A GAUNTLET

A PLAY IN THREE ACTS

DRAMATIS PERSONAE

     RIIS.
     MRS. RIIS.
     SVAVA, their daughter.
     MARGIT, their maid.
     CHRISTENSEN.
     MRS. CHRISTENSEN.
     ALFRED, their son, betrothed to Svava.
     DR. NORDAN.
     THOMAS, his servant.
     HOFF.

The action of the play passes in Christiania.




ACT I

(SCENE.--A room in RIIS' house. An open door at the back leads into a
park and gives a glimpse of the sea beyond. Windows on each side of the
door. Doors also in the right and left walls. Beyond the door on the
right is a piano; opposite to the piano a cupboard. In the foreground,
to the right and left, two couches with small tables in front of them.
Easy-chairs and smaller hairs scattered about. MRS. RIIS is sitting on
the couch to the left, and DR. NORDAN in a chair in the centre of the
room. He is wearing a straw hat pushed on to the back of his head, and
has a large handkerchief spread over his knees. He is sitting with his
arms folded, leaning upon his stick.)

Mrs. Riis. A penny for your thoughts!

Nordan. What was it you were asking me about?

Mrs. Riis. About that matter of Mrs. North, of course.

Nordan. That matter of Mrs. North? Well, I was talking to Christensen
about it just now. He has advanced the money and is going to try and get
the bank to suspend proceedings. I have told you that already. What else
do you want to know?

Mrs. Riis. I want to know how much gossip there is about it, my dear
friend.

Nordan. Oh, men don't gossip about each other's affairs.--By the way,
isn't our friend in there (nodding towards the door on the right) going
to be told about it? This seem, a good opportunity.

Mrs. Riis. Let us wait.

Nordan. Because Christensen will have to be repaid, you know. I told him
he would be.

Mrs. Riis. Naturally. What else would you suppose?

Nordan (getting up). Well, I am going away for my holidays, so
Christensen must look after it now.--Was it a very grand party
yesterday?

Mrs. Riis. There was not much display.

Nordan. No, the Christensens' parties are never very luxurious. But I
suppose there were a lot of people?

Mrs. Riis. I have never seen so many at a private entertainment.

Nordan. Is Svava up?

Mrs. Riis. She is out bathing.

Nordan. Already? Did you come home early, then?

Mrs. Riis. At about twelve, I think. Svava wanted to come home. My
husband was late, I think.

Nordan. The card tables. She looked radiant, I suppose, eh?

Mrs. Riis. Why didn't you come?

Nordan. I never go to betrothal parties, and I never go to
Weddings--never! I can't bear the sight of the poor victims in their
veils and wreaths.

Mrs. Riis. But, my dear doctor, you surely think--as we all do--that
this will be a happy marriage?

Nordan. He is a fine lad. But, all the same--I have been taken in so
often.--Oh, well!

Mrs. Riis. She was so happy, and is just as happy to-day.

Nordan. It is a pity I shall not see her. Good-bye, Mrs. Riis.

Mrs. Riis. Good-bye, doctor. Then you are off to-day?

Nordan. Yes, I need a change of air.

Mrs. Riis. Quite so. Well, I hope you will enjoy yourself--and, many
thanks for what you have done!

Nordan. It is I ought to thank you, my dear lady! I aim vexed not to be
able to say good-bye to Svava. (Goes out. MRS. RIIS takes up a magazine
from the table on the left and settles herself comfortably on a couch
from which she can see into the park. During what follows she reads
whenever opportunity allows. RIIS comes in through the door to the
right, in his shirt sleeves and struggling with his collar.)

Riis. Good morning! Was that Nordan that went out just now?

Mrs. Riis. Yes. (RIIS crosses the room, then turns back and disappears
through the door on the right. He comes back again immediately and goes
through the same proceeding, all the tine busy with his collar.) Can I
help you at all?

Riis. No--thanks all the same! These new-fangled shirts are troublesome
things. I bought some in Paris.

Mrs. Riis. Yes, I believe you have bought a whole dozen.

Riis. A dozen and a half. (Goes into his room, comes out again in
apparently the same difficulties, and walks about as before.) As a
matter of fact I am wondering about something.

Mrs. Riis. It must be something complicated.

Riis. It is--it is. No doubt of it!--This collar is the very--Ah,
at last! (Goes into his room and comes out again, this time with his
necktie in his hand.) I have been wondering--wondering--what our dear
girl's character is made up of?

Mrs. Riis. What it is made up of?

Riis. Yes--what characteristics she gets from you and what from me, and
so forth. In what respects, that is to say, she takes after your family,
and in what respect after mine, and so forth. Svava is a remarkable
girl.

Mrs. Riis. She is that.

Riis. She is neither altogether you nor altogether me nor is she exactly
a compound of us both.

Mrs. Riis. Svava is something more than that.

Riis. A considerable deal more than that, too. (Disappears again; then
comes out with his coat on, brushing himself.) What did you say?

Mrs. Riis. I did not speak.--I rather think it is my mother that Svava
is most like.

Riis. I should think so! Svava, with her quiet pleasant ways! What a
thing to say!

Mrs. Riis. Svava can be passionate enough.

Riis. Svava never forgets her manners as your mother did.

Mrs. Riis. You never understood mother. Still, no doubt they are unlike
in a great many things.

Riis. Absolutely!--Can you see now how right I was in chattering to her
in various languages from the beginning, even when she was quite tiny?
Can you see that now? You were opposed to my doing it.

Mrs. Riis. I was opposed to your perpetually plaguing the child, and
also to the endless jumping from one thing to another.

Riis. But look at the result, my dear! Look at the result! (Begins to
hum a tune.)

Mrs. Riis. You are surely never going to pretend that it is the
languages that have made her what she is?

Riis (as he disappears). No, not the languages; but--(His voice is heard
from within his room)--the language have done a wonderful lot! She has
savoir vivre--what? (Comes out again.)

Mrs. Riis. I am sure that is not what Svava is most admired for.

Riis. No, no. On the boat, a man asked me if I were related to the Miss
Riis who had founded the Kindergartens in the town. I said I had the
honour to be her father. You should have seen his face! I nearly had a
fit.

Mrs. Riis. Yes, the Kindergartens have been a great success from the
very first.

Riis. And they are responsible for her getting engaged, too--aren't
they? What?

Mrs. Riis. You must ask her.

Riis. You have never even noticed my new suit.

Mrs. Riis. Indeed I have.

Riis. I didn't hear as much as the tiniest cry of admiration from you.
Look at the harmony of it all!--the scheme of colour, even down to the
shoes!--what? And the handkerchief, too!

Mrs. Riis. How old are you, dear?

Riis. Hold your tongue!--Anyway, how old do you think people take me to
be?

Mrs. Riis. Forty, of course.

Riis. "Of course"? I don't see that it is so obvious. This suit is a
kind of Bridal Symphony, composed at Cologne when I got the telegram
telling me of Svava's engagement. Just think of it! At Cologne--not ten
hours' journey from Paris! But I could not wait ten hours; I had risen
too much in my own estimation in view of my approaching relationship
with the richest family in the country.

Mrs. Riis. Is that suit all you have to show for it, then?

Riis. What a question! Just you wait till I have got my luggage through
the custom-house!

Mrs. Riis. We shall be quite out of it, I suppose?

Riis. You out of it! When a very lucky daddy finds himself in Paris at a
most tremendous moment--

Mrs. Riis. And what did you think of the party yesterday?

Riis. I was quite delighted with the boat for being late so that I was
landed in the middle of a fête champêtre as by magic. And Naturally one
had a tremendous welcome as the party was in honour of one's own only
daughter!

Mrs. Riis. What time did you come in last night?

Riis. Don't you understand that we had to play cards yesterday, too? I
could not get out of it; I had to make a fourth with Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob--that is to say, with our host, a cabinet minister, and old Holk.
It was a tremendous honour to lose one's money to grand folk like that.
Because I always lose, you know.--I came home about three o'clock, I
should think.--What is that you are reading?

Mrs. Riis. The Fortnightly.

Riis. Has there been anything good in it while I have been away? (Begins
to hum a tune.)

Mrs. Riis. Yes--there is an article here on heredity that you must read.
It has some reference to what we began to talk about.

Riis. Do you know this tune? (Goes over to the piano.) It is all the
rage now. I heard it all over Germany. (Begins to play and sing, but
breaks off suddenly.) I will go and fetch the music, while I think of
it! (Goes into his room and comes out again with the music. Sits down
and begins to play and sing again. SVAVA comes in by it, door on the
left. RIIS stops when he sees her, and jumps up.) Good morning, my
child! Good morning! I have hardly had a chance to say a word to you
yet. At the party everyone took you away from me! (Kisses her, and comes
forward with her.)

Svava. Why were you so long of coming back from abroad?

Riis. Why don't people give one some warning when they are going to get
engaged?

Svava. Because people don't know anything about it themselves, till it
happens! Good morning again, mother. (Kneels down beside her.)

Mrs. Riis. There is a delicious freshness about you, dear! Did you have
a walk in the wood after your swim?

Svava (getting up). Yes, and just as I got home a few minutes ago Alfred
passed the house and called up to me. He is coming in directly.

Riis. To tell you the truth--and one ought always to tell the truth--I
had quite given up the hope of such happiness coming to our dear girl.

Svava. I know you had. I had quite given it up myself.

Riis. Until your fairy prince came?

Svava. Until my fairy prince came. And he took his time about it, too!

Riis. You had been waiting for him a long time, though--hadn't you?

Svava. Not a bit of it! I never once thought of him.

Riis. Now you are talking in riddles.

Svava. Yes, it is a riddle to understand how two people, who have seen
each other from childhood without even giving each other a thought,
suddenly--! Because that was really how it happened. It all dates from a
certain moment--and then, all at once, he became quite another man in my
eyes.

Riis. But in every one else's, I suppose, he is the same us before?

Svava. I hope so!

Riis. He is more lively than he was, at any rate--in my eyes.

Svava. Yes, I saw you laughing together last night. What was it?

Riis. We were discussing the best way of getting through the world. I
gave him my three famous rules of life.

Mrs. Riis and Svava (together). Already!

Riis. They were a great success. Do you remember them, you bad girl?

Svava. Rule number one: Never make a fool of yourself.

Riis. Rule number two: Never be a burden to any one.

Svava. Rule number three: Always be in the fashion. They are not very
hard to remember, because they art neither obscure nor profound.

Riis. But all the harder to put into practice! And thus is a great
virtue in all rules of life.--I congratulate you on your new morning
frock. Under the circumstances it is really charming.

Svava. "Under the circumstances" means, I suppose, considering that you
have had no hand in it.

Riis. Yes, because I should never have chosen that trimming. However,
the "under the circumstances" is not so bad. A good cut, too--yes. Aha!
Just you wail till my portmanteau comes!

Svava. Some surprises for us?

Riis. Big ones!--By the way, I have something here. (Goes into his
room.)

Svava. Do you know, mother, he seems to me more restless than ever.

Mrs. Riis. That is happiness, dear.

Svava. And yet father's restlessness has always something a little sad
about it. He is--. (RIIS comes out of his room again.) Do you know what
I heard a cabinet minister say about you yesterday?

Riis. A man of that stamp is sure to say something worth hearing.

Svava. "We all always look upon your father, Miss Riis, as our
Well-dressed man par excellence."

Riis. Ah, a bien dit son excellence! But I can tell you something better
than that. You are getting your father a knighthood.

Svava. I am?

Riis. Yes, who else? Of course the Government has once or twice made
use of me to some small degree in connection with various commercial
treaties; but now, as our great man's brother-in-law, I am going to be
made a Knight of St. Olaf!

Svava. I congratulate you.

Riis. Well, when it rains on the parson it drips on the clerk, you know.

Svava. You are really most unexpectedly modest in your new position.

Riis. Am I not!--And now you shall see me as a modest showman of
beautiful dresses--that is to say, of drawings of dresses--still more
modest than the showman, from the latest play at the Français.

Svava. Oh no, dad--not now!

Mrs. Riis. We won't start on that till the afternoon.

Riis. One would really think I were the only woman of the lot!
However, as you please. You rule the world! Well, then, I have another
proposition to make, in two parts. Part one, that we sit down!

Svava. We sit down! (She and her father sit.)

Riis. And next, that you tell your newly-returned parent exactly how it
all happened. All about that "riddle," you know!

Svava. Oh, that!--You must excuse me; I cannot t you about that.

Riis. Not in all its sweet details, of course! Good heavens, who would
be so barbarous as to ask such a thing in the first delicious month of
an engagement! No, I of only I want you to tell us what was the primum
mobile in the matter.

Svava. Oh, I understand. Yes, I will tell you that because that really
means teaching you to know Alfred's true character.

Riis. For instance--how did you come to speak to him?

Svava. Well, that was those darling Kindergartens of ours--

Riis. Oho!--Your darling Kindergartens, you mean?

Svava. What, when there are over a hundred girls there--?

Riis. Never mind about that! I suppose he came to bring a donation?

Svava. Yes, he came several times with a donation--

Riis. Aha!

Svava. And one day we were talking about luxury saying that it was
better to use one's time and money in our way, than to use them in
luxurious living.

Riis. But how do you define luxury?

Svava. We did not discuss that at all. But I saw that he considered
luxury to be immoral.

Riis. Luxury immoral!

Svava. Yes, I know that is not your opinion. But it is mine.

Riis. Your mother's, you mean, and your grand mother's.

Svava. Exactly; but mine too, if you don't object?

Riis. Not I!

Svava. I mentioned that little incident that happened to us when we were
in America--do you remember? We had gone to a temperance meeting, and
saw women drive up who were going to support the cause of abstinence,
and yet were--well, of course we did not know their circumstances--but
to judge from their appearance, with their carriages and horses, their
jewellery and dresses--especially their jewellery--they must have been
worth, say--

Riis. Say many thousands of dollars! No doubt about it.

Svava. There is no doubt about it. And don't you think that is really
just as disgraceful debauchery, in its town way, as drink is in its?

Riis. Oh, well--!

Svava. Yes, you shrug your shoulders. Alfred did not do that. He told me
of his own experiences--in great cities. It was horrible!

Riis. What was horrible?

Svava. The contrast between poverty and wealth--between the bitterest
want and the most reckless luxury.

Riis. Oh--that! I thought, perhaps--. However, go on!

Svava. He did not sit looking quite indifferent and clean his nails.

Riis. I beg your pardon.

Svava. Oh, please go on, dear!--No, he prophesied a great social
revolution, and spoke so fervently about it--and it was then that he
told me what his ideas about wealth were. It was the greatest possible
surprise to me--and a new idea to me, too, to some extent. You should
have seen how handsome he looked!

Riis. Handsome, did you say?

Svava. Isn't he handsome? I think so, at all events. And so does mother,
I think?

Mrs. Riis (without looking up from her book). And so does mother.

Riis. Mothers always fall in love with their daughters' young men--but
they fall out again when they become their mothers-in-law!

Svava. Is that your experience?

Riis. That is my experience. So Alfred Christensen has blossomed into a
beauty? Well, we must consider that settled.

Svava. He stood there so sure of himself, and looking so honest and
clean--for that is an essential thing, you know.

Riis. What exactly do you mean by "clean," my dear?

Svava. I mean just what the word means.

Riis. Exactly--but I want to know what meaning attach to the word.

Svava. Well--the meaning that I hope any one would attach to it if they
used the word of me.

Riis. Do you attach the same meaning to it if it is used' of a man, as
you would if it were used of a girl?

Svava. Yes, of course.

Riis. And do you suppose that Christensen's son--

Svava (getting up). Father, you are insulting me!

Riis. How can the fact of his being his father's son I an insult to you?

Svava. In that respect he is not his father's son! I am not likely to
make any mistake in a thing of that sort!

Mrs. Riis. I am just reading about inherited tendencies. It is Not
necessary to suppose that he has inherited all his father's.

Riis. Oh, well--have it as you please! I am afraid all these superhuman
theories of yours. You will never get through the world with them.

Svava. What do you mean?--Mother, what does father mean?

Mrs. Riis. I suppose he means that all men are alike. And one must allow
that it is true.

Svava. You do not really mean that?

Riis. But why get so excited about it?--Come and sit down! And, besides,
how can you possibly tell?

Svava. Tell? What?

Riis. Well, in each individual case--

Svava.--whether the man I see standing before me or walking past me is
an unclean, disgusting beast--or a man?

Riis. Etcetera, etcetera!--You may make mistakes, my dear Svava?

Svava. No--not any more than I should make a mistake about you, father,
when you begin to tease me with your horrid principles! Because, in
spite of them, you are the chastest and most refined man I know.

Mrs. Riis (laying down her book). Are you going to keep that morning
frock on, dear child? Won't you change your dress before Alfred comes?

Svava. No, mother, I am not going to be put off like that.--By this time
I have seen so many of my girl friends giving themselves trustfully to
their "fairy prince," as they think, and waking in the arms of a beast.
I shall not risk that! I shall not make that mistake!

Mrs. Riis. Well, as it is, there is no occasion for you to get heated
about it. Alfred is a man of honour.

Svava. He is. But I have heard of one shocking experience after another.
There was poor Helga, only a month ago! And I myself--I can speak about
it now, for I am happy now and feel secure--I can tell you now why I
have been so long about it. For a long time I did nut dare to trust
myself; because I too have been on the brink of being deceived.

Riis and Mrs. Riis (together, starting up from their chairs). You,
Svava?

Svava. I was quite young at the time. Like most young girls, I was
looking for my ideal, and found it in a young, vivacious man--I won't
describe him more accurately. He had--oh, the noblest principles and the
highest aims--the most complete contrast to you in that respect father!
To say I loved him, is much too mild; I worshipped him. But I never can
tell you what I discovered or how I discovered it. It was the time when
you all thought I had--

Mrs. Riis.--something wrong with your lungs? Is it possible, child? Was
it then?

Svava. Yes, it was then.--No one could endure or forgive being deceived
like that!

Mrs. Riis. And you never said a word to me?

Svava. Only those who have made such a mistake as I did can understand
the shame one feels.--Well, it is all over now. But this much is
certain, that no one who has had such an experience once will make the
same mistake again. (Meanwhile RIIS has gone into his room.)

Mrs. Riis. Perhaps it was a good thing for you, after all?

Svava. I am sure it was.--Well, it is all done with now. But it was not
quite done with till I found Alfred. Where is father?

Mrs. Riis. Your father? Here he comes.

Riis (coming out of his room, with his hat on, and drawing on his
gloves). Look here, little girl! I must go and see what has happened to
my luggage at the Customs. I will go to the station and telegraph. You
must have all your things looking very nice, you know, because the King
is coming here in a day or two--and so it is worth it! Good-bye, then,
my dear girl! (Kisses her.) You have made us very happy--so very happy.
It is true you have certain ideas that are not--. Well, never mind!
Goodbye! (Goes out.)

Mrs. Riis. Good-bye!

Riis (drawing off his gloves). Did you notice the tune I was playing
when you came in? (Sits down at the piano.) I heard it everywhere in
Germany. (Begins to play and sing, but stops short.) But, bless my soul,
here is the music! You can play it and sing it for yourself. (Goes out,
humming the air.)

Svava. He is delightful! There is really something so innocent about
him. Did you notice him yesterday? He was simply coruscating.

Mrs. Riis. You did not see yourself, my dear!

Svava. Why? Was I sparkling, too?

Mrs. Riis. Your father's daughter--absolutely!

Svava. Yes, it is no use denying, mother, that however great one's
happiness is, the friendliness of others increases it. I was thinking
to-day over all the things that gave me so much happiness yesterday, and
felt--oh, I can't tell you what I felt! (Nestles in her mother's arms.)

Mrs. Riis. You are a very lucky girl!--Now I must go and do my
housekeeping.

Svava. Shall I help you?

Mrs. Riis. No, thank you, dear. (They cross the room together.)

Svava. Well, then, I will run through father's song once or twice--and
Alfred should be here directly. (MRS. RIIS goes out by the door on the
left. SVAVA sits down at the piano. ALFRED comes in softly from the
left, and bends over her shoulder so that his face comes close to hers.)

Alfred. Good morning, darling!

Svava (jumping up). Alfred! I did not hear the door!

Alfred. Because you were playing. Something very pretty, too!

Svava. I enjoyed myself so much yesterday!

Alfred. I do not believe you have any idea what an impression you made!

Svava. Just a suspicion. But you must not talk about that, because it
would be most improper for me to confess it!

Alfred. Every one was singing your praises to me, and a mother and
father too. We are all very happy at how, to-day.

Svava. So we are here!--What is that you have got in your hand? A
letter?

Alfred. Yes, a letter. Your maid who opened the door gave it to me.
Someone has been clever enough to count upon my coming here some time
this morning.

Svava. You don't think that was difficult to guess?

Alfred. Not particularly. It is from Edward Hansen.

Svava. But you can take a short cut to his house through our park.
(Points to the right.)

Alfred. Yes, I know. And as he says it is urgent, and underlines the
word--

Svava.--you can have my key. Here it is. (Gives it to him.)

Alfred. Thank you, dear, very much.

Svava. Oh, it is only selfishness; we shall have you back again all the
sooner.

Alfred. I will stay here till lunch time.

Svava. You will stay here a great deal longer than that. We have a
frightful lot to talk about--all about yesterday, and--

Alfred. Of course we have!

Svava. And lots of other things as well.

Alfred. I have a most important question to ask you.

Svava. Have you?

Alfred. Perhaps you will find the answer by the time I come back.

Svava. It can't be so very difficult, then!

Alfred. Indeed it is. But sometimes you have inspirations.

Svava. What is it?

Alfred. Why did we two not find each other many years ago?

Svava. Because we were not ready for it, of course!

Alfred. How do you know that?

Svava. Because I know that at that time I was quite another girl from
what I am now.

Alfred. But there is a natural affinity between those that love one
another. I am sure of it. And it was just its much the case at that
time, surely?

Svava. We do not feel the natural affinity as long as we are developing
on different lines.

Alfred. Have we been doing that? And nevertheless we--

Svava. Nevertheless we love one another. Our paths may be as unlike as
they please, if only they lead together in the end.

Alfred. To the same way of thinking, you mean?

Svava. Yes, to our being such comrades as we are now.

Alfred. Such true comrades?

Svava. Such true comrades!

Alfred. Still, it is just at moments like this, when I hold you in my
arms as I do now, that I ask myself over and over again why I did not do
this long ago.

Svava. Oh, I don't think about that--not the least bit! It is the safest
place in the world--that is what I think!

Alfred. Perhaps before this year it would not have been so.

Svava. What do you mean?

Alfred. I mean--well, I mean practically the same as you; that I have
not always been the man I am now.--But I must hurry away. The letter
says it is something urgent. (They cross the room together.)

Svava. One minute won't make any difference, will it?--because there is
something I must say to you first.

Alfred (standing still). What is it?

Svava. When I saw you standing amongst all the others yesterday, I felt
for the first moment as if I did not know you. Some change seemed to
have come over you--the effect of the others, perhaps--anyway you really
_were_ actually different.

Alfred. Of course. People always are that, among strangers. When you
came in with the ladies, it just seemed to me as if I had never observed
you carefully before. Besides, there are certain things one cannot know
till one sees a person amongst others. It was the first time I realised
how tall you are--and your way of bending just a tiny bit to one side
when you bow to any one. And your colouring! I had never properly seen--

Svava. Do be quiet, and let me get a word in!

Alfred. No, no! Here we are, back in the room--and I _must_ be off now!

Svava. Only just a moment. You interrupted me, you know! When I saw you
standing there among the men for the first moment I felt just as if
I did not know you. But at the same moment you caught sight of me and
nodded. I don't know what sort of a transformation came over us both;
but I felt myself blushing as red as fire. And it was some time before I
had the courage to look at you again.

Alfred. Well, do you know what happened to me? Every time any one came
to dance with you, didn't I envy him! Oh, not at all!--To tell you
the truth, I cannot bear any one else to touch you. (Clasps her in his
arms.) And I have not told you the best part of it yet.

Svava. What is that?

Alfred. That when I see you amongst other people, and catch--say--a
glimpse of your arm, I think to myself: That arm has been round my neck
and round no one else's in the whole world! She is mine, mine, mine--and
no one else's!--There, that is the best part of it all!--Look here, here
we are back again in the room! It is witchcraft! Now I must go. (Crosses
the room.) Good-bye! (Lets her go, then catches hold of her again.) Why
didn't I find my happiness many years ago?--Good-bye!

Svava. I think I will come with you.

Alfred. Yes, do!

Svava. No, I forgot--I must learn this song before father comes back. If
I don't learn it now, I expect you will take care I don't do so to-day.
(A ring is heard at the front door.)

Alfred. Here is some one coming! Let me get away first. (Hurries out to
the right. SVAVA stands waving her hand to him, then turns to the piano.
The maid MARGIT enters.)

Margit. A gentleman has called, miss, who wants to know if--

Svava. A gentleman? Don't you know who he is?

Margit. No, miss.

Svava. What is he like?

Margit. He looks rather--

Svava. Rather suspicious?

Margit. No, far from it, miss--a very nice gentleman.

Svava. Tell him my father is not at home; he has gone down to the
station.

Margit. I told him so, miss, but it is you he wants to see.

Svava. Ask my mother to come in here!--Oh, no, why should she! Let him
come in. (MARGIT shows in HOFF, and goes out.)

Hoff. Is it Miss Riis I have the honour to--? Yes, I see it is. My name
is Hoff--Karl Hoff. I am a commercial traveller--travel in iron.

Svava. But what has that to do with me?

Hoff. Just this much, that if I had been an ordinary stay-at-home man, a
great many things would not have happened.

Svava. What would not have happened?

Hoff (taking a large pocket-book out of his docket, and extracting a
letter from it). Will you condescend to read this? Or perhaps you would
rather not?

Svava. How can I tell?

Hoff. Of course, you must first--Allow me. (Gives her the letter.)

Svava (reading). "To-night between ten and eleven that is to say, if the
booby has not come home. I love you so dearly! Put a light in the hall
window."

Hoff. "The booby" is me.

Svava. But I don't understand--?

Hoff. Here is another.

Svava. "I am full of remorse. Your cough frightens me; and now, when you
are expecting--" But what in the world has this to do with me?

Hoff (after a moment's thought). What do you suppose?

Svava. Is it some one you want me to help?

Hoff. No, poor soul, she doesn't need help any more. She is dead.

Svava. Dead? Was she your wife?

Hoff. That's it. She was my wife. I found these and come other things
in a little box. At the bottom were these notes--there are more of
them--and some cotton wool on the top of them. On the top of that lay
some earrings and things that had been her mother's. And also (producing
some bracelets) these bracelets. They are certainly much too costly to
have been her mother's.

Svava. I suppose she died suddenly, as she did not--

Hoff. I cannot say. Consumptives never think they are going to die.
Anyway she was very delicate and weak.--May I sit down?

Svava. Please do. Are there any children?

Hoff (after a moment's thought). I believe not.

Svava. You believe not? I asked because I thought you wanted our Society
to help you. This really is all very distressful to me.

Hoff. I thought it would be--I thought as much. Besides, I am not really
sure if I--. You cannot understand this, then?

Svava. No, I cannot.

Hoff. No, you cannot.-I have heard so much good spoken of you for many
years. My wife used to sing your praises, too.

Svava. Did she know me?

Hoff. She was Maren Tang--who used to be companion to--

Svava.--to Mrs. Christensen, my future mother-in-law? Was it she? She
was such a well-bred, quiet woman. Are you sure you are not mistaken?
One or two notes, unsigned and undated--what?

Hoff. Did you not recognise the handwriting?

Svava. I? No. Besides, isn't it a disguised hand?

Hoff. Yes, but not much disguised.

Svava. I presume you had some more definite errand with me?

Hoff. Yes, I had--but I think I will let it alone. You do not understand
anything about this, I can see Perhaps you think I am a little crazy? I
am not so sure you would not be right.

Svava. But there was something you wanted to say to me?

Hoff. Yes, there was. You see, these Kindergartens--

Svava. Oh, so it was them, all the time?

Hoff. No, it was not them. But they are responsible for my having for a
long time thought very highly of you, Miss Riis. If you will excuse my
saying so, I had never before seen fashionable young ladies trying to
do anything useful--never. I am only a little broken-down tradesman
travelling for a firm--a worthless sort of chap in many ways, and one
that very likely deserves what he has got--but anyway I wanted you to be
spared. Indeed thought it was my duty--absolutely my duty. But now when
I see you sitting there before me--well, now I only I feel miserably
unhappy. So I won't trouble you at all (Gets up.) Not at all.

Svava. I really cannot understand--

Hoff. Please don't bother about me! And please forgive my disturbing
you.--No, you really must not give me another thought! Just imagine that
I have not been here--that is all. (As he reaches the door, he meets
ALFRED coming in. As soon as he sees that SVAVA is watching them, he
goes hurriedly out. SVAVA sees the meeting between the two and gives a
little scream, then rushes to meet ALFRED. But as soon as she is face
to face with him, she seems terrified. As he comes nearer to take her in
his arms she cries out: "Don't touch me!" and hurries out by the door
on the left. She is heard locking and bolting it on the inside. Then a
violent outburst of weeping is heard, the sound being somewhat deadened
by the distance, but only for a few moments. Then the sound of singing
is heard outside, and a few seconds later RIIS comes into the room. The
curtain falls as he enters.)




ACT II

(SCENE.--The same as in Act I. SVAVA is lying on the couch to the right,
resting her head on one hand, looking out towards the park. Her mother
is sitting beside her.)

Mrs. Riis. Decisions as hasty as yours, Svava, are not really decisions
at all. There is always a great deal more to be taken into consideration
than one realises at first. Take time to think it over! I believe he is
a fine fellow. Give him time to show it; don't break it off immediately!

Svava. Why do you keep on saying that to me?

Mrs. Riis. Well, dear, you know I have never had the chance of saying
anything to you till to-day.

Svava. But you keep harping on that one string.

Mrs. Riis. What note do you want me to strike, then?

Svava. The note your dear good mother would have struck--quite a
different one altogether.

Mrs. Riis. It is one thing to teach your child how to make a proper
choice in life, but--

Svava. But quite another thing to put into practice what you teach?

Mrs. Riis. No; I was going to say that life itself is quite another
thing. In daily life, and especially in married life, it is sometimes
advisable to make allowances.

Svava. Yes, on points that do not really matter.

Mrs. Riis. Only on points that do not matter?

Svava. Yes--personal peculiarities, and things like that, which after
all are only excrescences; but not on points that concern one's moral
growth.

Mrs. Riis. Yes, on those points too.

Svava. On those points too?--But isn't it just for the sake of our own
self-development that we marry? What else should we marry for?

Mrs. Riis. Oh, you will see!

Svava. No, indeed I shall not; because I do not intend to marry on such
conditions.

Mrs. Riis. You should have said that sooner. It is too late now.

Svava (sitting upright). Too late? If I had been married twenty years, I
would have done just the same! (Lies down again.)

Mrs. Riis. Heaven help you, then!--You haven't an idea, not the smallest
idea, what a net you are entangled in! But you will find it out, as soon
as you begin to struggle in earnest. Or do you really want your father
and me to throw away all that we have worked for here?--to begin all
over again in a foreign country? Because he has repeatedly said, during
the last day or two, that he will not be mixed up in the scandal that
would be the result of your breaking this off. He would go abroad, and I
should have to go with him. Ah, you wince at the thought of that!--Think
of all your friends, too. It is a serious matter to have been set on
such an eminence as you were at your betrothal party. It is like
being lifted up high on a platform that others are carrying on their
shoulders; take care you do not fall down from it! That is what you will
do, if you offend their principles of right behaviour.

Svava. Is that sort of thing a principle of right behaviour?

Mrs. Riis. I do not say that. But undoubtedly, one their principles of
right behaviour--and perhaps the most important--is that all scandal
must be avoided. No one relishes being disgraced, Svava--particularly
the most influential people in a place. And least of all, by a long way,
do people relish their own child being disgraced.

Svava (half raising herself). Good Lord! is it _I_ that am disgracing
him?

Mrs. Riis. No, of course, it is he himself--

Svava. Very well, then! (Sinks down upon the couch again.)

Mrs. Riis. But you will never get them to understand that. I assure you,
you won't. As long as what he has done is only whispered about in
his family and amongst his intimate friends, they don't consider him
disgraced at all. There are too many that do just the same. It is only
when the knowledge of it becomes common property, that they consider
it a disgrace. And if it became known that there was a formal breach
between you--the Christensens' eldest son ignominiously refused because
of his past life--they would consider it the most shocking scandal that
could possibly overtake them! And we should feel the effect of it, in
particular. And so would those that are dependent on us--and they are
not so few in number, as you know, because you have interested yourself
in them, particularly in the children. You would have t. give up all the
interests you have made for Yourself here--because you would have to go
with us. I am certain your father is in earnest about that.

Svava. Oh! Oh!

Mrs. Riis. I almost wish I could tell you why I am so certain of that.
But I cannot--at all events not now. No, you must not tempt me to.--Here
comes your father. Only take time to reflect, Svava! No breaking of it
off, no scandal! (RIIS comes in from outside, with an opened letter in
his hand.)

Riis. Oh, there you are! (Goes into his room, lays down his hat and
stick, and comes out again.) You have taken no serious step yet, I
hope--eh?

Mrs. Riis. No, but--

Riis. Very well. Now here is a letter from the Christensens. If you
won't receive either your dance or his letters, you will have to put up
with his family's interference in the matter. Everything must come to an
end sooner or later. (Reads.) "My wife, my son and I will do ourselves
the honour of paying you a visit between eleven and twelve o'clock." The
only wonder is, that I have not had some such letter before this! I am
sure they have been patient enough.

Mrs. Riis. Well, we have got no farther to-day, either.

Riis. What are you thinking of, child? Can't you see what it must all
lead to? You are a good-hearted girl, I know--I am sure you don't want
to ruin us all absolutely? I certainly consider, Svava, that you have
acted quite severely enough now in this matter. They have suffered a
nasty shock to their self-confidence, both of them; you may be quite
sure of that. What more do you want? If you are really determined to
carry the matter farther--well--make your conditions! There is no doubt
they will be agreed to.

Svava. For shame! For shame!

Riis (despairingly). What is the use of taking it in this way!

Mrs. Riis. What, indeed! You ought rather to try and make things a bit
easier, Svava.

Riis. And you really might condescend, too, to consider who it is that
you are throwing over--a member of one of the richest families in the
country, and, I venture to say, one of the most honourable too. I have
never heard of anything so idiotic! Yes, I repeat--idiotic, idiotic!
What if he have made a false step--or two--well, good heavens--

Svava. Yes, bring heaven into it, too!

Riis. Indeed I well may! There is good need. As I was saying, if he have
made a false step, surely the poor fellow has been sufficiently punished
for it now. Beside it is certainly our duty to be a little reasonable
with one another--it is a commandment, you know, that we are to be
reasonable and forgiving. We must be forgiving! And more than that, we
must help the erring--we must raise up the fallen and set them in
the right way. Yes, set them in the right way. You could do that so
splendidly! It is exactly in your line. You know very well, my dear
child, it is very seldom I talk about morals and that sort of thing. It
doesn't sit well on me at all; I know that only too well. But on this
occasion I cannot help it. Begin with forgiveness, my child; begin with
that! After all, can you contemplate living together with anyone for any
length of time without--without--well, without _that_?

Svava. But there is no question of living with anyone, for any length of
time, or of forgiveness--because I do not mean to have anything more to
do with him.

Riis. Really, this is beyond all bounds! Because he has dared to fall in
love with some one before you--?

Svava. Some one?

Riis. Well, if there was more than one, I am sure I know nothing about
it. No, indeed I do not! Besides, the way people gossip and backbite is
the very devil! But, as I was saying, because he dared to look at some
one before he looked at you--before he ever _thought_ of you--is that a
reason for throwing him over for good and all? How many would ever get
married under those circumstances, I should like to know? Everybody
confirms the opinion that he is an honourable, fine young fellow, to
whom the proudest girl might confidently entrust herself--you said so
yourself, only a day or two ago! Do not deny it! And now he is suddenly
to be thrown over, because you are not the first girl he has ever met!
Pride should have some limits, remember! I have never heard of anything
more preposterous, if you ask me.

Mrs. Riis. Men are not like that.

Riis. And what about girls? Are they like that? I am quite sure they do
not ask whether their fiancés have been married before--observe, I said
"married." You can imagine he has been married. Well, why not? That is
what other girls do--you cannot deny it. I know you know it. You have
been to dances; who are most in request there? Precisely those who have
the reputation of being something of a Don Juan. They take the wind out
of all the other fellows' sails. You have seen it yourself a hundred
times. And it is not only at dances that this applied. Don't you suppose
they get married--and as a rule make the very best matches?

Mrs. Riis. That is true.

Riis. Of course it is true. And as a rule they make the very best
husbands, too!

Mrs. Riis. Hm!

Riis. Oh, indeed they do!--with some exceptions, of course, naturally.
The fact is, that marriage has an ennobling influence, and provides a
beautiful vocation for a woman--the most beautiful vocation possible!

Svava (who has got up). I can just manage to listen to such things from
you--because I expected no better from you.

Riis. Thank you very much!

Svava (who has come forward). One would really think that marriage were
a sort of superior wash-house for men--

Riis. Ha, ha!

Svava.--and that men could come there and take a dip when they
please--and in what state they please!

Riis. Oh, really--!

Svava. I mean it! And it is flattering--very flattering--for me, as your
daughter, to feel that you look upon me as so peculiarly suited for the
washerwoman's post! None of that for me, thank you!

Riis. But this is--

Svava. No, just listen to me for a little! I don't think I have said too
much, the last day or two.

Riis. No, we have not been allowed to say a word to you.

Svava. Look here, father. You have a fine supply of principles, for show
purposes.

Riis. For--?

Svava. I do not mean by that, that they are not your own. But you are
so good and so honourable, your whole life is so refined, that I do not
attach the least importance to your principles. But to mother's I do
attach importance, for hers are what have formed mine. And now just when
I want to act up to them, she deserts me.

Riis and Mrs. Riis (together). Svava!

Svava. It is mother I am angry with! It is mother I cannot have patience
with!

Riis. Really, Svava--!

Svava. Because if there has been one point on which mother and I have
been agreed, it has been on the subject of the unprincipled way men
prepare themselves for marriage, and the sort of marriages that are the
result. We have watched the course of it, mother and I, for many years;
and we had come to one and the same conclusion, that it is _before_
marriage that a marriage is marred. But when, the other day, mother
began to turn round--

Mrs. Riis. No, you have no right to say that! I am convinced that Alfred
is as honourable--

Svava. But when, the other day, mother began to turn round--well, I
could not have been more amazed if some one had come in and told me they
had met her out in the street when she was actually sitting here talking
to me.

Mrs. Riis. I only ask you to take time to consider! I am not
contradicting you!

Svava. Oh, let me speak now! Let me give you just one instance. One day,
before I was really grown up, I came running into this room from the
park. We had just bought the property, and I was so happy. Mother was
standing over there leaning against the door and crying. It was a lovely
summer's day. "Why are you crying, mother?" I said. For some time
she seemed as if she did not see me. "Why are you crying, mother?" I
repeated, and went nearer to her, but did not like to touch her. She
turned away from me, and walked up and down once or twice. Then she came
to me. "My child," she said, drawing me to her, "never give in to what
is not good and pure, on any account whatever! It is so cowardly, and
one repents it so bitterly; it means perpetually giving in, more and
more and more." I do not know what she referred to, and I have never
asked. But no one can imagine what an effect it all had on me--the
beautiful summer day, and mother crying, and the heartfelt tones of her
voice! I cannot give in; do not ask me to. Everything that made marriage
seem beautiful to me is gone--my faith, my feeling of security--all
gone! No, no, no! I can never begin with that, and it is wicked of you
to want to make me believe I can. After such a disillusionment and such
a humiliation? No! I would rather never be married--even it I have to go
away from here. I daresay I shall find something to fill my life; it is
only for the moment that I am so helpless. And anything is better
than to fill it with what is unclean. If I did not refuse that without
hesitation, I should be an accomplice to it. Perhaps some people could
put up with that. I cannot--no, I cannot. Do you think it is arrogance
on my part? Or because I am angry? If you knew what we two had planned
and schemed, you would understand me. And if you knew what I have
thought of him, how I have admired him--you did the same yourselves--and
how wretched I feel now, how utterly robbed of everything!--Who is it
that is crying? Is it you, mother? (She runs to her mother, kneels down
and buries her head in her lap. A pause. RIIS goes into his room.) Why
cannot we three hold together? If we do, what have we to be afraid of?
What is it that stands in the way? Father, what is it that stands in
the way?--But where is father? (Sees NORDAN outside the window.) Uncle
Nordan! This is a surprise! (Hurries across the room, throws herself
into NORDAN's arms as he enters, and bursts into tears.)

Nordan. Oh, you goose! You great goose!

Svava. You must come and talk to me!

Nordan. Isn't that what I am here for?

Svava. And I thought you were up in the mountains and could not hear
from us.

Nordan. So I was. But when I got telegram after telegram, as long as
they could reach me, and then one express letter after another--and now
the end of it all is--well, I don't suppose I dare even mention his name
here now? (RIIS comes in from his room.)

Riis. At last! We have been so anxious for you to come!

Mrs. Riis (who has at last risen and come forward). Thank you for
coming, dear doctor!

Nordan (looking at her). There is something serious up, then?

Mrs. Riis. I have something I want to say to you.

Nordan. Yes, but just now away you go, you two! Let me talk to this
booby. (MRS. RIIS goes out to the left. SVAVA follows her for a minute.)

Riis. I just want to tell you that in a little while--

Nordan.--the whole pack of Christensens will be here? I know that. Go
away now.

Riis. Nordan! (Whispers to him.)

Nordan. Yes, yes!--Quite so!--No, of course not! (Tries to stop his
whispering.) Do you suppose I don't know what I am about? Be off with
you! (SVAVA comes in, as her father goes out.)

Svava. Dear Uncle Nordan! At last, somebody that will agree with me!

Nordan. Am I?

Svava. Oh, Uncle Nordan, you don't know what these days have been like!

Nordan. And the nights too, I expect?--although, with all that, you
don't look so bad.

Svava. The last night or two I have slept.

Nordan. Really? Then I see how things stand. You are a tough customer,
you are!

Svava. Oh, don't begin saying a lot of things you don't mean, uncle.

Nordan. Things I don't mean!

Svava. You always do, you know. But we haven't time for that now. I am
all on fire!

Nordan. Well, what is this you have been doing?

Svava. Ah, you see, you are beginning again!

Nordan. Beginning again? Who the devil has put the idea into your head
that I ever say anything but what I mean? Come and let us sit down.
(Brings a chair forward.)

Svava (bringing her chair close to his). There now!

Nordan. Since I was here last, I believe you have promulgated a
brand-new law on the subject of love? I congratulate you.

Svava. Have I?

Nordan. A superhuman, Svava-woven one--derived from seraphic heights,
I should imagine! "There shall be only one love in a man's life, and it
shall be directed only to one object." Full stop!

Svava. Have I said anything like that?

Nordan. Is it not you that have thrown over a young man because he has
had the audacity to fall in love before he saw you?

Svava. Do you take it in that way, too?

Nordan. In that way? Is there any other way for a sensible man to take
it? A fine young fellow honesty, adores you; a distinguished family
throw their doors wide open to you, as if you were a princess; and then
you turn round and say: "You have not waited for me ever since you were
a child! Away with you!"

Svava (springing up). What, you too! You too! And the same talk! The
same stupid talk!

Nordan. I can tell you what it is; if you do not give consideration to
everything that can be said on the other side, you are stupid.--No, it
is no use going away from me and marching up and down! I shall begin and
march up and down too, if you do! Come here and sit. Or _daren't_ you go
thoroughly into the question with me?

Svava. Yes, I dare. (Sits down again.)

Nordan. Well, to begin with, do you not think there must certainly be
two sides to a question that is discussed by serious men and women all
over the world?

Svava. This only concerns me! And as far as I am concerned there is only
one side to it.

Nordan. You do not understand me, child! You shall settle your own
affairs ultimately, and nobody else--of course. But suppose what you
have to settle is not quite so simple as you think it? Suppose it is a
problem that at the present moment is exercising the minds of thousands
and thousands of people? Do you not think it is your duty to give some
consideration to the usual attitude towards it, and to what is generally
thought and said about it? Do you think it is conscientious to condemn
in a single instance without doing that?

Svava. I understand! I think I have done what you are urging me to do.
Ask mother!

Nordan. Oh, I daresay you and your mother have chattered and read a lot
about marriage and the woman question, and about abolishing distinctions
of class--now you want to abolish distinctions of sex too. But as
regards this special question?

Svava. What do you consider I have overlooked?

Nordan. Just this. Are you right in being equally as strict with men as
with women? Eh?

Svava. Yes, of course.

Nordan. Is it so much a matter of course? Go out and ask any one you
meet. Out of every hundred you ask, ninety will say "no"--even out of a
hundred women!

Svava. Do you think so? I think people are beginning to think otherwise.

Nordan. Possibly. But experience is necessary if one is to answer a
question like that.

Svava. Do you mean what you say?

Nordan. That is none of your business. Besides, I always mean what I
say.--A woman can marry when is sixteen; a man must wait till he is
five-and-twenty, or thirty. There is a difference.

Svava. There _is_ a difference! There are many, many times more
unmarried women than men, and they exhibit self-control. Men find it
more convenient to make a law of their want of self-control!

Nordan. An answer like that only displays ignorance. Man is a polygamous
animal, like many other animals--a theory that is very strongly
supported by the fact that women so outnumber men in the world. I
daresay that is something you have never heard before?

Svava. Yes, I have heard it!

Nordan. Don't you laugh at science! What else we to put faith in, I
should like to know?

Svava. I should just like men to have the same trouble over their
children that women do! Just let them have that, Uncle Nordan, and I
fancy they would soon change their principles! Just let them experience
it!

Nordan. They have no time for that; they have to govern the world.

Svava. Yes, they have allotted the parts themselves!--Now, tell me this,
Dr. Nordan. Is it cowardly not to practise what you preach?

Nordan. Of course it is.

Svava. Then why do you not do it?

Nordan. I? I have always been a regular monster. Don't you know that,
dear child?

Svava. Dear Uncle Nordan--you have such long white locks; why do you
wear them like that?

Nordan. Oh, well--I have my reasons.

Svava. What are they?

Nordan. We won't go into that now.

Svava. You told me the reason once.

Nordan. Did I?

Svava. I wanted, one day, to take hold of your hair, but you would
not let me. You said: "Do you know why you must not do that?"--"No," I
said.--"Because no one has done that for more than thirty years."--"Who
was it that did it last?" I asked.--"It was a little girl, that you are
very like," you answered.

Nordan. So I told you that, did I?

Svava. "And she was one of your grandmother's younger sisters," you said
to me.

Nordan. She was. It was quite true. And you are like her, my child.

Svava. And then you told me that the year you went to college she was
standing beside you one day and caught up some locks of your hair in her
fingers. "You must never wear your hair shorter than this," she said.
She went away, and you went away; and when, one day, you wrote and asked
her whether you two did not belong to one another, her answer was "yes."
And a month later she was dead.

Nordan. She was dead.

Svava. And ever since then--you dear, queer old uncle--you have
considered yourself as married to her. (He nods.) And ever since the
evening you told me that--and I lay awake a long time, thinking over
it--I wanted, even when I was quite a young girl, to choose some one I
could have perfect confidence in. And then I chose wrong.

Nordan. Did you, Svava?

Svava. Do not ask me any more about that.--Then I chose once again, and
this time I was certain! For never had truer eyes looked in mine. And
how happy we were together! Day after day it always seemed new, and the
days were always too short. I dare not think about now. Oh, it is sinful
to deceive us so!--not deceit in words, it is true, but in letting
us give them our admiration and our most intimate confidences. Not in
words, no--and yet, it is in words; because they accept all we say, and
are silent themselves, and by that very fact make our words their own.
Our simple-mindedness pleases them as a bit of unspoilt nature, and it
is just by means of that that they deceive us. It creates an intimacy
between us and an atmosphere of happy give-and-take of jests, which we
think can exist only on one presupposition--and really it is all a sham.
I cannot understand how any one can so treat the one he loves--for he
did love me!

Nordan. He does love you.

Svava (getting up). But not as I loved him! All these years I have not
been frittering away my love. Besides, I have had too high an ideal of
what loving and being loved should be; and just for that reason I felt a
deep desire to be loved--I can say so to you. And when love came, seemed
to take all my strength from me; but I felt I should always be safe with
him, and so I let him see it and gloried in his seeing it. That is the
bitterest part of it to me now--because he was unworthy of it. He has
said to me: "I cannot bear to see any one else touch you!" and "When I
catch a glimpse of your arm, I think to myself that it has been round my
neck--mine, and no one else's in the world." And I felt proud and happy
when he said so, because I thought it was true. Hundreds of times I had
imagined some one's saying that to me some day. But I never imagined
that the one who would say it would be a man who--oh, it is disgusting!
When I think what it means, it makes me ready to hate him. The mere
thought that he has had his arms round me--has touched me--makes me
shudder! I am not laying down rules for any one else, but what I am
doing seems to me a matter of course. Every fibre of my being tells me
that. I must be left in peace!

Nordan. I see that this is more serious, and goes deeper, than I had any
suspicion of. None of them understand it that way, Alfred least of
all. He is only hurt--distressed and hurt at the thought that you could
distrust him.

Svava. I know that.

Nordan. Yes--well--don't take up such a high and mighty attitude! I
assure you that is how it will appear to most people.

Svava. Do you think so? I think people are beginning to think otherwise.

Nordan. Most people will think: "Other girls forgive things like that,
especially when they love a man."

Svava. There are some that will answer: "If she had not loved him, she
might have forgiven him."

Nordan. And yet, Svava?--and yet?

Svava. But, uncle, do you not understand? I do not know that I can
explain it, either; because, to do that, I should have to explain what
it is that we read into the face, the character, the manner of the man
we love--his voice, his smile. That is what I have lost. Its meaning is
gone.

Nordan. For a while, yes--till you have had a breathing space.

Svava. No, no, no! Do you remember that song of mine, about the beloved
one's image? that one always sees it as if it were framed in happiness?
Do you remember it?

Nordan. Yes.

Svava. Very well--I cannot see it like that any longer. I see it, of
course--but always with pain. Always! Am I to forgive that, because
other girls forgive it? What is that they have loved, these other girls?
Can you tell me that? Because what I loved is gone. I am not going to
sit down and try to conjure it up in my imagination again. I shall find
something else to do.

Nordan. You are embittered now. You have had your ideal thoroughly
shattered, and as long as you are smarting from that it is no use
reasoning with you. So I will only beg one thing of you--one single
little thing. But you must promise me to do it?

Svava. If I can.

Nordan. You can. There are things to take into consideration. Ask for
time to think it all over!

Svava. Ah!--mother has been writing to you!

Nordan. And if she has? Your mother knows what depends upon it.

Svava. What depends upon it? Why do you speak so mysteriously, as if we
were not on secure ground? Aren't we? Father talks about giving up this
place. Why?

Nordan. I suppose he thinks it will be necessary.

Svava. Father? On grounds of economy?

Nordan. Not in the least! No, but all the gossips in the place will be
at you. What you propose to do is a regular challenge, you know.

Svava. Oh, we can stand criticism! Father has some queer principles, you
know; but his own life--. Surely no one has any doubt about that?

Nordan. Listen to me, my child. You cannot prevent people inventing
things. So be careful!

Svava. What do you mean?

Nordan. I mean that you ought to go for a stroll in the park and pull
yourself together a little, before the Christensens come. Try to be
calm; come in calmly, and request time to think it over. That is all you
have to do! They will make no difficulty about that, because they must
agree. Nothing has happened yet, and all ways are still open. Do as I
ask!

Svava. I _have_ thought it over--and you will never get me to do
anything else.

Nordan. No, no. It is only a matter of form.

Svava. What? You mean something more than that, I know.

Nordan. What an obstinate girl you are!--Can you not do it then, let me
say, for your mother's sake? Your mother is a good woman.

Svava. What will they think, if I come in and say: "Will you not give me
time to consider the matter?" No, I cannot do that.

Nordan. What will you say, then?

Svava. I would rather say nothing at all. But if I absolutely must say
something--

Nordan. Of course you must!

Svava. Well, I will go out now and think it over. (Turns to go, but
stops.) But what you want can never be.

Nordan. It must be!

Svava (standing by the door). You said just now: "Your mother is a good
woman." It sounded almost as if you laid stress on the word "mother"?

Nordan. Suppose I did?

Svava. Is father not that, too?

Nordan. Your father a good woman?

Svava. Why do you try to turn it off with a joke?

Nordan. Because it is serious, confound it all!

Svava. Can I not believe father--?

Nordan. Hush!

Svava. Father?--Is it possible that he too--? Do people say that?
(NORDAN does not answer, and does not move.) Shameful! Impossible! I say
it is impossible! (Rushes out. RIIS comes in from the right.)

Riis. What is the matter with Svava?

Nordan (coming forward). There was nothing else for it.

Riis. Nothing else for it? What do you mean?

Nordan. No, devil take it!--there was nothing else for it.

Riis. Quite so--but what?

Nordan. What do you say?

Riis. No, what were you saying--?

Nordan. What was I saying?

Riis. You said there was nothing else for it. You alarm me.

Nordan. Do I? Then you did not hear right. (Moves away from him.)

Riis. Didn't hear right? You were swearing about it too!

Nordan. That I certainly did not.

Riis. Very well then, you didn't. But how did you get on with Svava?
Won't you answer me?

Nordan. How did I get on with Svava?

Riis. Why are you so preoccupied? Are things so bad, then?

Nordan. Preoccupied? Why should I be that?

Riis. You ought to know best. I was asking about Svava--how you got on
with Svava--and I think I have the right to know.

Nordan. Look here, Riis.

Riis. Yes? (NORDAN takes him by the arm.) What is it?

Nordan. Did you see Svava?

Riis. Hurrying away out through the park? Yes. My dear chap, what was
it?

Nordan. It was the Greek tragedy.

Riis. The Greek--?

Nordan. Only the name--only the name! Well, you know what the word
means, don't you?

Riis. The Greek--?

Nordan. No, no--not "Greek," but "tragedy"?

Riis. Something mournful--?

Nordan. Far from it! Something amusing! It came to Greece with the
worship of Dionysus, in whose train there was a goat--

Riis (draws his arm away). A goat? What on earth--?

Nordan. Yes, you may well be surprised--because it sang!

Riis. Sang?

Nordan. Yes--and is still singing, of course! And paints! There are
pictures by him in every exhibition. And works in bronze and marble!
Wonderful! And such a courtier as he is, too! It is he that designs
ball-dresses and arranges entertainments--

Riis. Have you gone raving mad?

Nordan. Why do you ask that?

Riis. I am waiting patiently here till you have done talking such damned
nonsense! We are accustomed to something of the sort when you are in one
of those humours, but to-day I can't understand a blessed word of what
you are saying.

Nordan. Don't you, my dear fellow?

Riis. Can you not tell me what my daughter said? Isn't it ridiculous
that I cannot get that out of you! Now, briefly and intelligibly, what
did she say?

Nordan. Do you want to know?

Riis. He asks that!

Nordan. She said she pitied all the innocent young girls that,
generation after generation, disappear--

Riis. Where to?

Nordan. That is just it--where to? She said: "They are brought up in
pious ignorance, and finally the unsuspecting creatures are wrapped up
in a long white veil that they shall not be able to see distinctly where
they are being taken to."

Riis. Now you are talking your mythology again. Am I not to--

Nordan. Be quiet! It is your daughter that is speaking. "But I will not
do that," she said. "I will enter confidently into the holy estate of
matrimony, and sit down by the hearth in the land of my fathers, and
bring up children in the sight of my husband. But he shall be as chaste
as I; for otherwise he stains my child's head, when he kisses it,
and dishonours me."--There, that is what she said, and she looked so
splendid as she said it. (A ring is heard at the bell.)

Riis. They are upon us! They are upon us! What in the world is going to
happen? We are in a muddle of the most preposterous theories! The whole
heathen mythology is buzzing round in my head! (Hurries to the door to
meet MR. and MRS. CHRISTENSEN, whom MARGIT is showing in.) I am so happy
to see you!--so very happy! But your son?

Christensen. We could not get him to come with us.

Riis. I am very sorry!--At the same time, I quite understand.

Christensen. I admire the beauty of this place afresh every time I see
it, my dear sir!

Mrs. Christensen. This beautiful old park! I wanted once--. Oh, good
morning, doctor! How are you?

Nordan. So, so!

Riis (to MARGIT). Please tell Mrs. Riis. And--oh, there she is. (MRS.
RIIS comes in by the door at the left.) And tell Miss Svava.

Nordan. She is out in the park (pointing)--out that way. (Exit MARGIT.)

Riis. No, this way!--That's right! Go straight on till you find her.

Mrs. Christensen (who meantime has come forward with MRS. RIIS). I have
been thinking so much about you the last day or two, my dear! What a
tiresome business this is!

Mrs. Riis. Do you mind my asking if you knew anything about it before?

Mrs. Christensen. What is there that a mother--and a wife--escapes the
knowledge of nowadays, my dear! She was in my service, you know. Come
here! (Tells MRS. RIIS something in a whisper, ending with something
about "discovery" and "dismissal.")

Riis (offering the ladies chairs). Won't you sit down?--Oh, I beg your
pardon! I did not see--. (Hurries to CHRISTENSEN.) Excuse me, but are
you really comfortable in that chair?

Christensen. Thank you, I am just as uncomfortable here as anywhere
else. It is the sitting down and getting up again that bothers me more
than anything else. (Looks round.) I have just been to see him.

Riis. Hoff?

Christensen. Honest fellow. Stupid.

Riis. So long as he holds his tongue--

Christensen. He'll do that.

Riis. Thank heaven for that! Then we have only ourselves to consider. I
suppose it cost you a bit?

Christensen. Not a penny!

Riis. You got out of it cheap, then.

Christensen. Yes, didn't I? Still, as a matter of fact, he has cost me
quite enough already--although he knows nothing about that.

Riis. Indeed? When he failed, I suppose.

Christensen. No, when he married.

Riis. Oh, I understand.

Christensen. And I didn't think I should hear any more about it after
that.--You ladies seem to be having a fine game of whispering! (MRS.
CHRISTENSEN comes forward. RIIS places chairs for her and his wife.)

Mrs. Christensen. I was telling Mrs. Riis about the Miss Tang affair.
She really seems to have risen from her grave!

Christensen. Is your daughter at home, may I ask?

Riis. I have sent to fetch her.

Mrs. Christensen. I hope the last few days have taught her a lesson too,
poor girl! She suffers from a fault that unusually clever people are
very liable to--I mean self-righteousness.

Riis. Exactly! You are perfectly right! But I should call it arrogance!

Mrs. Christensen. I should not like to say that--but presumption,
perhaps.

Mrs. Riis. Why do you say that, Mrs. Christensen?

Mrs. Christensen. Because of various conversations I have had with her.
I was speaking to her once about a man's being his wife's master. In
these days it is a good thing to impress that on young girls.

Christensen. Yes, indeed!

Mrs. Christensen. And when I reminded her of certain words of St.
Paul's, she said: "Yes, it is behind those bars that we women are still
shut up." Then I knew that something would happen. Pride goes before a
fall, you know.

Christensen. Oh, come, come! That won't do at all! Your chain of
reasoning isn't sound!

Mrs. Christensen. How?

Christensen. It is not. Because in the first place it was not Miss Riis
that fell, but your precious son. And in the second place his fall was
not a consequence of Miss Riis's pride, because of course it happened
many years before Miss Riis showed any of her pride. So that if you knew
that his fall would happen as a consequence of Miss Riis's pride, you
knew something that you certainly did not know.

Mrs. Christensen. Oh, you are making fun of me!

Christensen. I ought to be at a committee meeting punctually at
one.--May I ask what has become of your daughter?

Riis. Indeed I am really beginning to wonder--(During the foregoing,
NORDAN has remained in the background, sometimes in the room and
sometimes outside in the park. MARGIT now goes fast the window outside,
and NORDAN is heard speaking to her.)

Nordan. Have you only just found her?

Margit. No, sir--I have been down once already to take Miss Riis her
hat, gloves and parasol.

Nordan. Is she going out?

Margit. I don't know, sir. (Goes out.)

Christensen. Dear me!

Riis. What does it mean? (Turns to go and fetch her.)

Nordan. No, no! Do not you go!

Mrs. Riis. I expect I had better go--

Riis. Yes, you go!

Nordan. No, I will go. I am afraid I am responsible for--. (As he goes)
I'll answer for it I will bring her back!

Christensen. Dear me!

Mrs. Christensen (getting up). I am afraid, my dear Mrs. Riis, we have
come at an inconvenient time for your daughter?

Riis. Ah, you must be lenient with her! I assure you it is these
high-flown ideas--this reading, that her mother has not been nearly firm
enough in keeping her from.

Mrs. Riis. I? What are you talking about?

Riis. I say that this is a very important moment! And at moments like
this one sees very clearly, very--well, that is what happens!

Christensen. Your husband, Mrs. Riis, has suddenly had the same sort of
revelation as our parson had lately--I should say, my wife's parson. It
was one day just after dinner--after an extremely good dinner, by the
way--a moment when a man often has very bright ideas. We were talking
about all the things a woman has to learn now, as compared with the old
days, and how some people say it is mere waste of time because she will
forget it all again when she marries. "Yes," said parson, looking very
pleased, "my wife has completely forgotten how to spell; I hope she will
soon forget how to write, too!"

Mrs. Christensen. You imitate people so well, that one cannot help
laughing--although it isn't right. (CHRISTENSEN looks at his watch.)

Riis. It doesn't look as if they were coming back?--Will you go, or
shall I?

Mrs. Riis (getting up). I will go. But you could not expect them
already--

Riis (coming close up to her and speaking in an undertone). This is your
doing! I see it clearly!

Mrs. Riis. I do not think you know what you are saying. (Goes out.)

Riis (coming forward). I really must apologise most humbly! It is the
last thing I should ever have expected of Svava--because I pride myself
that the obligations of courtesy have never been disregarded in my house
before.

Mrs. Christensen. Perhaps something has happened?

Riis. I beg your pardon?--Good heavens!

Mrs. Christensen. Oh, do not misunderstand me! I only mean that
young girls are so easily agitated, and then they do not like to show
themselves.

Riis. All the same, Mrs. Christensen, all the same! At such a moment as
this, too!--You really must excuse me, I shall have no peace till I find
out for myself what has happened! (Hurries out.)

Christensen. If Alfred had been here, I suppose he would have been
running about all over the park after these females, too.

Mrs. Christensen. Really, my dear!

Christensen. Aren't we alone?

Mrs. Christensen. Yes, but still--!

Christensen. Well, I say, as a certain famous man said before me: "What
the devil was he doing in that galley?"

Mrs. Christensen. Do have a moment's patience! It is really necessary.

Christensen. Bah! Necessary! Riis is more afraid of a rupture than any
of us. Did you see him just now?

Mrs. Christensen. Yes, of course I did, but--

Christensen. She has already gone much farther than she has any right
to.

Mrs. Christensen. So Alfred thinks, too.

Christensen. Then he should have been here now, to say so. I asked him
to come.

Mrs. Christensen. He is in love, and that makes a man a little timid.

Christensen. Nonsense!

Mrs. Christensen. Oh, that passes off when one is in love as often as
you are. (Gets up.) Here they come!--No, not Svava.

Christensen. Is she not with them?

Mrs. Christensen. I don't see her.

Riis (appearing at the door). Here they are!

Mrs. Christensen. And your daughter too?

Riis. Yes, Svava too. She asked the others to go on ahead of her. I
expect she wanted to collect herself a little.

Mrs. Christensen (sitting down again). Ah, you see, it was just what I
thought, poor child!

Mrs. Riis (coming in). She will be here in a moment! (Goes up to MRS.
CHRISTENSEN.) You must forgive her, Mrs. Christensen; she has had a bad
time of it.

Mrs. Christensen. Bless my soul, of course I understand that! The first
time one has an experience of this kind, it tells on one.

Christensen. This is positively beginning to get amusing!

[Enter NORDAN.]

Nordan. Here we are! She asked me to come on little ahead of her.

Riis. She is not going to keep us waiting any longer, I hope?

Nordan. She was just behind me.

Riis. Here she is! (Goes to the door to meet her; NORDAN and MRS. RIIS
do the same from the other side of the room.)

Christensen. One would think she were the Queen of Sheba.

(SVAVA comes in, wearing her hat, and with her gloves and parasol in her
hand. CHRISTENSEN and MRS. CHRISTENSEN get up from their seats. She bows
slightly to them, and comes to the front of the stage on the right-hand
side. All sit down in silence. NORDAN is at the extreme left, then MRS.
RIIS, MRS. CHRISTENSEN and CHRISTENSEN. At the extreme right, but a
little behind the others, is RIIS, who is sitting down one minute and
standing the next.)

Mrs. Christensen. My dear Svava, we have come here to--well, you know
what we have come for. What has happened has distressed us very much;
but what is done cannot be undone. None of us can excuse Alfred. But all
the same we think that he might be granted forgiveness, especially
at the hands of one who must know that he loves her, and loves her
sincerely. That makes it a different matter altogether, of course.

Christensen. Of course!

Riis. Of course!

Nordan. Of course!

Mrs. Christensen. And, even if you don't quite agree with me about that,
I hope you will agree with me about Alfred himself. I mean to say, that
we consider his character, my dear Svava, should vouch to you for his
fidelity. I know that, if you require it, he will give you his word of
honour that--

Mrs. Riis (getting up). No! No!

Mrs. Christensen. What is the matter, my dear Mrs. Riis?

Mrs. Riis. No words of honour! He has to take an oath when he marries,
anyway.

Nordan. But surely two make it all the safer, Mrs. Riis?

Mrs. Riis. No, no! No oath! (Sits down again.)

Christensen. I was struck with our friend Dr. Nordan's remark. Tell me,
my dear sir, do you also take it for granted that the sort of thing my
son has done ought to be an absolute bar to marriage with an honourable
woman?

Nordan. Quite the contrary! I am quite sure it never prevents any one
getting married--and remarkably well married. It is only Svava that is
behaving in an extraordinary manner in every respect.

Mrs. Christensen. I would not go so far as to say that; but there is one
thing that Svava has overlooked. She is acting as if she were free. But
she is not by any means free. A betrothal is equivalent to a marriage;
at any rate, I am old-fashioned enough to consider it so, And the man to
whom I have given my hand is thereby made my master and given authority
over me, and I owe to him--as to a superior authority--my respect,
whether he act well or ill. I cannot give him notice, or run away from
him.

Riis. That is old-fashioned and sensible. I thank you heartily, Mrs.
Christensen!

Nordan. And I too!

Mrs. Riis. But if it is too late after the betrothal--. (Checks
herself.)

Mrs. Christensen. What do you mean, dear Mrs. Riis?

Mrs. Riis. Oh, nothing nothing at all.

Nordan. Mrs. Riis means that if it is too late after the betrothal, why
do people not speak out before they are betrothed?

Riis. What a thing to say!

Christensen. Well, it wouldn't be such a bad thing, would it? I imagine
proposals in future being worded somewhat in this way: "My dear
Miss So-and-So, up to date I have had such and such a number of love
affairs--that is to say, so many big ones and so many little ones."
Don't you think it would be a capital way to lead the conversation on
to--

Nordan.--to assuring her that she is the only one you have ever loved?

Christensen. Well, not exactly that, but--

Riis. Here comes Alfred!

Mrs. Riis. Alfred?

Mrs. Christensen. Yes, it really is he!

Riis (who has gone to the door to meet ALFRED). Ah, that is right! We
are so glad you have come!

Christensen. Well, my boy?

Alfred. When it came to the point, I could not do anything else--I had
to come here.

Christensen. I quite agree with you.

Riis. Yes, it was only the natural thing to do. (ALFRED comes forward
and bows respectfully to SVAVA. She bows slightly, but without looking
at him. He steps back again.)

Nordan. Good morning, my boy!

Alfred. Perhaps I have come at an inconvenient moment.

Riis. Not a bit of it! Quite the contrary!

Alfred. At the same time, it seems evident to me that my presence is not
welcome to Miss Riis. (No one answers him.)

Mrs. Christensen. But it is a family council we are holding--isn't it,
my dear girl?

Riis. I assure you, you _are_ welcome! And we are all particularly
anxious to hear what you have to say!

Christensen. That is so.

Alfred. I have not succeeded in getting a hearing yet, you know. I have
been refused admittance repeatedly--both in person and when I wrote. So
I thought that if I came now, perhaps I should get a hearing.

Riis. Of course. Who can object to that?

Nordan. You shall have your hearing.

Alfred. Perhaps I may take Miss Riis's silence to mean permission? In
that case--well--it is nothing so very much that I have to say, either.
It is merely to remind you that, when I asked for Miss Riis's hand, it
was because I loved her with all my heart--her and no one else. I could
not imagine any greater happiness, and any greater honour, than to
be loved by her in return. And so I think still. (He pauses, as if he
expected an answer. They all look at SVAVA.) What explanation I could
have given of my own free will--indeed what explanation, under other
circumstances, I should have felt impelled to give--I shall say nothing
about now. But I _owe_ no explanation! My honour demands that I should
make point of that. It is my future that I owe to her. And with regard
to that I must confess I have been hurt--deeply hurt--by the fact that
Miss Riis could doubt me for a moment. Never in my life has any one
doubted me before. With all respect, I must insist that my word shall be
taken. (They are all silent.) That is all I have to say.

Mrs. Riis (getting up unwillingly). But, Alfred, suppose a woman, under
the same circumstances, had come and said the same thing--who would
believe her? (They are all silent. SVAVA bursts into tears.)

Mrs. Christensen. Poor child!

Riis. Believe her?

Mrs. Riis. Yes, believe her. Believe her if, after past like that, she
came and assured us that she would make an honest wife?

Christensen. After a past like that?

Mrs. Riis. Perhaps that is putting it too harshly. But why should you
require her to believe a man any more readily than a man would believe
her? Because he would not believe her for a moment.

Riis (coming up behind her). Are you absolutely mad?

Christensen (half rising). Excuse me, ladies and gentlemen; the two
young people must settle the affair now! (Sits down again.)

Alfred. I must confess I have never thought of what Mrs. Riis has just
said, because such a thing never could happen. No man of honour would
choose a woman of whose past he was not certain. Never!

Mrs. Riis. But what about a woman of honour, Alfred?

Alfred. Ah, that is quite different.

Nordan. To put it precisely: a woman owes a man both her past and her
future; a man owes a woman only his future.

Alfred. Well, if you like to put it that way--yes.

Nordan (to SVAVA, as he gets up). I wanted you to postpone your answer,
my child. But now I think you ought to answer at once. (SVAVA goes up to
ALFRED, flings her glove in his face, and goes straight into her room.
ALFRED turns and looks after her. RIIS disappears into his room on the
right. Every one has risen from their seats. MRS. CHRISTENSEN takes
ALFRED by the arm and goes nut with him; CHRISTENSEN follows them. MRS.
RIIS is standing at the door of the room which SVAVA has locked after
her.)

Nordan. That was throwing down a gauntlet, if you like!

Mrs. Riis (calling through the door). Svava!

Christensen (coming in and speaking to NORDAN, who has taken no notice
of him and has not turned round). Then it is to be war?--Well, I fancy I
know a thing or two about war. (Goes out. NORDAN turns round and stands
looking after him.)

Mrs. Riis (still at the door). Svava! (RIIS comes rushing out of his
room, with his hat on and his gloves and stick in his hand, and follows
the CHRISTENSENS.) Svava!




ACT III


SCENE I

(SCENE.--DR. NORDAN'S garden, behind his neat one-storied house. He is
sitting on a chair in the foreground reading. His old servant, THOMAS,
opens the how door and looks out.)

Thomas. Doctor!

Nordan. What is it? (ALFRED comes into sight in the doorway.) Oh, it is
you! (Gets up.) Well, my boy? You don't look up to much!

Alfred. No, but never mind that. Can you give me a bit of breakfast?

Nordan. Have you had no breakfast yet? Have you not been home then?--not
been home all night?--not since yesterday? (Calls) Thomas!

Alfred. And when I have had something to eat, may I have a talk with
you?

Nordan. Of course, my dear boy. (To THOMAS, who has come out of the
house) Get some breakfast laid in that room, please (pointing to a
window on the left).

Alfred. And may I have a wash too?

Nordan. Go with Thomas. I will be with you directly. (ALFRED and THOMAS
go into the house. Then a carriage is heard stopping outside.) There is
a carriage. Go and see who it is, Thomas. I won't see any patients! I am
going away to-morrow.

Thomas. It is Mr. Christensen. (Goes into the house again.)

Nordan. Oho! (Goes to the window on the left.) Alfred!

Alfred (coming to the window). Yes?

Nordan. It is your father! If you do not want to be seen, pull down the
blind. (The blind is dulled dawn.)

Thomas (showing in CHRISTENSEN). Will you come this way please, sir.
(CHRISTENSEN is in court dress protected by a dustcoat, and wears the
cross of a Knight Commander of the Order of St. Olaf.)

Christensen. I hope I do not disturb you, doctor?

Nordan. Not at all!--In full dress! I congratulate you.

Christensen. Yes, we newly-fledged knights have to go to Court to-day.
But do you mind if I spend a minute or two here with you before I go on
to the palace?--Any news from over there? From the Riis's?

Nordan. No. They are sitting waiting for the "war" to begin, I expect.

Christensen. They shall not have to wait long, then! I have made up
my mind to begin it to-day. Has she come to her senses, by any chance?
Women usually feel things like that very acutely. But they usually get
over it, too.

Nordan. I do not think so. But I bow before your experience.

Christensen. Thank you! I should think that, as an old hand at playing
the buffer in family jars, you had a much greater experience. Yesterday
she was like an electric eel! And she gave her shock, too! The boy has
not been home since. I am almost glad of that; it shows he has some
sense of shame. I was beginning to doubt it.

Nordan. It is the coming "war" that interests me.

Christensen. Oh, you are anxious to see that, are you? Very well. As
a matter of fact there is no need to draw up a plan of campaign. That
affair of Mrs. North's can be taken up again any day, my dear fellow! It
is in the hands of the bank, you know.

Nordan. But what has that to do with your son engagement?

Christensen. What has it to do with it? Miss Riis gives my son his
dismissal because she cannot tolerate his conduct before marriage. Her
own father indulges in the same sort of conduct when he is well on in
married life! Tableau vivant très curieux!--to use a language Mr. Riis
is very fond of.

Nordan. It is a shame to talk like that--because your son is the only
one to blame in this matter.

Christensen. My son is not in the least to blame in the matter! He
has not done the slightest thing that could harm or discredit the
Riis's--not the slightest thing! He is a man of honour, who has given
Miss Riis his promise and has kept it. Will any one dare to contradict
that? Or to suggest that he will not keep his promise? If any one doubts
him, it is an insult. Dr. Nordan! In this matter the alternatives are
either an apology and peace--or war. For I am not going to put up with
this sort of thing; and if my son puts up with it, I shall despise him.

Nordan. Oh, I quite believe your son had every honourable intention
when he gave his promise. And very likely he would have kept it, too; I
cannot say for certain, because I have learnt to doubt. I am a doctor--I
have seen too much--and he did not appear to great advantage yesterday.
You really must forgive my saying so--but after the liveliness of his
young days, coupled with the tendencies he has inherited, do you think
he really had any right to be surprised if people doubted him?--if his
fiancée doubted him? Had he really any right to feel insulted, or
to demand apologies? Apologies for what? For having doubted his
virtue?--Just consider that!

Christensen. Why, what--?

Nordan. One moment! I was only half done. You said something about a
reconciliation, you know; of course by that you meant a marriage. If
your son is willing to marry a woman who distrusts him, then I shall
despise him.

Christensen. Really--!

Nordan. Yes, indeed I shall. Our opinions are as different as all that.
To my way of thinking, your son's only course is to submit--and wait; to
keep silence, and wait--always supposing, of course, that he still loves
her. That is my view of it.

Christensen. Well, I imagine that there are very few candidates for
matrimony who have not been guilty of what my son has been guilty of;
indeed, I am sure of it. And I imagine, too, that they have the same
unfortunate "hereditary tendencies"--an expression on which you laid
stress out of special friendship for me. But is that any reason
why girls who are betrothed should behave as Miss Riis has been
doing?--scream, and run away, and create a scandal? We should not be
able to hear ourselves speak! It would be the queerest sort of anarchy
the world has ever seen! Why, such doctrines as that are contrary to
the very nature and order of things! They are mad! And when, into the
bargain, they are thrown at our heads as if they were decisions of a
High Court of Morality--well, then I strike! Good-bye! (Starts to go,
but turns back.) And who is it that these High Court of Morality's
decisions would for the most part affect, do you suppose? Just the
ablest and most vigorous of our young men. Are we going to turn them
out and make a separate despised caste of them? And what things would
be affected, do you suppose? A great part of the world's literature and
art; a great part of all that is loveliest and most captivating in the
life of to-day; the world's greatest cities, most particularly--those
wonders of the world--teeming with their millions of people! Let me
tell you this: the life that disregards marriage or loosens the bonds of
marriage, or transforms the whole institution--you know very well what
I mean--the life that is accused of using the "weapons of seduction" in
its fashions, its luxury, its entertainments, its art, its theatre--that
life is one of the most potent factors in these teeming cities, one of
the most fruitful sources of their existence! No one who has seen it can
have any doubt about it, however ingenuous he may pretend to be. Are we
to wish to play havoc with all that too?--to disown the flower of the
world's youth, and ruin the world's finest cities? It seems to me that
people wish to do so much in the name of morality, that they end by
wishing to do what would be subversive of all morality.

Nordan. You are certainly embarking on your little war in the true
statesmanlike spirit!

Christensen. It is nothing but sound common-sense, my dear sir; that
is all that is necessary, I am sure. I shill have the whole town on my
side, you may be certain of that!

Thomas (appearing at the house door). Doctor!

Nordan (turning round). Is it possible! (Hurries to the doorway, in
which MRS. RIIS appears.)

Mrs. Riis. May I--?

Nordan. Of course! Will you come out here?

Mrs. Riis (to CHRISTENSEN, who bows to her). My visit is really to you,
Mr. Christensen.

Christensen. I am honoured.

Mrs. Riis. I happened to look out into the street just as your
carriage stopped and you got out. So I thought I would seize the
opportunity--because you threatened us yesterday, you know. Is that not
so? You declared war against us?

Christensen. My recollection of it is that war was declared, Mrs. Riis,
but that I merely accepted the challenge.

Mrs. Riis. And what line is your campaign going to take, if I may ask
the question?

Christensen. I have just had the honour of explaining my position to the
doctor. I do not know whether it would be gallant to do as much to you.

Nordan. I will do it, then. The campaign will be directed against your
husband. Mr. Christensen takes the offensive.

Mrs. Riis. Naturally!--because you know you can strike at him. But I
have come to ask you to think better of it.

Christensen (with a laugh). Really?

Mrs. Riis. Once--many years ago now--I took my child in my arms and
threatened to leave my husband. Thereupon he mentioned the name
of another man, and shielded himself behind that--for it was a
distinguished name. "See how lenient that man's wife is," he said. "And,
because she is so, all her friends are lenient, and that will be all the
better for their child." Those were his words.

Christensen. Well, as far as the advice they implied was concerned, it
was good advice--and no doubt you followed it.

Mrs. Riis. The position of a divorced woman is a very humiliating one
in the eyes of the world, and the daughter of such a woman fares very
little better. The rich and distinguished folk who lead the fashion take
care of that.

Christensen. But what--?

Mrs. Riis. That is my excuse for not having the courage to leave him. I
was thinking of my child's future. But it is my husband's excuse, too;
because he is one of those who follows the example of others.

Christensen. We all do that, Mrs. Riis.

Mrs. Riis. But it is the leaders of society that set the example, for
the most part; and in this matter they set a tempting one. I suppose I
can hardly be mistaken in thinking that I have heard your view of this
matter, all along, through my husband's mouth? Or, if I am mistaken in
that, I at all events surely heard it more accurately yesterday, when I
heard your voice in everything that your son said?

Christensen. I stand by every word of what my son said.

Mrs. Riis. I thought so. This campaign of yours will really be a
remarkable one! I see your influence in everything that has happened,
from first to last. You are the moving spirit of the whole campaign--on
both sides!

Nordan. Before you answer, Christensen--may I ask you, Mrs. Riis, to
consider whether you want to make the breach hopelessly irreparable?
Do you mean to make a reconciliation between the young people quite
impossible?

Mrs. Riis. It is impossible, as it is.

Nordan. Why?

Mrs. Riis. Because all confidence is destroyed.

Nordan. More so now than before?

Mrs. Riis. Yes. I will confess that up to the moment. When Alfred's word
of honour was offered yesterday--up to the moment when he demanded that
his word of honour should be believed--I did not recognise the fact that
it was my own story over again. But it was--word for word my own story!
That was just the way we began; who will vouch for it that the sequel
would not be the same as in our case?

Christensen. My son's character will vouch for that, Mrs. Riis!

Mrs. Riis. Character? A nice sort of character a man is likely to
develop who indulges in secret and illicit courses from his boyhood!
That is the very way faithlessness is bred. If any one wants to know the
reason why character is such a rare thing, I think they will find the
answer in that.

Christensen. A man's youth is by no means the test of his life. That
depends on his marriage.

Mrs. Riis. And why should a man's faithlessness disappear when he is
married? Can you tell me that?

Christensen. Because then he loves, of course.

Mrs. Riis. Because he loves? But do you mean that he has not loved
before then? How absolutely you men have blinded yourselves!--No, love
is not the least likely to be lasting when the will is vitiated. And
that is what it is--vitiated by the life a bachelor leads.

Christensen. And yet I know plenty of sensual men who have strong wills.

Mrs. Riis. I am not speaking of strength of will, but of purity,
faithfulness, nobility of will.

Christensen. Well, if my son is to be judged by any such nonsensical
standard as that, I am devoutly thankful he has got out of the whole
thing before it became serious--indeed I am! Now we have had enough of
this. (Prepares to go.)

Mrs. Riis. As far as your son is concerned--. (Turns to NORDAN.) Doctor,
answer me this, so that his father may hear it before he goes. When you
refused to go with us to the betrothal party, had you already heard some
thing about Alfred Christensen? Was what you had heard of such a nature
that you felt you could not trust him?

Nordan (after a moment's thought). Not altogether, certainly.

Mrs. Riis (to CHRISTENSEN). There, you hear!--But will you let me ask
you this, doctor: why did you not say so? Good God, why did you not
speak?

Nordan. Listen to me, Mrs. Riis. When two young people, who after all
are suited to one another--for they are that, are they not?

Christensen. They are that, I admit.

Nordan. When all of a sudden they fall madly in love with one another,
what are you to do?

Christensen. Oh, rake up all sorts of stories and exaggerations--create
a scandal!

Nordan. Indeed, I must confess--what as a matter of fact I have
said--that I have become accustomed to things not being exactly as they
should be in that respect. I looked upon these young people's engagement
in the same light as I have looked on others--on most others--that is
cruel to say, as a lottery. It might turn out well; on the other hand it
might turn out very badly.

Mrs. Riis. And you were willing to risk my daughter, whom you are
so fond of--for I know you are fond of her--in a lottery? Could one
possibly have a clearer proof of the real state of things?

Nordan. Yes, certainly! You yourself, Mrs. Riis--what did you do?

Mrs. Riis. I--?

Christensen. Bravo!

Nordan. You knew what Hoff had said--and more too. (CHRISTENSEN laughs
quietly.) Nevertheless you helped your husband, if not actually to try
and get her to overlook it, at all events to smooth things over.

Christensen. Bravo!

Nordan. And you called in my help to induce her to take time to think it
over.

Christensen. Mothers observe a considerable difference between theory
and practice in these matters, I notice.

Nordan. It was only when I saw how deeply it affected Svava--what
a horror she had of it--that my eyes were opened. And the longer I
listened to her, the more sympathy I felt for her; for I was young
myself once--and loved. But that was such a long time ago--and I have
grown tired--

Mrs. Riis (who has sat down at the little table). My God!

Nordan. Yes, Mrs. Riis. Let me tell you candidly--it is the mothers, and
no one else, that by degrees have made me callous. Mothers look upon the
whole thing so callously. The fact is that as a rule they know what is
what.

Christensen. That they do, the dear creatures! And Mrs. Riis is no
exception to the rule. You must admit, my dear madam, that you did all
you could to hold on to a young man who had had a lively past? Not to
mention the fact that this same young man had an extremely good social
position--a thing I only allude to incidentally.

Nordan. Exactly. Rather than not give their daughters a prospect of what
they call "a good marriage" they straightway forget all that they have
suffered themselves.

Mrs. Riis. You see, we do not know that it will turn out the same in
their case.

Nordan. You don't know it?

Mrs. Riis. No, I tell you that I did not think so! We believe that the
man our daughter is going to marry is so much better. We believe that
in their case there are stronger guarantees--that the circumstances are
altogether different. It is so! It is a kind of illusion that takes hold
of us.

Christensen. When there is a prospect of a good marriage, yes! I
entirely agree with you, Mrs. Riis--for the first time. Moreover, I
think there is another side to it. Isn't it possible that women have not
suffered so much after all from the fact that men are men? What? I
fancy the suffering has been more acute than serious--something like
sea-sickness; when it is over--well, it is over. And so when it is the
daughters' turn to go on board, the dear mothers think: "Oh, they will
be able to get over it too! Only let us get them off!" For they are so
anxious to get them off, that is the truth!

Mrs. Riis (getting up and coming forward). Well, if it is so, surely it
is nothing to make fun of! It only shows what a woman can sink to, from
living with a man.

Christensen Indeed!

Mrs. Riis. Yes--because each generation of women is endowed with
a stronger and stronger aspiration for a pure life. It results
unconsciously from the maternal instinct, and is intended as a
protection for the defenceless. Even worthless mothers feel that. But if
they succumb in spite of it, and each generation of married women in
its turn sinks as deep as you say, the reason of it can only be the
privilege that men enjoy as part of their education.

Christensen. What privilege?

Mrs. Riis. That of living as they please when they are bachelors, and
then having their word of honour believed in when they choose to enter
the married state. As long as women are powerless to put an end to that
horrible privilege or to make themselves independent of it, so long will
one half of the world continue to be sacrificed on account of the other
half--on account of the other half's lack of self-control. That one
privilege turns out to be more powerful than all the striving for
liberty in the world. And that is not a laughing matter.

Christensen. You are picturing to yourself a different world from this,
and different natures from ours, Mrs. Riis. And that--if you will excuse
my saying so--is obviously all the answer that is necessary to what you
say.

Mrs. Riis. Well, then, give that answer openly! Why do you not openly
acknowledge that as your standpoint?

Christensen. But don't we?

Mrs. Riis. No--not here, at all events. On the contrary, you range
yourselves ostensibly under our banner, while all the time you are
secretly betraying it. Why have you not the courage to unfurl your
own? Let these bachelor customs of yours be sanctioned as entirely
suitable--then we should be able to join issue with you. And then
every innocent bride would be able to know what it is she is entering
upon--and in what capacity.

Nordan. That would be simply nothing more or less than abolishing
marriage.

Mrs. Riis. Would not that be more honest, too? Because now it is only
being corrupted, long before it begins.

Christensen. Oh, of course it is all the men's fault! It is the fashion
to say that now--it is part of the "struggle for freedom." Down with
man's authority, of course!

Mrs. Riis. The authority his bachelor life has won for him!

Nordan. Ha, ha!

Mrs. Riis. Do not let us cover up the real issue with phrases! Let us
rather speak of the "desolate hearth" that the poet writes of. Marriage
laid in ruins is what he means by that; and what is the cause of it?
What is the cause of the chilly, horrible commonplace of every-day
life--sensual, idle, brutish? I could paint it even more vividly, but I
will not. I will refrain, for instance, from bringing up the subject
of hereditary disease. Let the question be thrashed out openly! Then
perhaps a fire will be kindled--and our consciences stirred! It must
become the most momentous question in every home. That is what is
needed!

Christensen. Our conversation has soared to such heights that it really
seems quite an anti-climax for me to say that I must go to a "higher
place"!--but you must excuse me all the same.

Mrs. Riis. I hope I have not delayed you?

Christensen. No, there is plenty of time. I am only longing
fervently--you really must not be offended--to get away from here.

Mrs. Riis. To your--equals?

Christensen. What a remarkable thing that you should remind me of them!
And, by the way, that reminds me that I am scarcely likely to meet you
or your family in future.

Mrs. Riis. No. Our acquaintance with you is at an end.

Christensen. Thank God for that!--All I hope now is that I shall succeed
in apportioning the ridicule with some degree of justice.

Mrs. Riis. You need only publish your autobiography!

Christensen. No--I think it should rather be your family principles,
madam! They are really very quaint. And when I relate the manner in
which they are put into practice by yourselves, I rather think that
people will be quite sufficiently amused. To speak seriously for a
moment--I mean to attack your husband's reputation in private and in
public, until he quits the town. I am not the sort of man to accept a
humiliation like this without returning the compliment. (Turns to go.)

Nordan. This is shocking!

Alfred (appearing in the doorway of the house). Father!

Christensen. You here?--How ill you look, my boy! Where have you been?

Alfred. I came here at the same time as you did, and have heard
everything. Let me tell you this at once, that if you take another step
against the Riis's, I shall go round and tell every one the reason why
Miss Riis threw me over. I shall tell them exactly what it was. Oh, it
is no use looking at me with that mocking expression! I shall do it--and
at once, too.

Christensen. I think you may spare yourself the trouble. The gossip
about a broken engagement will get all over the town quicker than you
could spread it.

Nordan (going up to ALFRED). One word, my boy--do you still love her?

Alfred. Do you ask that because she has been unjust to me? Well, now I
know quite well what led to it--and inevitably led to it. I understand
now!

Christensen. And forgive her? Without anything more?

Alfred. I love her more than ever--whatever she thinks of me!

Christensen. Well, upon my word! What next, I should like to know? You
claim your right to resume the rôle of lover, and leave us and other
honest folk to put the best face we can on the muddle you have made!
I suppose you are going across the road now to tell her how much you
enjoyed yourself yesterday?--or to ask for a respite till to-morrow, to
give you time to pass decently through a process of purification? May I
ask where you are going to find it and what it is going to consist of?
Oh, don't look so melodramatic! If you can put up with what you got from
Riis's girl yesterday and her mother to-day, surely you can put up with
a little angry talk or a little chaff from your father. I have had to
put up with the whole affair--the betrothal and the breaking it off
as well! And then to be sprinkled with essence of morality into the
bargain! Good Lord! I hope at least I shall not smell of it still when I
get to the palace. (Goes towards the house, but turns back at the door.)
You will find same money in the office to pay for a trip abroad. (Exit.)

Nordan. Does that mean banishment?

Alfred. Of course it does. (Appears very much agitated.)

Mrs. Riis. Doctor, you must come over to our house with me--and at once!

Nordan. How is she?

Mrs. Riis. I don't know.

Nordan. You don't know?

Mrs. Riis. She wanted to be alone yesterday. And to-day she went out
early.

Nordan. Has anything happened, then?

Mrs. Riis. Yes. You told me yesterday that you had given her a hint
about--her father.

Nordan. Well?

Mrs. Riis. And so I felt that it could not be concealed any longer.

Nordan. And you have--?

Mrs. Riis. I have written to her.

Nordan. Written?

Mrs. Riis. It seemed the easiest way--and we should escape talking about
it. All yesterday afternoon and last night I was writing, and tearing it
up, and writing again--writing--writing! It was not a long letter, when
all was done, but it took it out of me.

Nordan. And has she had the letter?

Mrs. Riis. When she had had her breakfast this morning and gone out, I
sent it after her. And now, my dear friend, I want to beg you to go and
have a talk with her--then you can let me know when I may go to her.
Because I am frightened! (Hides her face in her hands.)

Nordan. The moment you came I saw something serious had happened. You
argued so vehemently, too. Well, matters have developed, and no mistake!

Mrs. Riis. You mustn't go away, doctor! Don't go away from her now!

Nordan. Oh, that is it, is it?--Thomas!

[Enter THOMAS.]

Thomas. Yes, sir.

Nordan. You need not pack my things.

Thomas. Not pack, sir?--Very good, sir. (Gives the doctor his stick and
goes to open the house door for them.)

Nordan. Allow me, Mrs. Riis. (Offers her his arm.)

Alfred (coming forward). Mrs. Riis! May I speak to her?

Mrs. Riis. Speak to her? No, that is impossible.

Nordan. You heard, my boy, what she has to think about to-day.

Mrs. Riis. And if she would not speak to you before, it is not likely
she will now.

Alfred. If she should ask to speak to me, will you tell her I am here? I
shall stay here till she does.

Mrs. Riis. But what is the use of that?

Alfred. Well, that will be our affair. I know she wants to speak to me,
just as much as I do to her. Only tell her I am here! That is all I ask.
(Goes away into the farther part of the garden.)

Nordan. He does not know what he is talking about.

Mrs. Riis. Dear Dr. Nordan, let us go! I am so frightened.

Nordan. Not more than I am, I think.--So she knows it now, does she!
(They go out.)


SCENE II

(SCENE.--The same as in Acts I. and II. SVAVA comes into the room slowly
and looks round; then goes to the door and looks round outside the
house, then comes in again. As she turns back, she sees NORDAN standing
in the doorway.)

Svava. You!--Oh, Uncle Nordan! (Sobs.)

Nordan. My child! My dear child! Calm yourself!

Svava. But haven't you seen mother? She said she had gone across to see
you.

Nordan. Yes, she is coming directly. But look here--suppose you and I
go for a good long walk together, instead of talking to your mother or
anyone? Along quiet walk? Eh?

Svava. I can't.

Nordan. Why?

Svava. Because I must make an end of all this.

Nordan. What do you mean?

Svava (without answering his question). Uncle--?

Nordan. Yes?

Svava. Does Alfred know this?--Did he know it before?

Nordan. Yes.

Svava. Of course every one knew it except me. Oh, how I wish I could
hide myself away from every one! I will, too. I see the real state of
things now for the first time. I have been like a child trying to push a
mountain away with its two hands--and they have all been standing round,
laughing at me, of course. But let me speak to Alfred!

Nordan. To Alfred?

Svava. I behaved so wrongly yesterday. I ought never to have gone into
the room--but you gave me no choice when you came to me. I went with you
almost unconsciously.

Nordan. I suppose it was thinking of your father--of what I told you
about him--that made you--

Svava. I did not understand all at once. But, when I was by myself, it
all flashed across me--mother's strange uneasiness--father's threats
about leaving the country--all sorts of expressions, and signs--lots
and lots of things I had never understood and never even thought twice
about! I chased them out of my mind, but back they came!--back and back
again! It seemed to paralyse me. And when you took me by the arm and
said: "Now you must go in!"--I hardly had strength to think. Everything
seemed to be going round and round.

Nordan. Yes, I made a regular mess of it--both on that occasion and the
time before.

Svava. No, it was all quite right--quite right! We certainly went a
little off the lines, it is true. I must speak to Alfred; the matter
must not rest as it is. But, except for that, it was all quite right.
And now I have got to make an end of it all.

Nordan. What do you mean?

Svava. Where is mother?

Nordan. My dear girl, you ought not to try and do anything to-day. I
should advise you not to speak to anybody. If you do--well, I don't know
what may happen.

Svava. But I know.--Oh, it is no use talking to me like that! You think
I am simply a bundle of nerves to-day. And it is quite true--I am. But
if you try to thwart me it will only make me worse.

Nordan. I am not trying to thwart you at all. I only--

Svava. Yes, yes, I know.--Where is mother, then? And you must bring
Alfred here. I cannot go to him, can I? Or do you think he has too much
pride to come, after what happened yesterday? Oh, no, he is not like
that! Tell him he must not be proud with one who is so humiliated.
(Bursts into tears.)

Nordan. But do you think you are able for it?

Svava. You don't know how much I can stand! Anyway, I must get done with
it all, quickly. It has lasted long enough.

Nordan. Then shall I ask your mother--?

Svava. Yes!--and will you ask Alfred?

Nordan. Presently, yes. And if you should--

Svava. No, there is no "if" about it!

Nordan.--if you should want me, I won't go away till you are "done with
it all," as you say. (SVAVA goes up to him and embraces him. He goes
out. After a short pause MRS. RIIS comes in.)

Mrs. Riis (going to SVAVA). My child! (Stops.)

Svava. No, mother, I cannot come near you. Besides, I am trembling all
over. And you don't understand what it is? It has not dawned upon you
that you cannot treat me like this?

Mrs. Riis. Treat you like this, Svava? What do you mean?

Svava. Good heavens, mother!--letting me live here day after day, year
after year, without letting me know what I was living with? Allowing me
to preach the strictest principles, from a house like ours? What will
people say of us, now that everything will be known!

Mrs. Riis. Surely you would not have wished me to tell my child that--

Svava. Not while I was a child. But when I had grown up, yes--under any
circumstances! I ought to have been allowed the choice whether I would
live at home under such conditions or not! I ought to have been allowed
to know what every one else knew--or what they may get to know at any
moment.

Mrs. Riis. I have never looked at it in that light.

Svava. Never looked at it in that light? Mother!

Mrs. Riis. Never!--To shield you and have peace in our home while you
were a child, and peace afterwards in your studies, your interests and
your pleasures--for you are not like other girls, you know, Svava--to
ensure this, I have been almost incredibly careful that no hint of this
should come to your ears. I believed that to be my duty. You have no
conception what I have stooped to--for your sake, my child.

Svava. But you had no right to do it, mother!

Mrs. Riis. No right?--

Svava. No! To degrade yourself for my sake was to degrade me too.

Mrs. Riis (with emotion). Oh, my God--!

Svava. I do not reproach you for anything, mother! I would not do that
for the world--my dear mother! I am only so infinitely distressed and
appalled at the thought of your having to go about carrying such a
secret with you! Never able to be your real self with me for a moment!
Always hiding something! And to have to listen to my praises of what
so little deserved praise--to see me putting my faith in him, caressing
him--oh, mother, mother!

Mrs. Riis. Yes, dear, I felt that myself--many and many a time. But
I felt that I dared not tell you. It was wrong--so very wrong! I
understand that now! But would you have had me leave him at once, as
soon as I knew of it myself?

Svava. I cannot take upon myself to say. You decided that for yourself.
Each one must decide that for herself--according to the measure of her
love and her strength. But when the thing went on after I was grown
up--! Naturally that was why I made a second mistake. I had been brought
up to make mistakes, you see. (RIIS is heard outside the window, humming
a tune.)

Mrs. Riis. Good heavens, there he is! (RIIS is seen passing the
left-hand window. When he reaches the door, however, he stops and, with
the words, "Oh, by the bye!" turns back and goes hurriedly out.)

Mrs. Riis. You look quite changed, my child! Svava, you frighten me!
Surely you are not going to--?

Svava. What is it that is in your mind, mother?

Mrs. Riis. The thought that, as I have endured so much for your sake,
you might make up your mind to endure a little for mine.

Svava. A little of this? No, not for a moment!

Mrs. Riis. But what are you going to do?

Svava. Go away from here at once, of course.

Mrs. Riis (with a cry). Then I shall go with you!

Svava. You? Away from father?

Mrs. Riis. It has been for your sake that I have stayed with him. I
won't stay here a day without you!--Ah, you don't want me with you!

Svava. Mother, dear--I must have time to accustom myself to the changed
state of things. You have quite changed in my eyes too, you see. I have
been mistaken in you, and I must get accustomed to that idea. I must be
alone!--Oh, don't look so unhappy, dear!

Mrs. Riis. And this is the end of it all--this is the end of it!

Svava. I cannot act otherwise, dear. I must go away now to my
Kindergartens and give up my life entirely to that work. I must, I must!
If I cannot be alone there, I must go farther afield.

Mrs. Riis. This is the cruellest part of it all--the cruellest part!
Listen, is that--? Yes, it is he. Do not say anything now! For my sake
say nothing now; I cannot bear anything more on the top of this!--Try
to be friendly to him! Svava--do you hear me! (RIIS comes back, still
humming a tune; this time he has his overcoat over his arm. SVAVA comes
hurriedly forward, and after a moment's hesitation sits down with her
back half turned to him, and tries to busy herself with something. RIIS
puts down his overcoat. He is in court dress and wears the Order of St.
Olaf.)

Riis. Good morning, ladies! Good morning!

Mrs. Riis. Good morning!

Riis. Here is the latest great piece of news for you: Who do you think
drove me from the palace? Christensen!

Mrs. Riis. Really?

Riis. Yes! Our wrathful friend of yesterday! Yes! He and one of my
fellow-directors. I was one of the first persons he greeted when he got
to the palace. He introduced me to people, chatted with me--paid me the
most marked attention!

Mrs. Riis. You don't mean it?

Riis. Consequently nothing really happened here yesterday! No gloves
were thrown about at all, least of all in his eldest son's face!
Christensen, the worthy knight of to-day's making, feels the necessity
for peace! We ended by drinking a bottle of champagne at my brother's.

Mrs. Riis. How amusing!

Riis. Therefore, ladies--smiles, if you please! Nothing has happened
here, absolutely nothing! We begin again with an absolutely clean slate,
without a smear upon it!

Mrs. Riis. What a piece of luck!

Riis. Yes, isn't it! That rather violent outburst of our daughter's has
unburdened her mind and cleared the ideas in other people's heads. The
general atmosphere is agreeably clear, not to say favourable.

Mrs. Riis. And what was it like at the palace?

Riis. Well, I can tell you this--when I looked round at our batch of
new-fledged knights, it did not exactly impress me that it is virtue
that is rewarded in this world of ours. However, we were all confronted
with an alarmingly solemn document. It was about something we swore to
preserve--I fancy it was the State--or perhaps the Church--I am really
not sure, because I didn't read it. They all signed it!

Mrs. Riis. You, as well?

Riis. I, as well. Do you suppose I was going to be left out of such good
company? Up at those exalted heights one obtains a happier and freer
outlook upon life. We were all friends up there. People came up and
congratulated me--and after a bit I wasn't sure whether it was on my
daughter's account or on my own; and, what is more, I never knew I had
so many friends in the town, let alone at Court! But in such brilliant
company and such an atmosphere of praises and compliments and general
amiability, one was not inclined to be particular! And there were only
men present! You know--you ladies must excuse me--there is sometimes
a peculiar charm in being only with men, especially on great occasions
like that. Conversation becomes more pointed, more actual, more
robust--and laughter more full of zest. Men seem to understand one
another almost without the need of words.

Mrs. Riis. I suppose you are feeling very happy to-day, then?

Riis. I should think I am!--and I only wish every one were the same! I
daresay life might be better than it is; but, as I saw it under those
circumstances from those exalted heights, it might also be much worse.
And, as for us men--oh, well, we have our faults, no doubt, but we are
very good company for all that. It would be a dull world without us, I
am sure. Let us take life as it comes, my dear Svava! (Comes nearer
to her. She gets up.) What is the matter? Are you still in a bad
temper?--when you have had the pleasure of boxing his ears with your own
gloves, before the whole family circle? What more can you reasonably
ask of life? I should say you ought to have a good laugh over it!--Or is
there something up? What? Come, what is the matter now?

Mrs. Riis. The fact is--

Riis. Well, the fact is--?

Mrs. Riis. The fact is that Alfred will be here in a moment.

Riis. Alfred here? In a moment? Hurrah! I quite understand! But why
didn't you tell me so at once?

Mrs. Riis. You have talked the whole time since you came in.

Riis. I do believe I have!--Well, if you are going to take it seriously,
my dear Svava, perhaps you will allow your "knightly" father to take it
lightly? The whole thing amuses me so tremendously. I was put into good
spirits to-day the moment I saw, from Christensen's face, that there
was nothing in the wind. And so Alfred is coming here directly! Then I
understand everything. Hurrah, once more! I assure you that is the best
of all the good things that have happened to-day. I really think I must
play a festal overture till he comes! (Goes towards the piano, singing.)

Mrs. Riis. No, no, dear! Do you hear? No, no! (RIIS plays on, without
listening to hey, till she goes up to him, and stops him, pointing to
SVAVA.)

Svava. Oh, let him play, mother--let him play! It is the innocent
gaiety that I have admired since I was a child! (Bursts into tears, but
collects herself.) How hateful! How horrible!

Riis. My dear child, you look as if you wanted to be throwing down
gauntlets to-day too! Isn't that all done with?

Svava. No, indeed it is not!

Riis. You shall have the loan of my gloves, if you haven't--

Mrs. Riis. Oh, don't say those things to her!

Svava. Oh, yes, let him! Let him mock at us, mother dear! A man of his
moral earnestness has the right to mock at us!

Riis. What are you talking about? Does it show a lack of moral
earnestness not to be in love with old maids and sour-faced virtue?

Svava. Father, you are--

Mrs. Riis. No, Svava!

Riis. Oh, let her say what she wants! It is something quite new to see
a well-brought-up girl throw her gloves in her fiancé's face and
accusations in her father's! Especially when it is all done in the name
of morality!

Svava. Don't talk about morality! Or go and talk to Mrs. North about it!

Riis. Mrs.--Mrs.--? What has she to do with--?

Svava. Be quiet! I know everything! You have--

Mrs. Riis. Svava!

Svava. Ah, yes-for mother's sake I won't go on. But, when I threw down
my much discussed gauntlet yesterday, I knew about it then. That was why
I did it! It was a protest against everything of the kind, against
its beginning and its continuation, against him and against you!
I understood--then--your pious zeal in the matter, and the show of
scandalised morality you allowed mother to be a witness of!

Mrs. Riis. Svava!

Svava. I understand now, for the first time, what your consideration,
your politeness to mother--which I have so often admired--all meant!
Your fun, your good temper, your care of your appearance!--Oh, I never
can believe in anything any more! It is horrible, horrible!

Mrs. Riis. Svava, dear!

Svava. All life seems to have become unclean for me! My nearest and
dearest all soiled and smirched! That is why, ever since yesterday,
I have had the feeling of being an outcast; and that is what I am--an
outcast from all that I prized and reverenced--and that without my
having done the slightest thing to deserve it. Even so, it is not the
pain of it that I feel most deeply; it is the humiliation, the shame.
All that I have so often said must seem now to be nothing but empty
words--all that I have done myself must seem of no account--and this
without its being my fault! For it is your fault! I thought, too, that
I knew something about life; but there was more for me to learn! I see
that you wanted me to give way to such an extent that I should end
by acquiescing in it. I understand now, for the first time, what your
teaching meant--and the things that you invoked mother and heaven to
witness. But it is of no use! I can tell you that it is about as much
as one can stand, to have the thoughts I have had yesterday--last
night--to-day. However, it is once and for all; after this, nothing can
ever take me by surprise again. To think that any man could have the
heart to let his child have such an experience!

Mrs. Riis. Svava--look at your father!

Svava. Yes--but if you think what I am saying now is hard, remember what
I said to you before I knew this--no longer ago than yesterday morning.
That will give you some idea of how I believed in you, father--and some
idea of what I am feeling now! Oh--!

Riis. Svava!

Svava. You have ruined my home for me! Almost every other hour in it has
been corrupted--and I cannot face a future like that.

Riis and Mrs. Riis (together). But, Svava--!

Svava. No, I cannot! My faith in you is destroyed--so that I can never
think of this as a home again. It makes me feel as if I were merely
living with you as a lodger--from yesterday onwards, merely a lodger in
the house.

Riis. Don't say that! My child!

Svava. Yes, I am your child. It only needed you to say it like that, for
me to feel it deeply. To think of all the experiences we two have
had together--all the happy times we have had on our travels, in our
amusements--and then to think that I can never look back on them again,
never take them up again! That is why I cannot stay here.

Riis. You cannot stay here!

Svava. It would remind me of everything too painfully. I should see
everything in a distorted light.

Mrs. Riis. But you will see that you cannot bear to go away, either!

Riis. But--I can go!

Mrs Riis. You?

Riis. Yes, and your mother and you stay here?--Oh, Svava--!

Svava. No, I cannot accept that--come what may!

Riis. Do not say any more! Svava, I entreat you! Do not make me too
utterly miserable! Remember that never, until to-day--I never thought
to make you--. If you cannot bear to be with me any more--if you
cannot--then let me go away! It is I that am to blame, I know. Listen,
Svava! It must be I, not you! You must stay here!

Mrs. Riis (listening). Good heavens, there is Alfred!

Riis. Alfred! (A pause. ALFRED appears in the doorway.)

Alfred (after a moment). Perhaps I had better go away again?

Riis (to ALFRED). Go away again?--Go away again, did you say?--No, not
on any account! No!--No, you could not have come at a more fortunate
moment! My boy, my dear boy! Thank you!

Mrs. Riis (to SVAVA). Would you rather be alone--?

Svava. No, no, no!

Riis. You want to speak to Svava, don't you? I think it will be best
for me to leave you together. You need to talk things over frankly with
her--to be alone--naturally! You will excuse me, then, if I leave you,
won't you? I have something very important to do in town, so you will
excuse me! I must hurry and change my clothes--so please excuse me!
(Goes into his room.)

Alfred. Oh, but I can come some other time.

Mrs. Riis. But I expect you would like to talk to her now?

Alfred. It is no question of what I would like. I see--and I heard Dr.
Nordan say--that Miss Riis is quite worn out. But I felt it my duty, all
the same, to call.

Svava. And I thank you for doing so! It is more--far more--than I have
deserved. But I want to tell you at once that what happened yesterday--I
mean, the form my behaviour took yesterday--was due to the fact that,
only an hour before then, something had come to my knowledge that I had
never known before. And that was mixed up with it. (She can scarcely
conceal her emotion.)

Alfred. I knew that to-day you would be regretting what happened
yesterday--you are so good. And that was my only hope of seeing you
again.

Riis (coming out of his room partly dressed to go out). Does any one
want anything done in town? If so, I shall be happy to see to it! It
has occurred to me that perhaps these ladies would like to go away for a
little trip somewhere--what do you two say to that? When one's thoughts
are beginning to get a little--what shall I call it?--a little too much
for one, or perhaps I should rather say a trifle too serious, it is
often a wonderful diversion to go away for a little change. I have often
found it so myself--often, I assure you! Just think it over, won't you?
I could see about making plans for you at once, if you think so--eh?
Well, then, good-bye for the present! And--think it over! I think myself
it is such an excellent plan! (Goes out. SVAVA looks at her mother with
a smile, and hides her face in her hands.)

Mrs. Riis. I must go away for a few minutes and--

Svava. Mother!

Mrs. Riis. I really must, dear! I must collect my thoughts. This has
been too much for me. I shall not go farther away than into my room
there (pointing to the room on the left). And I will come back directly.
(SVAVA throws herself into a chair by the table, overcome by her
emotion.)

Alfred. It looks as if we two were to have to settle this matter, after
all.

Svava. Yes.

Alfred. I daresay that you will understand that since yesterday I have
done nothing else but invent speeches to make to you--but now I do not
feel as if it had been of much use.

Svava. It was good of you to come.

Alfred. But you must let me make one request of you, and that from my
heart: Wait for me! Because I know now what will show me the way to your
heart. We had planned out our life together, you and I; and, although I
shall do it alone, I shall carry out our plans unfalteringly. And then
perhaps, some day, when you see how faithful I have been--. I know I
ought not to worry you, least of all to-day. But give me an answer! You
need scarcely say anything--but just give me an answer!

Svava. But what for?

Alfred. I must have it to live on--and the more difficult the prize
is to attain, the better worth living will life be to me. Give me an
answer!

Svava (tries to speak, but bursts into tears). Ah, you see how
everything upsets me to-day. I cannot. Besides, what do you want me to
do? To wait? What would that mean? It would mean being ready and yet
not ready; trying to forget and yet always having it before my mind. (Is
overcome again by her emotion.) No!

Alfred. I see you need to be alone. But I cannot bring myself to go
away. (SVAVA gets up, and tries to regain control over herself. ALFRED
goes to her and throws himself on his knees beside her.) Give me just
one word.

Svava. But do you not understand that if you could give me back once
more the happiness that complete trust gives--do you think I should wait
for you to ask anything of me then? No, I should go to you and thank you
on my knees. Can you doubt that for a moment?

Alfred. No, no!

Svava. But I have not got it.

Alfred. Svava!

Svava. Oh, please--!

Alfred. Good-bye--good-bye! But I shall see you again some day? I shall
see you again? (Turns to go, but stops at the door.) I must have a
sign--something definite to take with me! Stretch out a hand to me! (At
these words SVAVA turns to him and stretches out both her hands to him.
He goes out. MRS. RIIS comes in from her room.)

Mrs. Riis. Did you promise him anything?

Svava. I think so. (Throws herself into her mother's arms.)
