
  The Three Daughters
  of M. Dupont

  [Les Trois Filles de M. Dupont]

  Translated by St. John Hankin

Cast of the original production before the Stage Society at the King’s
Hall, London, on March 12, 13 and 14, 1905.

  Mme. Dupont                KATE BISHOP

  Courthezon                LEON M. LION

  Caroline                  ITALIA CONTI

  Julie                     ETHEL IRVING

  M. Dupont               O. B. CLARENCE

  Justine                  LOIS CRAMPTON

  M. Mairaut              ARTHUR CHESNEY

  Mme. Mairaut              AGNES THOMAS

  Antonin Mairaut      CHARLES V. FRANCE

  Lignol                    LEWIS CASSON

  M. Pouchelet              G. M. GRAHAM

  Mme. Pouchelet             DORA BARTON

  Françoise               FLORENCE ADALE

  Angèle                GERTRUDE BURNETT




ACT I


  _A very undistinguished room in a house in a French country town. The
  time is February. There is in the centre of the room a table, with
  chairs round it; a fireplace on the left, and window on the right; a
  piano; lamps; a bronze statuette of Gutenberg; holland covers on the
  furniture. There are doors to right and left and at the back._

  _Madame Dupont is discovered alone, darning stockings. After a moment
  or two Courthezon comes in, with some papers in his hand._

COURTHEZON. Why, you’re all alone, Madame Dupont?

MME. DUPONT. Yes, M. Courthezon.

COURTHEZON. Your young ladies are listening to the band?

MME. DUPONT. No: Julie has gone to pay a call, and Caroline is at
Benediction. She goes every Sunday.

COURTHEZON. Oh, yes, of course.

MME. DUPONT. On Sunday we never see her, except at déjeûner. The rest
of the day she’s at church. I believe she never misses a service. And
now she is one of the Enfants de Marie. At her age, too!

COURTHEZON. How old is she?

MME. DUPONT. Thirty-three.

COURTHEZON. And still very religious?

MME. DUPONT. Very.

COURTHEZON [_nodding_] Her mother was just the same.

MME. DUPONT. You remember my husband’s first wife?

COURTHEZON. Yes. I came to the printing office two years before she
died. [_Pause_] M. Dupont is at his game at the Café du Commerce, no
doubt? I should be there myself if I could afford it.

MME. DUPONT. You have your savings.

COURTHEZON. Precisely; and I don’t want to lose them. But you are
working, Madame Dupont?

MME. DUPONT. Mending some stockings. One must find something to do.

COURTHEZON. I’ve been hard at it, too, all day.

MME. DUPONT. Still at your invention?

COURTHEZON. Yes. I tell you it’s splendid. I’ve been downstairs to the
printing office to see if there were any orders.

MME. DUPONT. Were there any?

COURTHEZON [_looking through papers in his hand_] Three hundred
visiting cards, a price list, and an announcement.

MME. DUPONT [_stopping her work_] Death? Birth?

COURTHEZON. Neither. A marriage.

MME. DUPONT. Give it me. [_Reads paper which Courthezon gives her_] M.
Jacquemin. M. Jacquemin! And who is this Mlle. Martha Violet whom he is
marrying?

COURTHEZON. One of the Violets of the Rue du Pré.

MME. DUPONT. Oh, yes: of course. [_To Courthezon, who makes as if to
take back the paper_] Leave it with me. I will send it down to you. I
want to show it to Julie. So you are pleased with your invention?

COURTHEZON [_sitting down_] I am delighted with it. Delighted! I’ve
been working at it twenty years! And now it’s finished. What do you
think of that?

  _Enter Caroline. She is tall, stringy, not pretty, not attractive,
  but not absurd. She has a prayer-book in her hand._

MME. DUPONT [_carelessly, to Courthezon, who has stopped_] Go on. It’s
only Caroline. [_Interested_] And you still won’t tell us what it is?

COURTHEZON. Not yet. [_Rising, bowing to Caroline_] Good day, Mlle.
Caroline.

CAROLINE [_half-returning his bow_] Good day, M. Courthezon.

MME. DUPONT. I can imagine how pleased you are.

COURTHEZON. Of course I am.

CAROLINE. You have finished your invention!

COURTHEZON. Yes. How did you guess?

CAROLINE [_a little confused_] Oh, only—

COURTHEZON. Only?

CAROLINE [_in a lower voice_] Only that I knew it.

COURTHEZON. You knew it?

CAROLINE [_confused_] Yes. But never mind about that.

MME. DUPONT [_to Courthezon_] And now you will become a rich man, eh,
M. Courthezon?

COURTHEZON. Not all at once. I must first find someone who will buy
my invention, or who will advance me money to push it for myself. But
there’s plenty of time to think of all that: and whether I succeed
or not, I am glad to have given twenty years of my life to inventing
something that will make life a little easier for those who will come
after me. And now I am going downstairs to the office to do a little
work. You’ll send down that announcement, won’t you?

MME. DUPONT. I won’t forget.

COURTHEZON. Good evening, Madame Dupont. Good evening, Mlle. Caroline.

CAROLINE & MME. DUPONT. Good evening, M. Courthezon.

  _Courthezon goes out._

MME. DUPONT. Why were you so sure he had completed his invention?

CAROLINE [_confused, after a moment’s silence_] You won’t tell anyone,
mother?

MME. DUPONT. No.

CAROLINE. Because I prayed for it.

MME. DUPONT [_not spitefully, but with a slight shrug of the
shoulders_] I see.

  _Julie comes in._

JULIE. Here I am, maman [_she kisses her_]. You here, Caro? [_She does
not kiss her_].

MME. DUPONT. Ah, Julie! Sit down, dear, and tell me what you have been
doing and whom you have seen.

  [_Her warm greeting to Julie contrasts markedly with the cold
  reception she previously gave to Caroline_].

JULIE. I went to see Madame Leseigneur.

MME. DUPONT. I might have guessed that.

JULIE. Why?

MME. DUPONT. You only go to houses where there are children. And as
Madame Leseigneur has six—

JULIE. I wish I were in her place. Only think: André, the youngest, you
know, the one who is only six months old?

MME. DUPONT. Yes.

JULIE. He _recognised_ me. There never _was_ such a baby for taking
notice.

MME. DUPONT. You talk as if you were a mother yourself.

JULIE. Jean laughed till he cried when he saw what I had brought him.
Charles and Pierre were in disgrace because they’d been fighting. But
I got their mother to forgive them, so that was all right. To-morrow I
shall go to Madame Durand to hear how Jacques is going on. I hear he
has the whooping-cough.

MME. DUPONT [_laughing_] You ought to have been a nurse.

JULIE [_seriously_] No, no. I should have died when I had to leave the
first child I had nursed.

MME. DUPONT. Then you should marry.

JULIE. Yes. [_Pause_].

MME. DUPONT [_to Caroline_] Well, Caroline, what are you doing there
with your mouth open?

CAROLINE. I was listening.

MME. DUPONT. Have you finished your painting?

CAROLINE. No. I still have six of the Marie Antoinette figures to do,
and a dozen china Cupids to finish.

JULIE. How funny it is to think of Caro painting Cupids!

CAROLINE. Why?

MME. DUPONT [_to Caroline_] And you have to send all those off by
twelve o’clock to-morrow?

CAROLINE. Yes.

MME. DUPONT. You will never have them ready.

CAROLINE. I shall manage.

MME. DUPONT. You might do a little at them now, before dinner, instead
of sitting there twiddling your fingers.

CAROLINE. I shall get up early to-morrow.

MME. DUPONT. Even if you _do_ get up early—

CAROLINE. I shall begin at six, as soon as it is light.

MME. DUPONT. Still, you might do some work on them now.

CAROLINE. I would rather not.

MME. DUPONT. Because it’s Sunday, I suppose; and one mustn’t work on
Sunday.

CAROLINE. Yes. [_Pause_] Why should _you_ mind, mother, if I—

MME. DUPONT. I? Not the least in the world. Do as you please. You are
old enough to decide for yourself.

JULIE [_who has been reading one of the papers_] Is Courthezon down in
the office? I should like the next part of this.

MME. DUPONT. You know quite well your father doesn’t like you to read
the proofs of the stories he has to print.

JULIE. I have no others. Listen to this: isn’t it too bad to have to
stop there? [_Reads_] ‘Solange was still in Robert’s arms. At this
moment the Count entered, menacing, terrible, his revolver in his
hand.’ I do so want to know what happened next!

CAROLINE. The Count will kill them, of course. It is his right.

JULIE. I wonder.

CAROLINE. According to law.

JULIE. That’s no reason. I want to read over again where Robert comes
in. It’s lovely. And the meeting with Solange in Italy, one evening
in May. Where is it? Ah, here! [_Reads_] ‘Under the deep blue of the
sky, picked out by stars, by the shore of the calm sea that a perfumed
breeze just ruffled, and in which were reflected with the stars above
the many distant lights of Mentone and of Monte Carlo—’

MME. DUPONT [_smiling_] And your father imagines he has cured you of
all such foolishness!

JULIE. I am doing no harm.

MME. DUPONT. No matter. I would rather you didn’t read any more novels.

JULIE. Why? Berthe Paillant reads all the stories that come out, and
she’s younger than I am.

MME. DUPONT. Berthe Paillant is married.

JULIE. There it is! If one is not to remain a child to the end of one’s
days one must marry. I am twenty-four, and I may’nt read the books
which Berthe can read at eighteen.

MME. DUPONT. There’s my thread broken again. I believe you bought it at
Lagnier’s, Caroline.

CAROLINE. Yes.

MME. DUPONT. Why didn’t you go to Laurent’s?

CAROLINE. I thought we ought to deal with those who believe as we do.

MME. DUPONT. If only one could find a good Catholic who sold good wool!

CAROLINE. There isn’t one in the town.

JULIE [_with a sigh_] Heigho! You don’t know of a husband for me, do
you, Caro?

CAROLINE. What sort of one do you want?

JULIE [_seriously_] I am getting to the time of life when a woman
accepts the first man who offers himself. Choose whatever sort you
think best for me [_laughing_]. What would be your ideal? Someone in
business? A captain in the army? Tell me.

CAROLINE. No.

JULIE. Why not?

CAROLINE. If I were to marry, I should choose a worker, a man with a
noble aim, a man who would be ready to sacrifice himself to make life a
little easier for those who will come after him.

MME. DUPONT. Oh, don’t talk like a sentimental novel, Caroline.

CAROLINE. I was not.

MME. DUPONT. Well, I’m sure I’ve read that somewhere. Besides, at your
age one doesn’t speak of those things any longer.

JULIE. Talking of that, you know Henriette Longuet?

MME. DUPONT. Yes.

JULIE. She is going to be married.

MME. DUPONT. Indeed?

JULIE. Yes. [_Thoughtfully_] I’m the last to go.

MME. DUPONT. The last go off best. What a week this is for marriages!
Courthezon brought me an announcement just now which I kept to show
you. Where is it? Ah, here it is. [_Hands it to her_].

JULIE [_after looking at it, sadly_] That finishes it!

MME. DUPONT. What do you mean?

CAROLINE. What is it, Julie?

JULIE. Nothing.

MME. DUPONT. Were you thinking of M. Jacquemin?

JULIE. How do I know? He has never said anything to me, of course, but
I fancied he had noticed me. I didn’t care much about him, but he was
better than nothing. Better than nothing! [_Sighs_] It’s a stupid sort
of world for girls nowadays.

  _Dupont comes in._

DUPONT [_brimming over with excitement and importance_] Ah! Here are
the children. Run away, my dears, for a few minutes. I’ll call you when
I want you.

JULIE [_going with Caroline_] Caroline! Do you think it is—?

CAROLINE [_thoughtfully_] It does look like it.

  _They go out together._

MME. DUPONT. Well, what is it?

DUPONT [_with an air of importance_] M. and Madame Mairaut will be here
in an hour, at six o’clock.

MME. DUPONT. Yes?

DUPONT [_craftily_] And do you know why they are coming?

MME. DUPONT. No.

DUPONT. To ask for Julie’s hand in marriage. That’s all!

MME. DUPONT. For their son?

DUPONT. Well, my dear, it’s not for the Sultan of Turkey.

MME. DUPONT. M. Mairaut, the banker.

DUPONT. M. Mairaut, head of the Banque de l’Univers, 14 Rue des
Trois-Chapeaux, second floor.

MME. DUPONT. Yes; but—

DUPONT. Now, now, don’t excite yourself. Don’t lose your head. The
thing isn’t done yet. Listen. For the last fortnight, at the Merchants’
Club, Mairaut has been taking me aside and talking about Julie—asking
me this, that, and the other. As you may suppose, I let him run on.
To-day we were talking together about the difficulty of marrying one’s
children. ‘I know something of that,’ said he. ‘So do I,’ I said. Then
he grinned at me and said: ‘Supposing Madame Mairaut and I were to
come in one of these days to discuss the question with you and Madame
Dupont?’ You may imagine my delight. I simply let myself go. But no,
when I say I let myself go, I do myself an injustice. I kept a hand
over myself all the time. ‘One of these days. Next week, perhaps?’ I
said, carelessly, just like that. ‘Why not to-day?’ said he. ‘As you
please,’ said I. ‘Six o’clock?’ ’Six o’clock.’ What do you think of
that?

MME. DUPONT. But M. Mairaut—the son, I mean—Monsieur—what is his
Christian name?

DUPONT. Antonin, Antonin Mairaut.

MME. DUPONT. Antonin, of course. I was wondering. Is M. Antonin Mairaut
quite the husband we should choose for Julie?

DUPONT. I know what you mean. His life isn’t all that it should be.
There’s that woman—

MME. DUPONT. So people say.

DUPONT. But we needn’t bother about that. There’s another matter,
however, that _is_ worth considering—though, of course, you haven’t
thought of it. Women never do think of the really important things.

MME. DUPONT. You mean money? The Mairauts haven’t any. They only keep a
couple of clerks altogether in their bank. They may have to put up the
shutters any day.

DUPONT. Yes: but there’s someone else who may put his shutters up
first. Antonin’s uncle. The old buffer may die. And he has two hundred
thousand francs, and never spends a penny.

MME. DUPONT. True. But—

DUPONT. But. But. There you go. You’re determined never to see anything
that is more than an inch before your nose. I don’t blame you for it.
Women are like that.

MME. DUPONT. But suppose he disinherits Antonin?

DUPONT. You forget I shall be there. I flatter myself I shall know how
to prevent Uncle Maréchal from disinheriting his nephew. Besides, what
is Uncle Maréchal?

MME. DUPONT. Antonin’s uncle.

DUPONT. You don’t understand. I ask you what he _is_. What is his
position, I mean.

MME. DUPONT. He’s head clerk at the Prefecture.

DUPONT. Exactly. And he could get me the contract for all the printing
work at his office. Thirty thousand francs a year! How much profit does
that mean?

MME. DUPONT. Five thousand francs.

DUPONT. Five thousand? Ten thousand! If one is only to make the
ordinary trade profit, what’s the good of Government contracts?

MME. DUPONT. I’m afraid young M. Mairaut’s character—

DUPONT. His character! We know nothing about his character. He has one
virtue which nothing can take away from him: he is his uncle’s nephew.
And his uncle can get me work that will bring in ten thousand francs a
year, besides being as rich as Crœsus.

MME. DUPONT. Still, are you sure that he is the right sort of husband
for Julie?

DUPONT. He is the right sort of husband for Julie, and the right sort
of son-in-law for me.

MME. DUPONT [_dubiously_] Well, you know more of these things than I do.

DUPONT [_looks at his watch_] Ten minutes past five. Now listen to me.
We have very little time, but I feel the ideas surging through my brain
with extraordinary clearness. It’s only in moments of emergency that
I feel myself master of all my faculties, though I flatter myself I’m
not altogether a fool at the worst of times. [_He sits upon a chair,
his hands leaning upon the back of it_]. I will explain everything to
you, so that you may make as few blunders as possible. We must get old
Mairaut to agree that all the money, Julie’s and Antonin’s, shall be
the joint property of them both.

MME. DUPONT. But there will be Julie’s dot.

DUPONT [_pettishly_] If you keep interrupting we shall never be done.
The joint property of them both, on account of Uncle Maréchal’s money.
Do you understand?

MME. DUPONT. Yes.

DUPONT. That’s a blessing. Well, then we shall ask for—

MME. DUPONT. No settlements. I understand.

DUPONT. On the contrary, we shall ask for the strictest settlements on
both sides.

MME. DUPONT. But—

DUPONT. You are out of your depth. Better simply listen without trying
to understand. [_He rises, replaces his chair, and taps her knowingly
on the shoulder_]. In these cases one should never ask for the thing
one wants. One must know how to get the other side to offer it, and be
quite pleased to get it accepted. Well, then, I am giving Julie fifty
thousand francs as her dot.

MME. DUPONT. Fifty thousand! But Julie has only twenty-five thousand.

DUPONT. That is so. I shall give her twenty-five thousand down and
promise the rest for next year.

MME. DUPONT. You can’t mean that. You will never be able to keep such a
promise. [_She rises_].

DUPONT. Who knows? If I get the contract from the Prefecture.

MME. DUPONT. We ought to ask Julie what she thinks of this marriage.

DUPONT. We haven’t much time, then. Still, call her: and take off these
covers [_pointing to the chairs_].

MME. DUPONT [_she goes towards the door on the right; then returns_]
But have you thought—

DUPONT. I have thought of everything.

MME. DUPONT. Of everything? What about Angèle and her story?

DUPONT [_pompously_] Angèle is no longer my daughter.

MME. DUPONT. Still, we shall have to tell them.

DUPONT. Naturally. Since they know it already.

MME. DUPONT. I am nearly sure it was she I met last time I was in Paris.

DUPONT. You were mistaken.

MME. DUPONT. I don’t think so.

DUPONT. In any case, in acting as I did I was doing my duty. I can hold
my head up and fear nothing. Call Julie. She will help you to put the
room tidy. [_Madame Dupont goes out_].

DUPONT [_rubbing his hands_] I think I’ve managed things pretty well
this time! I _think_ so!

  _Julie and Madame Dupont come in._

JULIE. Father, is it someone who wants to marry me?

DUPONT. It is. [_To Madame Dupont, pointing to the chairs_] Take
off those covers. [_To Julie_] You know young M. Mairaut—M. Antonin
Mairaut? [_He sits down_]. You have danced together several times.

JULIE. Yes.

DUPONT. What do you think of him?

JULIE. As a husband?

DUPONT. As a husband. Don’t answer in a hurry. Take off that cover from
the chair you are sitting on and give it to your mother.

JULIE [_obeying_] Have his parents formally proposed for him?

MME. DUPONT. No. But if they should do so your father and I wish to
know—

DUPONT [_to Madame Dupont, giving her the last chair cover, which he
has taken off himself_] Take all these away. [_Madame Dupont goes
out_]. The formal offer has not been made, but it will be soon, in less
than an hour.

JULIE. Is that why you are taking all this trouble? [_She points to the
chairs_].

DUPONT. Precisely. We mustn’t appear to be paupers or people without
social position. [_He seizes a bowl in which there are some visiting
cards_]. Very old, these cards. Very yellow. And the names, too, common
rather. I must put that right. [_To his wife, who returns_] Go down
to the printing office and ask Courthezon to give you some printed
specimens of our new visiting cards at three francs—no, three francs
fifty. And then put that Wagner opera on the piano which someone left
to be bound. [_Madame Dupont goes. To Julie_] I have no desire to
influence you, my dear.

JULIE. Still—

DUPONT [_going to the mantelpiece_] Still what? Wait while I light the
lamp [_He strikes a match_].

JULIE. Why, it’s still quite light.

DUPONT. When one receives visitors one doesn’t wait till it is dark
before—You are old enough to know—what the deuce is the matter with
the oil?—old enough to know what you are about. Damn the lamps! When
they are never lighted it is the devil’s own job to make them burn.
Yes, as I was saying, it is for you to weigh the pros and the cons.
Marriage—— There! [_He looks round him_] Is there anything else to be
done to make things look better? What is that over there? That great
stupid Caroline’s hat!

MME. DUPONT [_coming in and bringing visiting cards and a piano score
of an opera_] Here are the cards and the music book.

DUPONT. Thanks. [_He gives Caroline’s hat to Madame Dupont_] Take this
thing away. And these stockings. Hide them somewhere. You don’t want
to appear to do your own darning, confound it! It’s extraordinary you
shouldn’t have thought of that. [_Madame Dupont goes out, returning
in a moment. Dupont continues mechanically to Julie_] It is for you
to weigh the pros and cons. This is better. Vicomte de Liverolles; M.
L’Abbé Candar, Honorary Canon; Ange Nitron, Ex-Municipal Councillor.
That will look well enough. The Wagner score on the piano, open, of
course. That’s right. There’s something else I want, though. Julie,
the box of cigars which M. Gueroult sent me when he was elected to the
Chamber.

JULIE [_bringing a box_] Here it is.

DUPONT. Give it me.

JULIE. You haven’t begun it yet.

DUPONT. Wait. [_He rummages in his pocket and takes out a knife, which
he opens_] We must show them that other people besides deputies smoke
cigars at five sous. [_He opens the box_] Without being proud, one has
one’s dignity to keep up. There! [_He takes a handful of cigars and
gives them to his daughter_] Put those in the drawer so that the box
mayn’t seem to have been opened on purpose for them. [_He arranges the
box on the table_]. A fashion paper? Excellent! And for myself [to
_Mme. Dupont_] Léontine, give me a fresh ribbon of my Order of Christ.
This one is faded. [_To his daughter_] He is twenty-eight. He is good
looking and distinguished. He passed his law examination at Bordeaux.
[_He puts a fresh ribbon in his coat and looks at himself for a
considerable time in the glass_]. In a town where I was not known this
would be as good as the Legion of Honour. [_He turns round_]. Well?
Have you made up your mind?

JULIE. I should like more time to think it over.

DUPONT. You have still a quarter of an hour.

MME. DUPONT. She would like a few days, perhaps.

DUPONT. That’s it. Shilly shally! We are to have the story of that
great stupid Caroline over again, are we? No! Your sister, whom you see
now an old maid, who will never be married, unless her aunt in Calcutta
leaves her some money—your sister, too, had her chance one day. She
hum’d and ha’d; she wanted to think it over. And you see the result.
That’s what thinking it over leads to. Here she is, still on my hands!

MME. DUPONT. You mustn’t say that. She earns her own living.

DUPONT. She earns her own living, perhaps; but she remains on my
hands all the same. By the way, we had better not say anything to the
Mairauts about Caroline’s working for money.

MME. DUPONT. They are sure to know.

DUPONT. Not they. What was I saying? Oh, yes. She remains on my hands
all the same. And one old maid is quite enough in the family. Two would
be intolerable. Remember, my child, you have no dot—at least, none
worth mentioning. And as things go nowadays, when one has no dot, one
mustn’t be too particular.

JULIE. To marry nowadays, then, a girl has to buy her husband?

DUPONT [_shrugs_] Well—

JULIE. And there’s nothing but misery for girls who have no money.

DUPONT. It’s not quite as bad as that. But obviously there is a better
choice for those who have a good fortune.

JULIE [_bitterly_] And the others must be content with damaged goods,
much reduced in price!

DUPONT. There are exceptions, of course. But, as a rule, husbands are
like anything else. If you want a good article, you must be prepared to
pay for it.

MME. DUPONT. And, even so, one is often cheated.

DUPONT. Possibly. But M. Antonin Mairaut is a very eligible young man.
No? What do you want, then, in Heaven’s name? If you are waiting for a
royal prince, say so. Are you waiting for a prince? Answer me. Come,
my child, this is an opportunity you may never see again: a young man,
well brought up, with an uncle who is head clerk at the Prefecture and
can double my profits by putting the contract for printing in my way,
not to speak of other things. And you raise difficulties!

MME. DUPONT. Think, dear. You are four-and-twenty.

DUPONT. And you have had the astonishing good luck to captivate this
young fellow—at a ball, it seems.

JULIE. I believe so. He wanted to kiss me in one of the passages. I had
to put him in his place.

MME. DUPONT. You were quite right.

DUPONT. I don’t say she wasn’t—that is, if she didn’t overdo it. In his
case I’m sure it was only playfulness.

MME. DUPONT. Oh, of course.

JULIE. I only half like him, father.

DUPONT. Well, if you half like him, that’s always something. Plenty of
people marry without even that.

MME. DUPONT. You don’t dislike him, do you, Julie?

JULIE. No.

DUPONT [_triumphantly_] Well, then!

JULIE. That’s hardly enough, is it?

DUPONT. Come, come, my dear, we must talk seriously. As a child you
were full of romantic notions. Thank Heaven, I cured you of that
weakness. You know well enough that unhappy marriages are, more often
than not, love marriages.

JULIE [_unconvinced_] I know, I know. Still, I want to have a husband
who loves me.

DUPONT. But he _does_ love you, doesn’t he, since you’ve only just told
us that he wanted to kiss you at a ball.

JULIE. I want to be something more than my husband’s plaything.

DUPONT. You’ll lead your husband by the nose, never fear.

JULIE. How do you know?

DUPONT. Never you mind. I know it. And now really we have had enough of
this. You think that a whim of yours is to upset all my plans, prevent
me from increasing my printing business and retiring next year, as we
intended, your mother and I. You think we haven’t—I haven’t—worked
enough, I suppose. You don’t wish us to have a little rest before we
die? You think I have not earned that rest, perhaps? Answer me! You
think I have not earned it?

JULIE. Of course you have, father.

DUPONT [_mollified_] Very well, then. Still, I don’t want to make you
uncomfortable. I don’t press you for a definite answer to-day. All I
ask is that you won’t be obstinate, or refuse to let us present Antonin
to you as a possible husband, if his parents make any advances. That is
all. You will, then, talk with him, ask him questions. Naturally, you
must get to know each other.

MME. DUPONT. Think carefully, my child.

DUPONT. Make up your mind whether you wish to follow the example of
that great stupid Caroline.

MME. DUPONT. You are quite old enough to be married. [_A pause_].

DUPONT. Answer. Aren’t you old enough to be married?

JULIE. Quite, father.

DUPONT. Have you any other offers?

MME. DUPONT. Have you any choice?

JULIE. No.

DUPONT. You see!

MME. DUPONT. You see!

DUPONT. Well, then, it’s all settled. [_He looks at his watch_] And
only just in time! M. Mairaut is punctuality itself. It’s five minutes
to six. In five minutes he will be here. [_Julie is silent, gazing
through the open window. The laughter of children is heard outside. To
Madame Dupont, irritably_] What’s she looking out of that window for?

MME. DUPONT. It’s Madame Brichot. She is just going in with her
children.

JULIE [_to herself, with a smile of great sweetness, recalling a word
which she has just caught while dreaming_] Maman!

DUPONT. Well?

JULIE. I will do as you wish.

DUPONT. Ouf! Now go and change your dress.

JULIE. Change my dress?

MME. DUPONT. Of course. You will be supposed to know nothing; but you
must be tidy.

JULIE. What am I to put on?

MME. DUPONT [_reflecting_] Let me see. [_A sudden inspiration_] I know.
Isn’t there a dance at the Gontiers’ to-night?

JULIE. But we said we wouldn’t go.

MME. DUPONT [_rising, briskly_] We are going all the same. Put on your
ball dress.

JULIE. Before dinner? Is he marrying my clothes?

MME DUPONT. No. But you look best in your ball dress. Do as I tell you,
dear.

JULIE. Very well. [_She goes out_].

DUPONT. Are you really going to this ball?

MME. DUPONT. Certainly not.

DUPONT. Well, then?

MME. DUPONT. M. Antonin is coming.

DUPONT [_understanding_] And Julie looks far better when she is—you are
quite right. [_A bell rings_]. There they are! Come into the next room,
quick!

MME. DUPONT. Why?

DUPONT. We must keep them waiting a little. It creates an impression.
[_To the maid, who passes to go to open the door, in an undertone_] Ask
them to wait a moment.

MAID. Yes, monsieur.

DUPONT. Now, then. [_He bustles Madame Dupont out of the room. After a
moment M. and Madame Mairaut enter, followed by the maid. Their faces
wear a genial smile, which freezes as soon as they see that the room is
empty_].

MAIRAUT. They are not here?

MAID. I will tell madame. [_She goes out_].

MME. MAIRAUT. Tell madame! [_To her husband_] They saw us coming.

MAIRAUT. You think so?

MME. MAIRAUT. Of course. Why was that lamp lighted? Not for an empty
room, I imagine! I don’t think much of their furniture. Very poor. Very
poor. [_Lifts up a piece of stuff from the back of an armchair_] This
chair has been re-covered.

MAIRAUT [_at the bowl with the visiting cards_] They know some good
people.

MME. MAIRAUT. Let me see. [_She looks at the bowl_]. Those cards were
put there expressly for us not an hour ago.

MAIRAUT. Oh, come!

MME. MAIRAUT. Look! The top ones are all new. The underneath ones are
quite yellow.

MAIRAUT. Because the underneath ones are older.

MME. MAIRAUT. Because the underneath ones have been left out ever since
New Year’s Day, while these are just printed. We must be careful. Above
all things, don’t _you_ make a fool of yourself.

MAIRAUT. All right.

MME. MAIRAUT. Don’t let them think you’re set on this marriage.

MAIRAUT. I understand.

MME. MAIRAUT. Get them to offer that all moneys shall be held jointly.

MAIRAUT. Yes.

MME. MAIRAUT. And to work this, insist on separate settlements.

MAIRAUT. Yes.

MME. MAIRAUT. For the rest, do as you usually do. Say as little as
possible.

MAIRAUT. But—

MME. MAIRAUT. You know well enough that’s the only way you ever do
succeed with things.

MAIRAUT. But there’s something I want to say to you.

MME. MAIRAUT. Then it’s sure to be something stupid. However, we have
nothing better to do. Go on.

MAIRAUT. It’s what I spoke to you about before. It’s been worrying me
a good deal. If the Duponts give us their daughter, who has probably a
dot of twenty-five thousand francs—

MME. MAIRAUT. Twenty or twentyfive thousand, I expect.

MAIRAUT. Well, if they give her to us, who have nothing but the bank,
it must be because they don’t know that Uncle Maréchal is ruined.

MME. MAIRAUT. Obviously. Nobody knows.

MAIRAUT. It isn’t honest not to tell them.

MME. MAIRAUT. Why?

MAIRAUT. Surely, my dear—

MME. MAIRAUT. If you’re going to tell them that, we may as well be off
at once.

MAIRAUT. You see!

MME. MAIRAUT. I see that we ought to hold our tongues. Oh, yes: we
ought. For if you have scruples about injuring the Duponts, I have
scruples about injuring Uncle Maréchal.

MAIRAUT. What do you mean?

MME. MAIRAUT. We have no right to betray a secret. I’m sorry you
shouldn’t have seen that I am quite as particular as you are; only I
put my duty to my family before my duty to strangers. If I am wrong,
say so.

MAIRAUT. But if they ask us point blank?

MME. MAIRAUT. Then we must consult Uncle Maréchal, since he is the
principal person concerned.

MAIRAUT. In spite of all you say it seems to me—[_He hesitates. A
pause_].

MME. MAIRAUT. Well, my dear, which is it to be? If you want us to go,
let us go. You are the master. I have never forgotten it. Shall we go?

MAIRAUT [_giving in, after a moment of painful indecision_] Now that we
are here, what would the Duponts think of us?

MME. MAIRAUT. And then we must remember that the eldest Dupont girl got
into trouble and is now living a disreputable life in Paris. That will
make them less difficult.

MAIRAUT. Hush!

  _Madame Dupont and Dupont enter the room. General greetings. ‘How do
  you do, dear madame? How are you? How good of you to call! Sit down,’
  etc. All sit. Silence._

MME. MAIRAUT. My dear Madame Dupont, I will come straight to the
point. The object of our visit is this. M. Mairaut and I think we have
observed that mademoiselle, your daughter, has made an impression—how
shall I put it? A certain impression on our son.

MAIRAUT. A certain impression. Yes.

MME. MAIRAUT. Antonin will join us here immediately, but of course we
have said nothing to him about this.

DUPONT. Julie, of course, has not the least idea—

MME. DUPONT. She is dressing. We are going to the ball at the Gontiers’
to-night, and the dear child asked if she might dress before dinner.

DUPONT. Not that she is vain.

MME. DUPONT. Not the least in the world.

DUPONT [_to his wife, in an off-hand tone_] She makes her own dresses,
doesn’t she?

MME. DUPONT. Of course. In this house we don’t know what it is to have
a bill from the dressmaker.

DUPONT. Yet with all her other occupations she’s an excellent musician.

MME. DUPONT. Quite excellent. She has a passion for really good music.
She knows Wagner thoroughly.

MME. MAIRAUT. Wagner! Good heavens!

MME. DUPONT. To talk about, I mean.

MME. MAIRAUT. I know your daughter is charming.

MME. DUPONT. And good, too. You would never believe how responsive that
poor child is to affection!

DUPONT [_to Mairaut, offering the box_] Have a cigar?

MAIRAUT. No, thanks. I never smoke before dinner.

DUPONT. Take one, all the same. You can smoke it afterwards. They are
my usual brand, but pretty fair.

MAIRAUT [_taking one_] Thank you.

MME. MAIRAUT. If Antonin is not married already it is because his
father and I wished him to find a wife who is worthy of him. The
question of money, with us, is of secondary importance.

MME. DUPONT. And with us. I’m so glad we agree about that.

MME. MAIRAUT. Antonin might have made quite a number of good matches.

DUPONT. It is just the same with Julie. In spite of that unfortunate
affair in the family.

MAIRAUT. Yes, we know.

MME. MAIRAUT. Unfortunate affair? We have heard nothing of any
unfortunate affair. What are you saying, my dear?

MAIRAUT [_mumbling confusedly_] I was saying—nothing—I was saying—No, I
wasn’t saying anything.

MME. MAIRAUT [_to Madame Dupont_] Then there has been some unfortunate
affair in your family?

DUPONT. Yes. By my first marriage I had two daughters. One, that great
fool of a Caroline whom you know.

MME. MAIRAUT. Quite well. She remains unmarried, does she not?

DUPONT. She prefers it. That’s the only reason. The other was called
Angèle. When she was seventeen she was guilty of an indiscretion which
it became impossible to hide. I turned her out of my house. [_Quite
sincerely_] I was deeply distressed at having to do it.

MME. DUPONT. For three days he refused to eat anything.

DUPONT. Yes, I was terribly distressed. But I knew my duty as a man of
honor, and I did it.

MME. MAIRAUT. It was noble of you! [_She shakes him warmly by the
hand_].

MAIRAUT. Since you were so fond of her, perhaps it would have been
better to keep her with you.

MME. MAIRAUT. My dear, you are speaking without thinking. [_To Dupont_]
And what has become of her?

DUPONT [_lying fluently_] She’s in India.

MME. DUPONT. In India?

DUPONT [_to Madame Dupont_] Yes, with her aunt, a sister of my first
wife’s. I have had news of her from time to time. [_To Madame Mairaut_]
Indirectly, of course.

MME. MAIRAUT. I repeat, M. Dupont, all this does you honor.
[_Thoughtfully_] Still, some people might feel—However, I don’t think
this discovery need make us abandon our project at once. Not at once.
[_To Mairaut_] What do you think, my dear?

MAIRAUT. I?

MME. MAIRAUT. You think, as I do, that we must take time to consider,
do you not? [_A pause_]. Without any definite promise on either side,
but merely in order to get rid of all money questions, which are most
distasteful to me, will you allow me to ask you one question, M. Dupont?

DUPONT. Certainly, Madame Mairaut.

MME. MAIRAUT. Have you ever considered [_she hesitates_] what you
would give your daughter?

DUPONT. Oh, yes—roughly, you know.

MAIRAUT. Just so.

MME. MAIRAUT. And the sum is—roughly?

DUPONT. Fifty thousand francs.

MME. MAIRAUT. Fifty thousand francs. [_To her husband_] You hear, dear,
M. Dupont will give his daughter only fifty thousand francs.

MAIRAUT. Yes. [_A pause_].

MME. MAIRAUT. In cash, of course.

DUPONT. Twentyfive thousand at once. Twentyfive thousand in six months.

MME. MAIRAUT [_to Mairaut_] You hear?

MAIRAUT. Yes.

MME. MAIRAUT. For practical purposes that is only twentyfive thousand
francs and a promise.

DUPONT [_with dignity_]. Twentyfive thousand francs and my word.

MME. MAIRAUT. Precisely. That is what I said [_looking at her
husband_]. Under these circumstances, we regret very much, but M.
Mairaut must decline. It really is not enough.

DUPONT. How much are you giving M. Antonin?

MME. MAIRAUT. Not a sou! On that point we are quite decided and quite
frank. As soon as he marries his father will take him into partnership,
and his wife’s dot will be the capital which he will put into the
business.

MAIRAUT. That is the exact position.

MME. MAIRAUT. Antonin will have nothing except what may come to him
after our death.

MME. DUPONT. And I am glad to think you are both in excellent health.

MME. MAIRAUT [_modestly_] That is so.

MME. DUPONT [_meditatively_]. Hasn’t your son an uncle, by the way?

MME. MAIRAUT. Yes, madame.

MAIRAUT. Uncle Maréchal.

DUPONT. People say M. Maréchal has a great affection for M. Antonin.

MME. MAIRAUT. Yes.

MAIRAUT. Very great.

DUPONT. He is rich, too, people say.

MME. MAIRAUT. So they say.

MAIRAUT. However, we haven’t taken him into account, have we?

MME. DUPONT. Still, M. Maréchal would naturally leave everything to his
nephew.

MAIRAUT & MME. MAIRAUT [_together_] Oh, certainly. We can promise that.
He will leave him everything he has.

MME. DUPONT. M. Maréchal has considerable influence at the Prefecture,
has he not?

MME. MAIRAUT. No doubt. But all this is really beside the mark. At
twentyfive thousand francs we could not—

DUPONT. I am sorry.

MME. MAIRAUT. We are sorry, too. [_She rises, saying to her husband_]
Come, my dear, we must be taking our leave.

DUPONT. I might, perhaps, go to thirty thousand.

MME. MAIRAUT. I am afraid fifty thousand is the lowest.

DUPONT. Let us split the difference. Thirty thousand and my country
house at St. Laurent.

MME. MAIRAUT. But it is flooded two months out of the twelve.

DUPONT. Flooded! Never.

MME. MAIRAUT [_to her husband_] Well, my dear, what do you think?

MAIRAUT. Antonin is much attached to Mlle. Julie.

MME. MAIRAUT. Ah, yes, if it were not for that! [_Seats herself_] My
poor boy! [_She weeps_].

MME. DUPONT. My poor little Julie! [_She weeps_].

MAIRAUT [_to Dupont_] You must excuse her. After all, it is her son.

DUPONT. My dear sir, I quite understand.

MME. MAIRAUT [_wiping her eyes_] And, of course, there would be the
other twentyfive thousand in six months.

MME. DUPONT. Of course.

MME. MAIRAUT. Have you any views as to settlements?

DUPONT. On that point I have very definite ideas.

MAIRAUT. So have I.

DUPONT. The money on each side must be strictly settled.

MAIRAUT. Strictly settled? [_A silence of astonishment_].

DUPONT. Yes.

MAIRAUT. His and hers?

DUPONT. Certainly. You agree?

MAIRAUT. Oh, yes, I agree, I agree. Unless you preferred—

DUPONT. That all moneys should be held jointly?

MAIRAUT. Perhaps that would be—

DUPONT. Perhaps so. There is something distasteful, I might almost say
sordid, about strict settlements.

MAIRAUT. That’s it. Something sordid.

DUPONT. They imply a certain distrust.

MAIRAUT. Yes, don’t they? Well, that’s agreed, then?

DUPONT. Quite. The moneys to be held jointly. All moneys, that is,
that may come to them in the future. The first twentyfive thousand, of
course, will be settled on Julie. They will form the dot.

MME. MAIRAUT. The second twentyfive thousand, which you will pay over
in six months, to be held jointly.

DUPONT. Yes. We will draw up a little agreement.

MAIRAUT. Quite so.

  _Antonin Mairaut comes in. He is a handsome youth of twenty-eight,
  very correct in manner. Greetings are exchanged._

MME. MAIRAUT. Antonin. [_To Dupont and Madame Dupont_] You allow me?

MME. DUPONT. By all means.

MME. MAIRAUT [_She draws Antonin aside and says to him in a low voice_]
It’s settled.

ANTONIN. How much?

MME. MAIRAUT. Thirty thousand, the house, and twentyfive thousand in
six months.

ANTONIN. Good.

MME. MAIRAUT. Now you’ve only the girl to deal with.

ANTONIN. Is she romantic or matter of fact? I don’t quite know.

MME. MAIRAUT. Romantic. Raves about Wagner.

ANTONIN. Good heavens!

MME. MAIRAUT. So I said. But once she’s married and has children to
look after—

ANTONIN. Children! Don’t go too fast. Children come pretty expensive
nowadays. Troublesome, too.

MME. MAIRAUT. Never mind. Don’t cross her now. Later on, of course,
you’ll be master.

ANTONIN. I rather think so.

MME. MAIRAUT [_returning to Madame Dupont_] My dear madame—

MME. DUPONT. Yes?

MME. MAIRAUT. He is afraid he may not please Mlle. Julie.

DUPONT. Absurd!

MME. MAIRAUT. The amount of the dot, too—

DUPONT. It is my last word. [_To his wife_] But what is Julie about?
[_He rings_].

MME. DUPONT [_rises_] I will go and find her.

  _A maid enters._

DUPONT. Wait! [_To the maid_] Ask Mlle. Julie to come here if she is
ready.

  _The maid goes out._

ANTONIN. I must tell you, monsieur and madame, how flattered I am
to find that the preliminaries have been settled between you and my
parents on this important question. I do not know what will be the
issue, but—

MME. DUPONT. It is we, monsieur, who are flattered. But you’ll see
Julie in a moment. Of course she knows nothing.

MME. MAIRAUT. We might leave them to talk a little together, perhaps?

MME. DUPONT. By all means. We are going to the ball at the Gontiers’.
She asked to be allowed—Here she is. [_Julie comes in. Madame Mairaut
advances to meet her_] There is a crease in your dress, dear. [_She
takes her apart, saying to the Mairauts_] Will you excuse me?

JULIE [_in a low tone_] Well?

MME. DUPONT. It rests entirely with you. We are going to leave you to
talk together. Remember, it may be your last chance. Don’t throw it
away.

JULIE. I have thought it over and I don’t intend to do as Caroline did.
So if, after we have had a talk—

MME. DUPONT. You’ll have to manage him a little. He has a great eye for
business. If you could make him think you would be useful in the bank.

JULIE. But I hate figures.

MME. DUPONT. Once married you will do as you please. Tuck in that
lace a bit. It’s a little soiled. [_She tucks in the lace of Julie’s
corsage_]. And remember, between lovers there may be little things
which he considers himself entitled to.

JULIE. I understand. They can see you whispering. Go to them. [_Madame
Dupont goes back to Madame Mairaut_].

MME. MAIRAUT. What did she say?

MME. DUPONT. She has not the least suspicion at present.

MME. MAIRAUT. Let us leave them together. [_Aloud_] My dear M. Dupont,
I have long wished to go over a printing office. May we?

DUPONT [_delighted_] If you will kindly come this way.

MAIRAUT. Thank you.

MME. MAIRAUT. But there really are too many of us. [_Carelessly_] The
children might stay here, don’t you think, madame?

MME. DUPONT. By all means.

  _They go out._

ANTONIN [_looking at the music on the piano_] You are fond of Wagner,
mademoiselle.

JULIE. I adore him.

ANTONIN. So do I.

JULIE. What a genius he is.

ANTONIN. Wonderful.

JULIE. For me he is the only composer.

ANTONIN. The greatest, certainly.

JULIE. No: the only one.

ANTONIN. Perhaps so. How nice it is we should have the same tastes in
art! [_Pause_] Er—they have told you nothing, I understand?

JULIE. About what?

ANTONIN. Your parents, I mean. Mine have said nothing either.

JULIE. They have said nothing, of course, but I guessed.

ANTONIN. So did I. Then I may consider myself engaged to you?

JULIE. Oh, not yet. We must know each other better first.

ANTONIN. We have often danced together.

JULIE. Yes. But that’s hardly enough.

ANTONIN. It’s enough for me. Ever since the first time I saw you at the
ball at the Prefecture.

JULIE. No. It was at the band, one Sunday, that your mother first
introduced you to me.

ANTONIN. Was it? I forgot.

JULIE. I should like to know more about you. Will you—will you let me
ask you some questions? It is not usual, perhaps, but—

ANTONIN. Certainly. Pray ask them.

JULIE. Are you fond of children?

ANTONIN. Passionately.

JULIE. Really and truly?

ANTONIN. Really and truly.

JULIE. I am quite crazy about them. For me children mean happiness.
They are the one thing worth living for [_wistfully_]. But I think I
have a higher idea of marriage than most girls. I want to have my mind
satisfied as well as my heart.

ANTONIN. So do I.

JULIE. A marriage that is a mere business partnership seems to me
horrible.

ANTONIN. Horrible! That’s just the word.

JULIE. And tell me, are you very fond of society?

ANTONIN. Not particularly. Are you?

JULIE. No.

ANTONIN. I am delighted to hear it. The fact is I am sick to death of
parties and balls. Still, if it were necessary for business reasons: if
it would help to get business for the bank, you wouldn’t mind?

JULIE. Of course not. What kind of business do you do at your bank?

ANTONIN. Oh, the usual kind.

JULIE. I have often read what is put up on the wall, Current Accounts,
Bourse Quotations.

ANTONIN. Coupons cashed.

JULIE. That must be very interesting.

ANTONIN. Would you take an interest in all that?

JULIE. Of course. When I was little my father used to make me help him
with his books.

ANTONIN. But now?

JULIE. Now, unfortunately, he has a clerk. I am sorry.

ANTONIN. Do you know that you are charming?

JULIE. So you told me once before.

ANTONIN. Yes: at that ball. You had on a dress just like this one. You
are beautiful. Beautiful. [_He seizes her hand_].

JULIE [_a little troubled_] Please.

ANTONIN. Come. We are engaged, as good as married. Give me one kiss.

JULIE. No. No.

ANTONIN. Won’t you?

JULIE [_frightened_] No, I tell you.

ANTONIN. What beautiful arms you have. [_He draws her towards him_].
You remember how I adored you when we were dancing.

JULIE. Let me go.

ANTONIN [_greatly excited, in a low voice_] Don’t move. You are
entrancing. [_He kisses her upon the arm; she pulls it away sharply_].

JULIE. Monsieur!

ANTONIN [_angry_] I beg your pardon, mademoiselle.

  _A very long silence._

JULIE [_after looking at him for some time_] I have vexed you?

ANTONIN. Well, when I see that you positively dislike me. [_Julie,
after a short inward struggle, goes to him_].

JULIE [_putting her arm to his lips with a resigned sadness, which she
hides from him_] Antonin.

ANTONIN [_kissing her arm_] Oh, I love you. I love you.

JULIE. Hush. They are coming back.

  _The Mairauts and Duponts come in again._

DUPONT. And when I have the contract from the Prefecture I shall double
my business.

MAIRAUT. Excellent. Excellent.

MME. MAIRAUT. We must be going, dear madame. We have stayed far too
long already. Are you coming, Antonin?

ANTONIN [_to Julie, aloud, bowing profoundly_] Mademoiselle. [_In a
low voice_] My beloved Julie. [_To his mother_] She’s charming. I was
charming, too, by the way. Wagner, children, every kind of romantic
idiocy. And she believed me. [_Aloud to Dupont_] M. and Madame Dupont,
my parents will have the honor of calling upon you to-morrow to ask on
my behalf for the hand of Mlle. Julie.

DUPONT. Till to-morrow, then. Till to-morrow. [_To Antonin_] All sorts
of messages to your uncle, if you see him.

ANTONIN. I shall not fail. [_He bows. The Mairauts take their leave_].

DUPONT [_to Julie_] That’s all right, then?

JULIE. Yes. I really do like him. I think I managed him pretty well
too. Wagner. The bank. He thinks I’ve a perfect passion for banking.

DUPONT [_laughing_] Good. You’re my own daughter. Kiss me. And your
father? He managed pretty well, I think. I have arranged that all
moneys except your dot shall be held by you both jointly; so that if
you are divorced, or if you die after Uncle Maréchal, your dot will
come back to us, and half whatever he leaves. I call that a good day’s
work. And at dessert we’ll drink a bottle of the best to the health of
Madame Antonin Mairaut.

MME. DUPONT [_embracing her_] My poor little daughter.

DUPONT. Poor, indeed! She’s a very lucky girl. I wonder where that
great stupid Caroline has got to. [_He calls_] Caroline. She is never
here when one wants her. [_He calls again_] Caroline. She is hard at
work painting Cupids on plates, I bet. [_Caroline appears_] Here she
is. Great news. Your sister is engaged to be married.

CAROLINE. Julie. Is it true?

JULIE. Yes.

CAROLINE. Ah!

DUPONT. Is that all you have to say?

CAROLINE. I am very glad, very glad. [_She bursts into tears_].

DUPONT [_astonished_] What’s wrong with her? Crying! And she’s not
even asked who he is. She’s to marry M. Antonin Mairaut, nephew of M.
Maréchal.

MME. DUPONT. Don’t cry like that, my dear.

JULIE. Caroline.

CAROLINE [_trying to restrain her sobs_] Don’t mind me. It is only
because I love you, dear. Now you at least will be happy.

JULIE [_musing_] Yes.

DUPONT [_to himself_] The moral of all this is that that little affair
of Angèle’s is costing me an extra five thousand francs and my house at
St. Laurent.




ACT II


  _The salon of a house in the country. A July night. At the back
  through glass doors you see the garden brilliantly lighted by the
  moon. As you look out you have two doors on your right-hand side, and
  to your left, in a cross-wall, the door of the bedroom, inside which
  part of the bed is visible. The fireplace is to your right. When the
  curtain rises Antonin, Courthezon and Caroline are on the stage;
  Caroline is doing up a parcel._

ANTONIN. That’s settled, then, M. Courthezon. I’ll write to the
Bordeaux people about your invention this evening.

COURTHEZON. I am greatly obliged to you, M. Antonin. You’ll write this
evening without fail, won’t you? M. Smith is leaving tomorrow.

ANTONIN. Without fail.

COURTHEZON. Shall I post the letter for you on my way through the town?

ANTONIN. Well—it’s rather a difficult letter to write. It’ll take a
little time. Lignol, whom you met at dinner out in the garden, has to
go back tonight. He’ll take it.

COURTHEZON. It’s very good of you.

ANTONIN. And now let’s go and have our coffee.

COURTHEZON. Not for me, thanks. I’m afraid I ought to go by the 8.9
train. I shall be taking some china for Mdlle. Caroline and the
drawings.

ANTONIN. As you please. Good-bye, then.

COURTHEZON. Good-bye, M. Antonin. Thank you again. [_Antonin goes out_].

CAROLINE. I shall not keep you a moment. The parcel is just ready.

COURTHEZON. There is no hurry, mademoiselle. I can take the next train.
It’s of no importance. Indeed I prefer it. It carries third-class
passengers. The fact is I didn’t want to go back to the others. M. and
Madame. Mairaut, M. Lignol, all those people frighten me. Besides, I’m
so happy just now I can think of nothing else.

CAROLINE. M. Antonin is going to do something about your invention?

COURTHEZON. Yes. I have begun negotiations with a business house at
Bordeaux. M. Antonin knows the heads of the firm, and he has been kind
enough to say he will write to them about me. But M. Smith goes away
to-morrow. That was why I was so anxious the letter should go tonight.

CAROLINE [_giving him the parcel which she has just finished_] It’s
very kind of you to take charge of this. I have put the china in it and
the drawings they asked for. You will make my apologies to the firm,
won’t you? I have not been very well.

COURTHEZON. Not well?

CAROLINE. Nothing serious. But the doctor said a little country air
would be good for me, so Julie and her husband asked me here. They have
been very kind. I have been with them a week, and I’m feeling ever so
much better.

COURTHEZON. They would hardly have left you in your lodgings with no
one to look after you. [_Pause_]. What a strange idea it was of yours
to go off and live by yourself like that!

CAROLINE. I thought it better. After Julie’s marriage I preferred it.

COURTHEZON. It must cost more.

CAROLINE [_shrugs_] I daresay. [_Pause_]. You are going to have a
lovely night for your journey. How bright the moon is! One can see as
clearly as if it were broad daylight.

COURTHEZON [_suddenly remembering_] There now! I was just going to
forget! I brought a letter for M. Dupont from the office. It came after
he left. It’s about the printing contract for the Prefecture.

CAROLINE. For the Prefecture. He’ll want to see that directly he comes
in.

COURTHEZON. And now I really must be off. Good-bye, Mlle. Caro.

CAROLINE. Good-bye, M. Courthezon. [_He goes out_].

  _After Courthezon’s departure Caroline returns to her seat. She makes
  a slight sign of the cross, closes her eyes and sits motionless,
  praying silently. After a few seconds she again crosses herself, but
  does all this very quietly. Lignol comes in through the glass doors,
  giving his arm to Julie. Antonin and M. and Madame Mairaut follow._

ANTONIN. We shall be more comfortable here than in the garden. It’s
getting rather chilly. [_To Lignol_] You can smoke.

LIGNOL. We really could have stayed out quite well.

ANTONIN. And given Julie cold, eh?

JULIE. My dear, I assure you—

ANTONIN. Oh, yes, I know. But you aren’t wrapped up enough. [_He
touches her arm_] In that thin dress you’ve simply nothing on. Just
feel, Lignol, feel.

JULIE [_protesting_] My dear!

MME. MAIRAUT. What a charming frock you have on, my dear. Quite
delightful.

JULIE. It came from Madame Raimond.

MME. MAIRAUT [_to Mairaut_] From Madame Raimond? I thought she made all
her own dresses.

LIGNOL [_to Julie_] You know, madame, that you have not convinced me
yet.

JULIE. Admitting that I am wrong—[_They go towards the garden door with
Antonin, talking_].

MME. MAIRAUT [_to Mairaut_] And _you_ urged on that marriage.

MAIRAUT. I!

MME. MAIRAUT. When she was at home she never went to a dressmaker. And
now! It’s too much. And we shall have the river in here before long.
That wall is bound to go.

MAIRAUT. Do you think so?

MME. MAIRAUT. We shall have the whole house about our ears. And that
fool—

MAIRAUT. What fool?

MME. MAIRAUT. Your son, of course, who has put in electric light.

ANTONIN [_from the garden door, to Lignol_] You didn’t know I’d had
electric light put in. We have lots of water power, you see. I ought to
have turned it on before. Look. [_He touches a button and turns up the
light_].

LIGNOL. That’s better. [_They talk on_].

MME. MAIRAUT. If the river rises another couple of inches down will
come four hundred feet of that wall.

MAIRAUT. It’s not as bad as that.

MME. MAIRAUT. Oh, you have let yourself be nicely done.

MAIRAUT. Come, come.

MME. MAIRAUT. The girl is utterly useless. She can do nothing. And the
house will cost more in repairs than it is worth. When I think I was
idiot enough to listen to you. [_She listens_]. What was that?

MAIRAUT. I hear nothing.

MME. MAIRAUT. The wall! Listen! [_They listen intently_].

JULIE [_coming forward with Lignol and Antonin_] Oh, yes, we’re
comfortable enough here, as you see.

MME. MAIRAUT. Comfortable enough! [_To Mairaut_] Come with me. This
way. I am certain the wall has fallen. If it has we must have a little
talk with the Duponts; and I, for one, shan’t mince matters. [_Turning
to the others_] My husband finds the heat a little too much for him.
We are going for another turn in the garden. Oh, it’s nothing, nothing
at all.

MAIRAUT [_mumbling_] Nothing. Giddy, that’s all.

ANTONIN. Quite right. Get all the fresh air you can while you are in
the country. Don’t be long. We’re expecting visitors, you know.

MME. MAIRAUT. We’ll be back in time. [_Madame Mairaut and Mairaut go
out into the garden_].

ANTONIN. Here, you see, is the staircase which leads to the upstairs
rooms and down to the garden. [_He goes to the door on his left_]. Here
is our bedroom.

JULIE [_in a low voice, so as not to be noticed by Lignol_] Antonin!

ANTONIN [_aloud_] Nonsense, dear. Why not? [_He opens the door. To
Lignol_] Look.

LIGNOL. Charming.

ANTONIN. A real nest, eh? A nest for love-birds. That’s what I call it.
[_To his wife_] Kiss me, dear.

JULIE. But—

ANTONIN. Kiss me. Come.

JULIE [_gently_] But we’re not alone.

ANTONIN. Lignol won’t mind. Eh, Lignol?

LIGNOL [_laughs_] Don’t mention it. You weren’t so shy at dinner.

ANTONIN [_to Julie, smiling_] Come. Wives must obey, you know. [_She
kisses him_]. And now go and see about that beer.

JULIE. Mayn’t I send the servant?

ANTONIN. She doesn’t know where it is. It’s not unpacked yet. [_To
Lignol_] It’s a wedding present. We are going to broach it tonight.

LIGNOL. Not for me. I must go in a moment.

ANTONIN. I wasn’t thinking of you, my dear fellow. You’re a friend.
These formal entertainments are reserved for acquaintances. For the
Pouchelets, in fact. M. Pouchelet has just been elected a Departmental
Councillor. He and his wife are paying their first visit here tonight.

LIGNOL. So late?

ANTONIN. On their way back from the Préfet’s. They are dining there,
and we are near neighbors. They are very well off, very influential.
Useful people altogether. What was I saying? [_To Julie_] Oh yes, the
beer: that girl will never be able to find it. Besides, I’d rather you
went. She would only break the bottles. [_Julie pouts_]. Wives must
obey, you know.

JULIE. Very well. I shall be back before you go, M. Lignol. [_She goes
out_].

CAROLINE [_to Antonin_] You won’t forget the letter for M. Courthezon,
will you, M. Antonin.

ANTONIN. Of course not.

CAROLINE. If you write I feel sure he will succeed.

ANTONIN. Yes, yes, I know.

CAROLINE. I will go to Julie.

ANTONIN. You’d much better go and put on another dress or something.
Just to smarten yourself up. The Pouchelets are coming. We must all
look our best.

CAROLINE [_rather aghast, looking at her clothes_] But—[_A pause_].
Very well. [_She goes out_].

LIGNOL. Who is that lady? She never spoke a word all through dinner.

ANTONIN [_carelessly_] A poor relation. The usual thing, an old
maid, always at church. Awfully prim and proper, you know. [_Rather
shamefaced_] In fact—I don’t mind telling _you_—she really works for
her living.

LIGNOL. Well, why not? There’s nothing dishonorable about that, is
there?

ANTONIN. I know. But still—She paints little Cupids and that kind of
thing, on china. [_He laughs loudly_]. Enough to make you split! You
don’t see it? The other day someone offered her some work far better
paid than what she’s doing at present. She refused. Guess why.

LIGNOL [_bored_] Why?

ANTONIN [_giggling_] Because the woman who kept the shop was divorced.
[_He laughs_]. But it is good to see you again, my dear chap. [_He
claps Lignol on the shoulder_]. Awfully good.

LIGNOL. I’ve enjoyed coming immensely. [_A pause_]. Your wife is
charming.

ANTONIN [_fatuously_] Not bad, eh!

LIGNOL. And she’s clever, too.

ANTONIN. Get out!

LIGNOL. I’m quite serious.

ANTONIN. Oh, yes, I dare say. I know all about _that_. No use denying
it. Julie’s stupid. It was partly for that very reason I married her.

LIGNOL. I don’t think so. She has read a lot.

ANTONIN. Read! Oh, yes, she’s _read_! She reads everything she comes
across. Before her marriage she read the proofs of everything her
father printed. Here she has unearthed a lot of books left behind by an
old fool M. Dupont bought the house from. She’s read them all.

LIGNOL. But then—

ANTONIN. But she doesn’t understand a word of what she reads. Not a
word! The other day I looked at the author’s name on the book in her
hand. It was Mill. You know, John Stuart Mill.

LIGNOL [_nods_] Yes, I know.

ANTONIN. So do I, by name. But I’ve never read him, thank goodness. No,
I tell you Julie’s stupid. But she’s pretty and she knows how to put on
her clothes. I knew what I was about when I married her. With a little
instruction from me she’ll learn to manage the house well enough. And
that’s all I ask of a woman.

LIGNOL. Indeed. Well, my dear chap, if you imagine you’ve married a
stupid woman you’re mistaken.

ANTONIN. How do you know?

LIGNOL. She and I have been talking while you were entertaining your
inventor.

ANTONIN. You got her to talk, did you?

LIGNOL. Certainly.

ANTONIN. Wonders will never cease. When we’re alone she never has a
word to say.

LIGNOL. And you?

ANTONIN. I haven’t either.

LIGNOL. That’s awkward.

ANTONIN. I’m always afraid of putting my foot in it. The fact is I
don’t understand Julie.

LIGNOL. And you’ve been married five months.

ANTONIN. Four months and a week over. But then I’m at business all the
week. Every Saturday her parents and mine come down to spend Sunday
with us. M. and Madame Dupont couldn’t get here in time for dinner
tonight, but they’ll be here soon. When we are alone I try to find some
subject of conversation, but I tell you it’s like walking on eggshells.
Whew! And so—

LIGNOL. Well?

ANTONIN. And so I stop. And then I kiss her.

LIGNOL. You’re tremendously in love with her.

ANTONIN. Yes.

LIGNOL. And she?

ANTONIN. She’s just the same.

LIGNOL. Happy man!

ANTONIN. For the rest we can only wait and see how things turn out. She
knows nothing of my tastes. I know nothing of hers.

LIGNOL. And what did you talk about while you were engaged?

ANTONIN. We were only engaged three weeks. Just long enough to get the
money matters settled.

LIGNOL. You took good care about them, I bet.

ANTONIN. Rather. In fact it was a precious good stroke of business.
[_He laughs_]. If you only knew how we did the Duponts, maman and I!
[_He laughs again_].

LIGNOL. Hush. Here’s your wife. [_Julie comes in, and Lignol rises to
go_]. I am afraid I must be going, madame.

ANTONIN. But my letter for Courthezon. [_He looks at his watch_].
You’ve twenty minutes still.

LIGNOL. You’re sure?

ANTONIN. Certain. Wait a second. I’ll go and write it, and then I’ll
see you to the station. It’s only a step. [_He goes out_].

JULIE. Thanks to you, M. Lignol, we have had a delightful evening.

LIGNOL. You flatter me, dear madame. I know quite well I have been in
the way.

JULIE. On the contrary. I have not had such an evening’s conversation
since I married.

LIGNOL. Antonin isn’t a great talker.

JULIE. You are old friends, aren’t you?

LIGNOL. Yes. I’ve known him fifteen years. We are almost like brothers.

JULIE. Tell me. Is he what you would call a religious man?

LIGNOL. Antonin! [_Bursts out laughing_]. Why, he’s a materialist. Not
much idealism about him.

JULIE. Indeed! Not much idealism! But he’s fond of music? Good music I
mean: Wagner?

LIGNOL. He likes a brass band or a comic opera. [_Julie shows
surprise_]. You are astonished? Oh, I forgot. He plays a little on
the concertina. My dear madame, Antonin is a good chap but thoroughly
matter of fact. Prosaic.

JULIE [_laughing_] You are not very complimentary to your friends.

LIGNOL. What annoys me is that he should possess a treasure like you
and should seem quite unconscious of its value. Ah, when _I_ marry—

JULIE. You are going to marry soon?

LIGNOL. I don’t know. [_Musingly_] If I were to meet a woman like you,
a woman with whom I could discuss everything in heaven and earth,
everything that raises us, makes us higher, then—

JULIE. Look for her. You’ll find her easily enough.

LIGNOL. And beautiful, too. Beautiful as you are. For you _are_
beautiful, you know.

JULIE [_still rallying him_] Are you making love to me by any chance,
M. Lignol?

LIGNOL. If making love to you means yielding to an overmastering
attraction—to a fascination—

JULIE [_laughing_] You certainly make the most of your time as friend
of the family. But I shouldn’t hurry if I were you. You will only be
wasting a lot of pretty speeches which you could employ to greater
advantage elsewhere. I have old-fashioned views on the subject of
marriage.

LIGNOL. Whatever they are I am sure they will be lofty and noble.

JULIE. You are too good. But you are mistaken. My view is commonplace
enough. All I ask of life is that I may love my children and love my
husband.

LIGNOL. Your children?

JULIE [_quite simply, with a touch of emotion_] Above everything my
children. What I am going to say will sound absurd to you, but the day
my first child is born will be the happiest day of my life. So you see,
M. Lignol—

LIGNOL [_insinuatingly_] Dear madame, we shall meet again.

JULIE [_smiling_] As soon as you please.

  _Antonin comes in._

ANTONIN. Here’s the letter. You’ll slip it into the post-box, won’t
you? And now we’ve only just time.

LIGNOL. I’m ready [_rising briskly_]. But don’t let me drag you to the
station. You’ll be leaving madame alone.

ANTONIN. That’s all right. Come along. I can see if M. and Madame
Dupont have arrived at the same time.

LIGNOL [_to Julie_] Au revoir, madame. [_To Antonin_] I am sorry not to
say good-bye to mademoiselle. [_Antonin is puzzled_]. To the lady who
dined with us.

ANTONIN. Oh, Caro. I’ll say it for you. No, here she is. [_Caroline
comes in; and, as Lignol is saying good-bye to her, M. and Madame
Dupont appear. Antonin hurriedly introduces_] My friend Lignol. He has
to catch this train.

LIGNOL. So sorry. [_He goes out with Antonin_].

DUPONT. Ah, Caroline. There you are. I have good news for you. Your
aunt is dead. Your aunt in India. She has left all her money to you and
Angèle. Not much. Sixty thousand francs between you. I get nothing, of
course. She never could endure me. My dear girl, what’s the matter?
Come, come, you’re not going to cry because your aunt is dead! You’ve
not seen her for five and twenty years. It’s the greatest stroke of
luck for you. And I shall have all the trouble, as usual! [_A gesture
of dissent from Caroline_]. Oh, yes, I shall. Your sister will have to
come down from Paris.

MME. DUPONT. I thought you said she was in India.

DUPONT. In India! What are you talking about? She is in Paris. She has
never been anywhere except in Paris. What should take her to India?
[_To Caroline_] Your sister Angèle will have to come down from Paris
because part of the money is in land. It will be sold, of course, but
still I shall have to see Angèle. And that will set people talking.
Lots of people don’t even know that I have three daughters. [_To
Julie_] It’s lucky for you this didn’t happen before your marriage,
Julie.

CAROLINE. _Must_ she come, father?

DUPONT. Certainly she must. You must both be present at the lawyer’s
together to sign the documents.

CAROLINE. I will not go the lawyer’s.

DUPONT. If you refuse to go Angèle will not be able to get her legacy,
and she needs it.

CAROLINE. Well, perhaps I will go. I will think it over and consult
someone. I will give you my answer tomorrow.

DUPONT. As you please. And not a word about this, remember, either of
you.

JULIE. Very well, father.

CAROLINE [_taking a letter from the mantelpiece_] Courthezon brought
this letter for you. It is about the printing work for the Prefecture.

DUPONT [_He reads the letter_]. Done, by Jove! Dumoulin gets the
contract! Dumoulin! I expected this. I expected it. Uncle Maréchal
has done it on purpose, curse him! [_To Julie_] How long have I been
telling you you ought to pay him a visit. Have you been? No. And
Antonin? Not he! Nor his father and mother! The old fool is offended,
and this is his revenge. And if this goes on we shall never get a
halfpenny of his money. Why haven’t you been to see him?

JULIE. Antonin’s parents didn’t wish it.

DUPONT. Ah! They didn’t wish it! Well, I have a word or two to say
to Antonin’s parents, you’ll see. _I_ do my duty, _I_ go and call on
Uncle Maréchal myself. _I_ amuse the old idiot, though it’s not the
pleasantest sort of job to have to do. They didn’t wish it! I’ll show
them the kind of man I am! And you—you were fool enough to do what they
told you! I find a husband for you, a far better match than you could
ever have hoped for. I _do_ the Mairauts—

MME. DUPONT [_alarmed, looking round her_] Hush!

DUPONT. Well, haven’t I _done_ the Mairauts?

MME. DUPONT. Yes, yes. But don’t say it so loud.

DUPONT. They aren’t here. And if they were, Julie’s married now.
[_Speaking lower, but with the same fury_] I _do_ the Mairauts—

MME. DUPONT. Are you quite sure?

DUPONT. Am I quite sure? Haven’t I _done_ them? I tell you I’ve done
them _brown_!

  _The maid-servant comes in._

SERVANT [_to Julie_] It’s about the beer, madame.

JULIE. I’m coming. Will you come, too, Caro? [_Julie and Caroline go
out_].

DUPONT [_fuming_] Brown, by jove!

MME. DUPONT. Hush. Here they are.

DUPONT. I’m glad to hear it. Now you’ll see.

  _M. and Madame Mairaut come in._

MME. MAIRAUT. Ah, you are here. Well, the wall has come down.

DUPONT. I’m not thinking about the wall.

MME. MAIRAUT. Very likely. You haven’t to pay for putting it up again.

DUPONT. I’m not thinking about the wall. I’m thinking of something far
more important. M. and Madame Mairaut, I regret to have to inform you
that you are either deplorably unintelligent or else devoid of all
sense of parental duty.

MME. MAIRAUT. Indeed! So it’s you who propose to insult us just when—

DUPONT. I am a father and I love my children. When their interests are
at stake I have the sense to keep on good terms with those who may be
useful to them later on.

MME. MAIRAUT [_after a moment’s thought_] I see. Uncle Maréchal?

DUPONT. You knew it. You did it on purpose!

MME. MAIRAUT. Uncle Maréchal! [_She bursts out laughing uproariously_].

MAIRAUT. Charlotte. My dear. Don’t laugh like that.

MME. MAIRAUT. Why shouldn’t I laugh? You aren’t going to forbid me, I
suppose, [_looking full at Dupont and laughing more_] nor monsieur.

DUPONT. Well, since you take it like that, I propose to give you _my_
view of the situation. Either you are hopelessly selfish or else you
are hopelessly stupid.

MAIRAUT. Monsieur Dupont!

MME. MAIRAUT. You hold your tongue. Leave me to deal with him.

MME. DUPONT. My dear—

DUPONT. Be silent. Selfish or stupid? Which? [_Madame Mairaut shrugs
her shoulders_]. Is Uncle Maréchal a man with money to leave, or is he
not?

MME. MAIRAUT [_decisively, after a moment’s thought_] He is _not_!

DUPONT [_staggered_] He is not? But—

MME. MAIRAUT. I quite understand, and you have your answer. He is not.

DUPONT. He has not two hundred thousand francs?

MME. MAIRAUT. He had them. Somebody else has them now. He has lost them.

DUPONT. Lost them! If this is true—

MME. MAIRAUT. That is why we don’t waste our time in going to see him.

DUPONT. But—I don’t understand. [_A pause. He controls himself_]. How
long ago did this happen?

MME. MAIRAUT. More than six months ago.

DUPONT. More than six months? Then you knew.

MME. MAIRAUT. Yes, we knew.

DUPONT. And you never told me.

MME. MAIRAUT. You didn’t ask us.

DUPONT. You ought to have informed me. It was dishonest.

MME. MAIRAUT. Monsieur!

DUPONT. You have swindled me.

MME. MAIRAUT. Swindled!

DUPONT. Yes. Swindled.

MME. MAIRAUT. Nonsense. We are as well off as you are, I hope. Our bank
is worth as much as your printing business.

DUPONT. Most people wouldn’t say so. As to that, by the way, I should
like to ask you—

MME. MAIRAUT. No, monsieur. I have nothing further to say to you. And I
am now going to inform my son how you have treated us.

MME. DUPONT. Madame Mairaut!

MME. MAIRAUT. Are you coming, Alfred?

  _Mairaut makes a gesture of regret and distress behind his wife’s
  back, and then follows her out._

MME. DUPONT. This is terrible.

DUPONT. Eh! [_Pulling himself together_]. No! On reflection I’m
inclined to think it’s the best thing that could have happened. I
regret nothing. Rather the contrary.

MME. DUPONT. I don’t understand.

DUPONT. Naturally! You don’t understand. You will later. [_Julie comes
in_]. We were just speaking of you. I hear your husband’s business is
shaky. Is it?

JULIE. I know nothing about it.

DUPONT. You know, I suppose, whether it is true that he got let in by
the Bourdin failure?

JULIE. No.

DUPONT. Good Heavens! What on earth do you talk about, at meals, and so
on?

JULIE. We don’t talk at all.

DUPONT. Still you must have noticed whether he was anxious and
preoccupied, or whether he was in his usual spirits.

JULIE. I’ve no idea what his usual spirits are. I’ve only known him six
months.

DUPONT. You’d better ask him how things are going at once.

JULIE. What’s the good?

DUPONT. You must ask him. You will have children some day, I suppose?

JULIE [_with a sigh_] If it weren’t for that, I think I should go and
drown myself.

DUPONT. That would be absurd. But we needn’t discuss that now. Only,
if you don’t wish your children to be beggars, keep an eye on your
husband’s business affairs.

JULIE. Very well. I will.

  _Antonin comes in._

ANTONIN [_in a tone of mild reproach_] M. Dupont, this is very
annoying. Here are my parents coming to me to complain that you have
called them swindlers. I must say it’s pretty hard on me if I can’t
even spend a Sunday in the country in peace. From the moment you arrive
on Saturday night you begin quarrelling. And now—swindlers! Come, come,
M. Dupont, that’s not the sort of name one calls people, is it? They
are very angry, and I don’t blame them.

DUPONT. Oh, it was really nothing.

ANTONIN. Maman is furious.

DUPONT. That’s absurd of her. You know what it is when people begin
disputing; one word leads to another, and one says things one only half
believes. However, to show how reasonable I am, I will go and make my
apologies to Madame Mairaut. [_To Madame Dupont_] Come, my dear: you
must do the talking.

ANTONIN. If you put yourself in my place, you will see how unpleasant
this kind of thing is.

DUPONT [_with dignity_] Quite so. [_He and Madame Dupont turn towards
the door_].

ANTONIN [_calling them back_] Here are M. and Madame Pouchelet. Wait.
[_He goes to the door and calls to his parents_] Maman! They’re here,
and M. Dupont wants to apologize. It was a misunderstanding, and please
don’t let’s have any quarrelling before visitors. [_To Julie_] Go and
help them to get their things off.

  _Julie goes out to welcome the arrivals. M. and Madame Mairaut come
  in at the same moment as M. and Madame Pouchelet, Julie helping the
  latter to take off their wraps. M. Pouchelet is in evening dress,
  Madame Pouchelet in a ball dress._

JULIE. How good of you to come. My husband and I are so delighted.

POUCHELET. I promised your husband we would look in. Otherwise we
should have gone straight home. The Préfet kept us longer than we
wished, and we neither of us like late hours. We can only stay a moment.

MME. MAIRAUT [_pushing forward a chair for Madame Pouchelet_] Won’t you
sit down?

ANTONIN [_to Pouchelet_] Naturally the Préfet was only too glad to get
you to come.

POUCHELET. Yes. There is a scheme on foot for reclassifying the roads
in the Department.

ANTONIN [_with an assumption of great interest_] Really!

MME. MAIRAUT [_following suit_] Reclassifying the roads. Most
interesting.

ANTONIN. It is a matter of the greatest importance. And you, of course,
are the very man to give him the necessary information.

POUCHELET [_pompously_] I flatter myself I do know something of the
subject.

DUPONT. It is a question I have also had a great deal to do with.
Twelve years ago I printed—

POUCHELET. I intend to make—

DUPONT. No; it was thirteen—

MME. MAIRAUT [_to her husband_] Listen, dear: M. Pouchelet is speaking.

MAIRAUT. Yes, yes; I am listening.

POUCHELET. I intend to make an important speech on the subject at the
Council. But you will read the report in the papers.

ANTONIN. I should think so. We must not miss that, Julie, must we?

POUCHELET. Oh, madame, I’m afraid my speech is not likely to interest
you.

ANTONIN. On the contrary. My wife only likes reading about serious
subjects. Why the other day I found her reading—who was it? that
English writer: what was his name, dearest?

JULIE. Never mind.

ANTONIN [_going over to Julie, summing up her points_] She’s a
wonderful little woman, my wife. Aren’t you, dearest? You aren’t
cold, are you? I am always telling you you don’t wrap up enough. [_To
Pouchelet_] She is charming, isn’t she? And the most devoted wife! [_To
Julie_] Aren’t you a devoted wife, dear?

MME. MAIRAUT. Antonin, aren’t you going to offer M. and Madame
Pouchelet a little refreshment?

ANTONIN. Of course. [_To his wife_] Will you ring?

  _Julie rings the bell. The maid comes in almost at once with bottles
  of beer on a tray, and glasses._

JULIE [_to the maid_] Put it there.

ANTONIN [_to Madame Pouchelet_] My wife is a wonderful manager. We are
really hardly settled in here. Yet everything is always ready directly
one wants it. May I give you a glass of beer?

  _The glasses which Julie has poured out are handed round. Caroline
  comes in._

DUPONT. M. Pouchelet, allow me to present to you my second daughter,
Caroline.

POUCHELET [_bows_] Madame.

ANTONIN [_correcting him_] Mademoiselle. Mlle. Caroline has always
refused to marry. She prefers to devote her life to her art.

MME. POUCHELET. You are an artist, mademoiselle? How delightful. I
adore artists.

CAROLINE. I only paint a little on china.

ANTONIN. And she does it most beautifully.

POUCHELET. You must send something to our local exhibition.

ANTONIN. Excellent! M. Pouchelet is right. Why have you never sent
anything?

CAROLINE. I only paint china plates, knick-knacks and so on.

ANTONIN. Just for your own amusement. [_To Pouchelet_] My sister-in-law
just does it to amuse herself. But I am sure if she took the trouble—

CAROLINE. But I don’t do it to amuse myself.

MME. MAIRAUT. Oh, yes, you do.

ANTONIN. Merely to amuse yourself.

DUPONT. Just for your own amusement.

ANTONIN. And the artist can put just as much of his art into small
subjects. Look at Meissonier.

MME. POUCHELET. Of course. They give just as great scope for the
imagination.

CAROLINE. But I only copy what the people at the shop send me.

MME. MAIRAUT. Another glass of beer, Madame Pouchelet? It is French
beer and can’t—

MME. POUCHELET. Not just now, thank you. [_To Caroline_] The shop
people, mademoiselle?

CAROLINE. Yes, madame, the people who keep the shop I work for. They
pay me quite good wages for what I do.

MME. POUCHELET. I see. [_A silence_].

ANTONIN [_sotto voce, taking Caroline a glass of beer_] Be silent,
can’t you?

CAROLINE [_to him, puzzled_] What is it?

ANTONIN [_to Madame Pouchelet, leading her up to a picture_] Madame
Pouchelet, you understand pictures, I know. What do you think of this?
I paid a long price for it. [_They go on talking_].

CAROLINE [_to Madame Mairaut, in a low voice_] Have I done anything I
shouldn’t?

MME. MAIRAUT [_drily_] Oh no! Far from it! [_She rises and goes over to
Madame Pouchelet_].

MME. POUCHELET [_coming down stage with Antonin_] I don’t care much
about pictures unless they tell a story. What is that one about?

JULIE. It is an engraving of a picture by Gerard Dow.

MME. POUCHELET. Never heard of him.

JULIE. He was a Dutch painter. Seventeenth century.

MME. POUCHELET. Really. But of course you know more about these things
than I do. A propos, M. Dupont, did you go to the lecture the other day
on women’s rights?

POUCHELET [_laughing_] Oh, yes, ha! ha!

MME. POUCHELET [_to Julie_] I shouldn’t be surprised if you, madame,
had some sympathy with such opinions?

JULIE [_evasively_] I don’t know.

ANTONIN [_laughing_] Come, confess, my dear. Just a little, perhaps?

MME. MAIRAUT. Woman the equal of man!

JULIE [_mildly_] Why not?

MAIRAUT. There are some women who wouldn’t gain much by that.

MME. DUPONT. But not all.

DUPONT. Women lawyers!

MME. POUCHELET. Women doctors!

POUCHELET. Women with votes!

ANTONIN [_laughing_] What a joke.

DUPONT [_laughing_] Women with votes!

POUCHELET. I call that rich. [_All three are convulsed with merriment_].

DUPONT. Think of it. Women in the Chamber of Deputies!

ANTONIN. Women Senators!

POUCHELET. Women in the Ministry!

DUPONT. In the Chamber they would want to keep their hats on.

POUCHELET. Yes [_to Julie_]. Eh, Madame Mairaut? They’d insist on
keeping on their hats as they do at the theatres.

MME. POUCHELET. And at election times they’d go from house to house
asking for votes. The modern women would enjoy that.

POUCHELET. And this parliament elected by women, what would it be like?
[_More laughter_]. A Chamber of Deputies chosen by women!

JULIE [_a little annoyed_] Really, gentlemen, judging by the results
you’ve achieved so far by keeping the government to yourselves I don’t
think you need fear that women will do much worse. [_The laughter dies
down uneasily_].

POUCHELET [_with pompous solemnity_] I know it is the fashion nowadays
to decry all our elective assemblies. But, as I am myself, in my humble
way, one of the people’s representatives, I cannot allow such views to
pass without protest. [_An awful silence_].

JULIE [_apologizing_] I had no intention of saying anything that could
wound you, M. Pouchelet.

MME. POUCHELET. We are sure of that, dear madame.

POUCHELET [_to his wife_] And now, my dear, it is time for us to be
going.

ANTONIN. You must forgive my wife’s little slip, dear monsieur.

POUCHELET. It is nothing—nothing at all.

ANTONIN. You mustn’t go like this. Another glass of beer?

MME. POUCHELET. You are very good. It has been so close to-day.

ANTONIN. Julie, a glass of beer for Madame Pouchelet. [_To her_] Yes;
the heat this afternoon has been quite oppressive. [_To Julie_] Where’s
that beer?

JULIE [_who has tried the various bottles, confused_] I will send for
some more. These are empty.

ANTONIN. Really!

MME. POUCHELET. Oh, please don’t trouble. Please. No; you really must
not. We can have something when we get home. [_Going_] Our things are
here, I think.

JULIE. Let me help you.

ANTONIN. I will come and put you on your way.

POUCHELET [_declining_] Thank you, monsieur. We know the way.

  _M. and Madame Pouchelet bow formally and coldly to each in turn and
  go out: Julie goes with them. There is a silence. Antonin paces the
  room irritably. Madame Mairaut grins._

DUPONT [_to his wife, in a low voice, after glancing at the others_] I
think it’s time we went to bed.

MME. DUPONT. Very well, dear.

  _Formal bows, Monsieur, Madame, are exchanged. The Duponts go out and
  Julie returns._

ANTONIN [_his arms folded, sternly_] So there was no more beer.

JULIE. No, dear.

ANTONIN. It’s intolerable.

JULIE. Here are the three bottles. You told me to buy three bottles.
There they are.

ANTONIN. Nonsense. You make me ridiculous. I press Madame Pouchelet to
have another glass and there isn’t one. It’s preposterous.

JULIE. It is not my fault.

ANTONIN. I suppose you think it’s mine.

MME. MAIRAUT. Evidently.

ANTONIN. Besides, I have no recollection of saying three bottles.

JULIE. I assure you.

ANTONIN. I have no recollection whatever of it. On the contrary, I am
certain I said buy four or five.

JULIE. No. Three.

ANTONIN. You make me look like a fool. These people will think I was
laughing at them. You make me look like a fool, and that is a thing I
won’t have.

CAROLINE. M. Antonin, I was there when you spoke to Julie. You did say
three bottles.

ANTONIN. My dear Caroline, I love you very much, but I can’t help
pointing out to you that the best possible way to aggravate a dispute
between husband and wife is to interfere in it either on one side or on
the other. If you don’t realize that already, you may take it from me.

MME. MAIRAUT. If you spoke less, mademoiselle, it would certainly be
better for all parties.

CAROLINE. Why? What have I said?

ANTONIN. Among other things you might refrain from proclaiming on the
housetops that you are reduced to working for your living.

CAROLINE. There is nothing dishonorable in that.

MME. MAIRAUT. Very likely. But one doesn’t talk about it.

ANTONIN. I thought every moment you were going to ask M. Pouchelet for
an order. Not very pleasant for us, that.

CAROLINE. I am sorry. I didn’t mean to do anything wrong. [_She begins
to cry_]. But I’m so unfortunate. I always make mistakes.

ANTONIN [_irritably_] Oh, for goodness sake, my dear Caroline, don’t
begin to cry. There’s no earthly good in that.

MME. MAIRAUT. There’s really nothing to cry about.

JULIE [_going to her_] Caroline. Don’t cry, dear. [_She takes her
away_].

MME. MAIRAUT. Now, my son, we are going to say good-night.

ANTONIN. Good-night. [_He kisses her absently_].

MME. MAIRAUT. You’re not angry with us, dear, are you? You wanted to
marry Julie, you know. Good-night.

  _M. and Madame Mairaut go out. Antonin, left alone, goes to the bell
  and rings it. The maid comes in._

ANTONIN [_to the servant_] Put out the lights. You can leave the two on
the mantelpiece. Close those shutters. [_The maid does so and goes out.
Julie returns_]. I have something to say to you.

JULIE. I am listening.

ANTONIN. I do not wish Caroline to remain with us any longer.

JULIE. Why? What has she done?

ANTONIN. You know well enough.

JULIE. No, I do not.

ANTONIN. She gets on my nerves.

JULIE. Explain, please.

ANTONIN. It is not my business to give explanations. I am the master in
my own house. I shall be obliged if you will arrange with Caroline to
bring her visit to a close on Monday.

JULIE. But she was to stay till the end of the month. She will want to
know why. What am I to say to her?

ANTONIN. Whatever you please.

JULIE. She will be hurt.

ANTONIN. I don’t care about that.

JULIE. But I do care.

ANTONIN. If you won’t tell her I will, in a way which won’t admit of
any misunderstanding.

JULIE. She will be angry.

ANTONIN. Let her.

JULIE. But if you two quarrel where shall I be able to see her? Here?

ANTONIN. No. I forbid you to do so.

JULIE. Have you the right to forbid me?

ANTONIN. Certainly.

JULIE. Why?

ANTONIN. Once more, because I am master here: because the husband is
the master in his own house.

JULIE. That was not what you told me while we were engaged.

ANTONIN. I dare say.

JULIE. You have nothing more to say to me?

ANTONIN. Yes; I have.

JULIE. Well?

ANTONIN. When you have opinions of the outrageous description you gave
vent to this evening, please keep them to yourself.

JULIE. Haven’t I the right to have opinions?

ANTONIN. Nonsense. Once for all, I have made up my mind that you shall
obey me and not spoil my prospects. M. and Madame Pouchelet are people
of importance. They might be useful to me, and if you offend them
with your absurdities you will be wanting in your duty. Marriage is a
business partnership.

JULIE. Then I want to see the accounts. They say you are doing badly at
the bank. Is that true?

ANTONIN. Women know nothing about such things. You look after your
household and leave the rest to me. Under the terms of our marriage the
management of our affairs is in my hands. I manage them to the best of
my ability. That is all I have to say to you.

JULIE. In other words, I am a business partner who has to keep her eyes
shut and say nothing.

ANTONIN. My dear, it’s quite useless starting the lecture about women’s
rights all over again. I heard it the other evening. Leave that sort
of thing to old maids with beards. If I were willing to listen to you,
you’d reel off the whole catalogue of grievances against the laws which
make women slaves. I know.

JULIE. No: it is not a question of law. It is a question of social
usage. [_A pause_]. What is wrong is not that there is such and such a
provision in the Code. The real evil is that our parents married us as
they did marry us.

ANTONIN. They did as most parents do.

JULIE. And so most marriages are unhappy.

ANTONIN. If you really loved me—

JULIE. But I don’t love you. That is just the point. And you don’t love
me. And here we are chained to one another.

ANTONIN. Nonsense. I not love you?

JULIE. No, indeed. You don’t love me.

ANTONIN. Come, come, you are talking foolishly. It’s late. Let’s go to
bed. Things will be all right to-morrow morning. [_He goes into the
bedroom_].

JULIE [_sits staring in front of her for awhile: then she says to
herself_] No: things will never be all right. Never. Never.

ANTONIN [_calls_] Are you coming, Julie? [_Julie starts as if she had
been dreaming. She looks round her in a dazed way_]. Come along.

JULIE [_with a deep sigh, her face showing a mingled expression of
profound disgust and sorrowful resignation_] I am coming. [_She goes
slowly towards the door of the bedroom_].




ACT III


  _The scene is the same as in the first Act. It is September. Dupont
  and his wife are sitting together. There is a pile of account books
  on the table between them._

DUPONT [_to his wife, who is holding a paper_] You see what the
accounts say. They aren’t brilliant. [_To the maid who enters_] As soon
as Mlle. Caroline comes in ask her to come here.

SERVANT. Yes, sir. [_The maid goes out_].

MME. DUPONT. The turnover is smaller than last year.

DUPONT. The profits are down to nothing. I’m wrong. 112 francs 17.
Splendid things accounts!

MME. DUPONT. What’s to happen next?

DUPONT. I don’t know. One thing is certain. Things can’t go on like
this.

MME. DUPONT. What are we to do, then?

DUPONT. Next year it will be worse, unless—

MME. DUPONT. Unless?

DUPONT. The fact is the business wants new plant. At present we are
using an old machine worked by hand, which I inherited from my father.
We have a gas engine not worth twopence. In fact, there’s only one hope
for us.

MME. DUPONT. What is that?

DUPONT. To get fresh capital somehow.

MME. DUPONT. That’s not very likely.

DUPONT. Who knows? It’s lucky for you your husband is no fool, my dear.
I am going to see if I can get you out of this mess. [_Caroline comes
in_]. Here is Caroline. Go and find Julie. I shall want you both in a
moment. I will call you.

  _Madame Dupont goes out._

DUPONT [_to Caroline_] My dear child, I have asked you to come here
because I want to have a serious talk with you. After our long
arguments you have at last come to see that it is your duty to accept
the legacy from your aunt. Your sister Angèle is coming here.

CAROLINE. Coming here?

DUPONT. But that is another matter. We will discuss that in a moment
with Julie and her mother. They are in the next room. At present I am
speaking only of you. All difficulties are removed now—I had a lot of
trouble over it, by the way—and to-morrow at four at the lawyer’s you
will receive the sum of thirty one thousand three hundred and eighteen
francs and a few centimes. Ahem. My dear Caroline, you are old enough
to know what you are about. Still you are not one of those undutiful
children who throw aside all obedience to their fathers as soon as they
are of age. You continue, I am sure, to recognize my right at least to
give you advice. I have lived longer than you, I am a man of business,
and I can clearly be of use to you when you want to invest your money.
Have you any plans as to this so far?

CAROLINE. I had some idea—

DUPONT. May I know what it is?

CAROLINE. I would rather not say.

DUPONT. Not say!

CAROLINE. Yes.

DUPONT. Indeed. Oh, in that case—[_shrug_]

CAROLINE. You don’t mind, father?

DUPONT [_much put out, but endeavoring to control himself_] Not at
all. By no means. Then there’s nothing more to be said. I am a little
surprised, of course; hurt even; greatly hurt, in fact.

CAROLINE. I am sorry, father.

DUPONT. No matter. No matter.

CAROLINE. You understand—

DUPONT. I understand that you do not trust your father. That is what I
understand. But have your own way. I ask nothing.

CAROLINE. Are you vexed with me?

DUPONT. Oh no. Not the least in the world. Only when you have given
everything you possess to some religious community or other, I should
like to know what you will have to live upon when you are old. I
assume, of course, that it is some community you are thinking of.
[_Caroline is silent_]. You admit it?

CAROLINE. No. I would rather say nothing about it.

DUPONT. It is so, all the same?

CAROLINE. Please, father!

DUPONT. You won’t give me any idea?

CAROLINE. No.

DUPONT. You refuse, then? You refuse absolutely?

CAROLINE. I have the right to do so, have I not?

DUPONT. Clearly. You are old enough.

CAROLINE. Don’t let us talk about it any more.

DUPONT. Very well. [_After a moment, breaking into a passion_] So this
is my reward! This is the result of having sacrificed my whole life for
my daughters. You do not even trust me as much as you would trust any
little attorney you consulted.

CAROLINE. Father! Of course I trust you.

DUPONT [_furiously_] Hold your tongue. You are heartless and undutiful.
I did not expect this.

CAROLINE. Please don’t be angry, father.

DUPONT. Angry? Yes; I am angry, and I have good reason. [_Striking the
table_] Damnation! This is too much! To have lived to be sixtytwo and
be insulted like this. [_He strides up and down the room_].

CAROLINE. I thought I could—I have only disposed of part of the money.

DUPONT [_stopping short_] What?

CAROLINE. I have only disposed of part of the money.

DUPONT [_mollified, becoming tenderly reproachful and coming to sit by
her_] My dear child, why didn’t you say so at once?

CAROLINE. You gave me no time.

DUPONT. How much is gone?

CAROLINE. Fifteen thousand francs.

DUPONT. Um. That is a large sum. But the sixteen thousand that remain?

CAROLINE. I meant to ask your advice about that.

DUPONT [_rising_] Ah, well, my dear, I have been thinking this over.
Let’s consider what openings there are for capital. Suppose you invest
it? Gilt edged securities bring in two and a half per cent. If you take
something rather more speculative, you may get four. Then there are the
big industrial companies. But with them, too, there are risks to be
faced. Foreign competition is more and more threatening. The struggles
between labor and capital are reaching an acute phase.

CAROLINE. M. Antonin Mairaut has been to see me.

DUPONT. The scoundrel! I’ll bet he wanted you to invest the money in
his bank.

CAROLINE. He did suggest it.

DUPONT. You see. I guessed as much. You sent him about his business, I
hope?

CAROLINE. I said I would think about it.

DUPONT. That’s right. But what a fright you gave me. To invest your
money in a bank. Nothing could be more risky. Well, as we were saying.
No public companies, no industrials, no shares in banks. What remains?

CAROLINE. I don’t know.

DUPONT. There remains commercial enterprize, trade. But do you know
anyone engaged in trade who will let you put capital into his business?

CAROLINE. I think not.

DUPONT. We must put our heads together. I confess I can think of no
one. Madame Grandjean?

CAROLINE. Father! Madame Grandjean is divorced. You know quite well I
refused even to accept employment from her.

DUPONT. That is true. More fool you, by the way. Still—M. Darbout?

CAROLINE. He is a Protestant.

DUPONT. Well, then, I don’t see. There is no one, in fact.

CAROLINE. But you, father. If you would do it.

DUPONT. If I would do what? Manage it for you?

CAROLINE. Yes.

DUPONT. It is a great responsibility. I don’t know whether—What
interest would you expect?

CAROLINE. Whatever you thought right, father.

DUPONT. Well, I will speak to your mother about it. [_As if suddenly
making up his mind_] No: I won’t. I’ll do it. No one shall say I
hesitated to do all I could for my daughter. Kiss me, my dear. I’ll do
it.

CAROLINE. Thank you, father.

DUPONT. And you would still rather not tell me what you are doing with
the other fifteen thousand.

CAROLINE. Please, father.

DUPONT. Very well. You are your own mistress. I’ll have the necessary
documents prepared. Don’t you worry about it. I will arrange everything
beforehand. You will have nothing to do but sign. [_He looks at his
watch_] Three o’clock. Now there is that other matter we have to talk
of. [_He goes to the door and calls_] Come in, both of you. [_Julie and
Madame Dupont enter_]. Sit down. [_When they are all seated, he says_]
My dears, I wanted you all to come here that we may decide how we are
to receive Angèle. It is rather a difficult question. You know her life
in Paris is—ahem—highly reprehensible. Ought we to let her come here?
Ought we to meet her, for instance, at the station?

JULIE. Papa, what has Angèle done? Now that I am married surely I may
know? People always stop talking about her when I come in. I remember
her quite well.

MME. DUPONT. But you were only five when she went away.

DUPONT. You understand, my children, how painful this subject is both
for you and for me. I will spare you the details as far as possible. It
is enough that you should know, Julie, that when Angèle was seventeen
she was obliged to leave her home because—because—

MME. DUPONT [_simply_] Because she was about to become a mother.

JULIE. She went away?

DUPONT. Yes.

JULIE. Of her own free will?

DUPONT. I sent her away.

JULIE. Ah!

DUPONT. As I said, the subject is a very painful one. Let us get it
over as quickly as possible. She is coming here to-day. [_He looks at
his watch_] She is on her way now. Her train arrived five minutes ago.
Now I hope you will all of you behave with dignity, and neither be too
affectionate, which would be out of the question, nor too cold, which
would be unkind.

JULIE. Have you heard anything of her since she left home?

DUPONT. Yes.

JULIE. And her behavior?

DUPONT. Far from what it should be, I’m afraid. Still—

CAROLINE. Father, you make too light of all this. We have heard of her
three times. First when her baby died. Next we were told that she was
singing at a music hall and was almost penniless. The third time we
heard that she was rich, rich without working. When I think of it all I
am sorry I consented to meet her.

JULIE. But she couldn’t get her share of the legacy unless you did. You
couldn’t rob her of this money however you feel towards her.

CAROLINE. That was what decided me. But there is no reason why I should
see her here.

DUPONT. I shall see her. Julie will see her. So will your mother. Why
should you do differently from us?

MME. DUPONT. She was very fond of you, Caroline; and you were fond of
her. Come, come, you must not be so hard. One should have compassion
for those who have suffered as she has done.

CAROLINE [_after a pause_] Very well. I will do as you wish.

DUPONT. That’s right. At the same time, I have no intention of going
from one extreme to the other. There will be no question of asking her
to stay, or even of inviting her to dinner. That is agreed, is it not?

CAROLINE. Yes. And now I am going downstairs to the office. [_She goes
out_].

DUPONT. You, Julie, had better go to your room. [_She goes_]. In ten
minutes she will be here.

MME. DUPONT. Well, I must say if she were my daughter, I should have
been at the station long ago.

DUPONT. Do you suppose I haven’t wanted to go?

MME. DUPONT. Why didn’t you, then?

DUPONT. What would people say? Everyone knows me here. On the platform
I should have met a dozen people who would have asked me whom I was
meeting. And, besides, all things considered, it looks more dignified
to receive her here. [_Pondering_] I’ve been asking myself for the last
fortnight what I should say when we do meet.

MME. DUPONT. Give her a kiss. The rest will come easily.

DUPONT. You think I should kiss her?

MME. DUPONT. Yes.

DUPONT. I think so, too. At the same time we must remember—how shall I
put it? Her way of life. It is a difficult question. And then what am
I to say to her? Ought I to refer to the past? I must not seem to be
forgiving her, of course. I couldn’t do that. I couldn’t possibly. On
the other hand, since she is coming, I can hardly—Confound it, it’s all
extremely awkward. Eh?

MME. DUPONT. I can’t advise you.

DUPONT [_still thinking it out_] Of course, she is my daughter. Still,
I have not seen her for eighteen years. [_Peevishly_] I thought I
should never set eyes on her again. In the early days, when she
first went away, I was terribly distressed. But that couldn’t last,
could it? And then, you understand—Well, well, you must advise me. I
have prepared something to say, so as not to leave everything to the
inspiration of the moment. If one doesn’t think things out beforehand,
one always says too much or too little. So, as I said, I have prepared
something. I even wrote it out, but I know it by heart. You can imagine
how upset I am with all this. Here it is: ‘My child’—I think it best to
say ‘my child.’ ‘Angèle’ would be too familiar and ‘my daughter’ too
formal. ‘My child’—[_breaking off_]. And what makes it all the harder
is that I’ve no idea what she will say to me. Her letters are very
properly expressed, very properly. Still, will she cry? Will she break
down? Will she faint? I don’t know. It’s impossible to know. Dear me, I
wish the next half hour were over. However: ‘My child, I thank you for
having come.’ The fact is I ought to tell you I haven’t given Caroline
quite a true account of how things stood. I thought it wiser not.

MME. DUPONT. What do you mean?

DUPONT. It’s this way. Caroline is the one who could not get her legacy
without Angèle’s signature. Not the other way about.

MME. DUPONT. But you said—

DUPONT. Yes; I did misrepresent matters a little. You see Caroline
would never have agreed to meet Angèle if she had known that it was she
who needed Angèle’s presence, not Angèle hers. Angèle is the executor
under the will. In fact, it is she who is doing us a service. But if we
go into all that we shall never be done. Well, I say to her: ’My child,
I thank you for having come. Let us not speak of the past. I only wish
to remember one thing, that you have not visited upon your sister
Caroline the resentment which doubtless I inspire in you. I am grateful
to you.’ What do you think of that? [_The maid comes in_]. Good
heavens, here she is! [_Pointing to the papers, account books, etc.,
which lie on the table_] And that fool Courthezon has never taken away
the books. [_To the maid_] Wait a minute. [_To Madame Dupont_] Come,
come this way. You can tell me whether I ought to make any change. [_In
a low voice to the maid_] Ask her to wait a moment. Say I am engaged.
[_He goes out with Madame Dupont. The maid shows in Angèle. She is a
woman of thirtyfive, dressed in black, very quietly, but fashionably_].

MAID. Monsieur is engaged, but I don’t think he will be long. Whom
shall I say, madame?

ANGÈLE. Madame Angèle Dupont.

MAID. Madame has the same name as monsieur?

ANGÈLE. The same.

MAID. Will madame please be seated? [_She takes some books off a chair
and goes out_].

ANGÈLE [_with a gesture of despondency, to herself_] Nothing is as it
used to be. Nothing.

  _Courthezon comes in._

COURTHEZON. M. Dupont asks you to be good enough to wait five minutes,
madame.

ANGÈLE. Certainly, monsieur. [_Courthezon collects the books and
papers, looking at Angèle the while out of the corner of his eye. He
makes as if to go_]. You are M. Courthezon, are you not?

COURTHEZON [_much embarrassed_] Yes, madame—Mlle. Angèle. You remember
me? You have a good memory. Especially as I am not quite myself just
now. I have many things to worry me. But that is a long story. [_He
stands facing her, the books and papers under his arm_]. I recognized
you at once. M. Dupont told me.

ANGÈLE. My father is well in health?

COURTHEZON [_embarrassed_] Quite well. They are all quite well. You,
too, if I may judge by your looks?

ANGÈLE. Quite. Thank you.

COURTHEZON. And you have come about this legacy?

ANGÈLE. Yes. [_A silence_].

COURTHEZON. You must find some changes down here?

ANGÈLE. Very many. I hardly know the place.

COURTHEZON. We have moved since you went away. The house where the
press used to be was pulled down when the Rue de l’Arbre-à-Poires was
rebuilt.

ANGÈLE [_looking round her_] They have altered the furniture in the
drawing room.

COURTHEZON. That was ten years ago.

ANGÈLE [_sadly_] If I had come here without warning, I shouldn’t have
known I was in my father’s house.

COURTHEZON. It is so long since you left. You must feel it very much,
the idea that you are to see him again?

ANGÈLE [_very slowly_] Yes. But less than I expected. When I got my
father’s letter, I felt as if I should faint. That was two months ago.
Since then I have thought of this moment every day. I have wondered
so often what my father would say to me and what I should answer that
now I no longer feel anything. That is strange, is it not? Strange
and sad. [_She sighs_]. After all, M. Courthezon, life is always more
commonplace than we expect; simpler, but less beautiful. [_A pause.
Sadly_] And besides, I have seen so much.

COURTHEZON. You have suffered, too?

ANGÈLE. A little.

COURTHEZON. Eighteen years, is it not?

ANGÈLE. Yes. Eighteen years.

COURTHEZON. I hear M. Dupont. I must be going. Au revoir, madame.

  _Courthezon goes out. A moment later the voice of Dupont is heard
  without through the half open door, saying: ’Yes, yes; I want you to
  come with me.’ Then M. and Madame Dupont come in. There is a long
  pause, and finally Dupont says, with apparent calm_

DUPONT. Good morning Angèle.

ANGÈLE. Good morning, father.

  _They hesitate for a moment as to whether they should kiss one
  another, then make up their minds to do so. Dupont places a chill
  salute on either cheek of Angèle. Still silent, Angèle goes up to
  Madame Dupont and kisses her with the same frigidity._

MME. DUPONT. Good morning, Angèle.

ANGÈLE. Good morning, mother. [_They look at one another without a
word_].

DUPONT [_overcoming a momentary emotion_] Let us sit down. [_They sit.
Then he addresses Angèle in the tone he might have used if she had only
gone away the previous evening_] Thank you for coming.

ANGÈLE. I came for my sister’s sake. For Caroline. I was very fond of
her. [_A pause_]. Is she married?

DUPONT. No. She has never wished to marry.

ANGÈLE. Yet she is thirty-three.

DUPONT [_to his wife_] Thirty-three or thirtyfour?

MME. DUPONT. Thirty-three.

ANGÈLE. I shall see her?

DUPONT. Yes. We will let her know you are here.

ANGÈLE. And my half-sister?

DUPONT. Julie?

ANGÈLE. Yes; Julie.

DUPONT. Your half-sister is married. She has made a good match. The son
of a banker. The Mairauts. You remember M. Mairaut, the grandfather?

ANGÈLE. No.

DUPONT. Oh, yes; an old man with a long white beard.

ANGÈLE. No.

DUPONT. Anyhow, he was the grandfather of M. Antonin Mairaut, Julie’s
husband. [_He points to the door_] She is in there.

ANGÈLE. There?

DUPONT [_speaking rapidly to hide his mingled emotion and
embarrassment_] Yes. She has come back with her husband to live with us
for a time. Their house at St. Laurent is flooded. You remember the
house at St. Laurent?

ANGÈLE. Yes.

DUPONT [_as before, his embarrassment growing_] I told them they ought
to build a little wall along the river bank or their house would be
flooded. They wouldn’t listen to me and this is the consequence.
Happily the water is going down, and they’ll be able to go home
to-morrow. But they should have built a wall like their neighbors.
Their neighbors built a wall and—and that’s how it was.

ANGÈLE [_after a pause_] How is the business doing? Well?

DUPONT. Oh, yes.

ANGÈLE. And you are all quite well?

DUPONT. All of us. I had a touch of bronchitis last year, but it passed
off.

ANGÈLE. I am glad. [_A silence_].

DUPONT [_to Angèle, who is gazing at him_] You find me looking older,
eh?

ANGÈLE. On the contrary. I was just thinking—

DUPONT. And you? You are well?

ANGÈLE. Quite, thank you. [_Another silence. Then Angèle rises and the
Duponts rise too_].

DUPONT. You can’t stay any longer?

ANGÈLE. No. I’m afraid I must—[_Another silence_].

DUPONT. You came straight from the station?

ANGÈLE. No. I had my things taken to the Lion d’Or.

DUPONT. You are staying at the Lion d’Or?

ANGÈLE. Yes.

DUPONT. Just so. Well, until to-morrow. Four o’clock at the lawyer’s.
His house is just opposite. [_He points through the window_]. You can
see his door from here. You can’t miss it.

ANGÈLE. I understand. [_A pause_]. Julie—she is there? [_She points to
the door_].

DUPONT. Tut, tut, what am I thinking of? I had forgotten. Yes; she is
there. They will take you to her. [_To Madame Dupont_] Go and see
if—I’ll tell someone to go and find Caroline. [_He rings_].

MME. DUPONT [_opening a door and calling through it_] Julie: your
sister Angèle is here.

JULIE [_from her room_] Angèle? Ask her to come in.

MME. DUPONT. You can go in to her.

  _Angèle goes. Dupont has rung and says a few words to the maid, who
  goes out at once._

DUPONT. Ouf! [_To Madame Dupont_] Ah well, it has all gone off
excellently. I didn’t say a word of what I had got ready, but still it
was all right. Don’t you think so?

MME. DUPONT. Quite. Poor girl! I felt sorry for her.

DUPONT. She is quite happy. She was very well dressed, quite like a
lady in fact. Who would think to see her—Eh? [_Madame Dupont nods_].
And yet—But when one has had a good education it always comes out. It
is curious. I thought I should be quite upset when I saw her. Instead
of which—Of course I don’t mean that I didn’t feel it. Still it wasn’t
so bad as I expected. But now she’s no longer there I feel—I feel my
legs giving way under me! [_He sits down. A silence_]. If I were not so
sure it was my duty to do as I did—for it was my duty? [_Pause_] You
don’t answer. Wasn’t it my duty?

MME. DUPONT. I don’t know.

  _Caroline comes in._

DUPONT. Angèle—

CAROLINE. Yes. Courthezon told me.

DUPONT [_with assumed carelessness after a pause_] You understand,
Caroline, no reproaches. Don’t make any allusion to what you are doing
for her sake.

CAROLINE. I understand.

DUPONT [_to his wife_] Tell her that Caroline is waiting for her.

  _The maid comes in._

MAID. M. and Madame Mairaut, monsieur. They wish to speak to you.

DUPONT. Good. Where are they? In the office?

MAID. Yes, monsieur.

DUPONT [_to his wife_] I know what they want. [_To the maid_] I will
come down with you. [_He and the maid go out_].

MME. DUPONT [_speaking at the door of Julie’s room_] Caroline is here.

  _Angèle comes in and makes a quick movement towards Caroline but
  pulls herself up before the coldness of the other’s demeanor._

ANGÈLE. Caroline.

CAROLINE. Angèle. [_They stand looking fixedly at one another for some
moments_].

ANGÈLE [_sadly_] How changed you are!

CAROLINE. You are changed too.

ANGÈLE. That is because life has not always gone smoothly with me.
[_Caroline makes a gesture of incredulity_]. You don’t believe me?

CAROLINE. Yes, if you say so.

ANGÈLE. I have just seen Julie. She was kinder than you are. And she
was only five when I left home and she is only my half-sister. You and
I have the same father and the same mother. We are almost of an age and
we used to love one another.

CAROLINE [_coldly_] That is true.

ANGÈLE. If you knew all about it you would forgive me.

CAROLINE. Are the things that were said about you untrue?

ANGÈLE. No. However bad they were they are true.

CAROLINE. Since that is so—

ANGÈLE [_without anger_] Since that is so—I still think your virtue
very proud and very hard. That is all. [_Changing her tone_] You
understand what has brought me here?

CAROLINE. I understand that we are to meet at the lawyer’s.

ANGÈLE. Very well. To-morrow at four.

CAROLINE. To-morrow at four at the lawyer’s.

ANGÈLE [_turning at the door, greatly moved_] You have nothing else to
say to me?

  _Caroline shakes her head. Angèle goes out. A moment after Dupont
  comes in._

DUPONT [_beaming_] She has gone?

CAROLINE. Yes.

DUPONT [_chuckling_] Where is your mother? Where is she? [_He calls
Madame Dupont_].

MME. DUPONT. What is it?

DUPONT. I want you.

CAROLINE. I will go.

DUPONT. There’s no need.

CAROLINE. I have some work to do.

DUPONT. Very well. Go, my child. Go. [_Calling after her_] To-morrow,
remember. [_She goes out as M. Dupont rubs his hands, chuckling_] Guess
what M. and Madame Mairaut came to ask me. You can’t guess?

MME. DUPONT. No.

DUPONT. No wonder. They came to ask for the twentyfive thousand francs,
the twentyfive thousand francs of Julie’s dot, you remember, which I
was to pay six months after her marriage.

MME. DUPONT. Well?

DUPONT. Well. It is six months to-day since Julie was married.

MME. DUPONT. Good heavens! What did you do?

DUPONT. Gave them nothing, of course.

MME. DUPONT. You couldn’t do otherwise.

DUPONT. As you say, I couldn’t.

MME. DUPONT. But they will make us bankrupt.

DUPONT [_still smiling broadly_] They can’t. They have nothing but my
word.

MME. DUPONT. Luckily.

DUPONT. However, I haven’t refused the twentyfive thousand francs. Nor
have I disputed the debt.

MME. DUPONT. What did you do then?

DUPONT. I wish you had been there. You would have laughed.

MME. DUPONT. Well?

DUPONT. I think I managed pretty well, though I say it who shouldn’t.
If you had seen the long faces they pulled. Especially Mother Mairaut.
[_He bursts out laughing_]. I should have liked a photograph of them.
It would have cheered me in moments of depression. Ha! Ha! Ha!

MME. DUPONT [_smiling_] Tell me about it.

DUPONT. Well—I’d have given anything for a photograph. I said to them
[_solemnly_] ‘Dear monsieur and dear madame, I admit that I promised
to pay you to-day twentyfive thousand francs. Only I am not in a
position to pay them.’ Explosion! Rage! Dignified reproaches! Insults!
Smiling, I let the storm to pass by. Mother Mairaut sat there, her
husband here, I here. All the time they were speaking I looked at
them like this [_grins_]. As soon as they had finished I took up
the tale again. ‘I do not deny the debt,’ said I, ’only I ask to be
allowed to postpone the payment. And this time I am ready to sign an
undertaking, a binding undertaking, to pay.’ Complete change of front!
Smiles. Apologies. Oh, they were devilish civil. Called me a man of
honor, etc., etc. I let them run on, still smiling. Then, in the midst
of an almost religious silence, I sat down at my desk, I took pen
and paper, I wrote, I blotted, so, taking my time about it. Madame
Mairaut positively slobbered with delight. I tell you she slobbered. I
handed her the paper. On it was written simply: ‘Good for the sum of
twentyfive thousand francs to be paid out of the money to be left by
Uncle Maréchal.’ Ha! Ha! Ha!

MME. DUPONT [_laughing_] Splendid!

DUPONT. Funny, eh? Deuced funny!

MME. DUPONT. Yes.

DUPONT. You don’t think so? You don’t! Eh? Wasn’t it funny?

MME. DUPONT. Yes. Yes.

DUPONT. When Mother Mairaut took it in I thought she was going to have
a fit. ‘It’s an insult!’ she shrieked. I believe she actually even
called me a cad! As for me, I was almost dying with laughter. They went
away swearing they were going straight to the bank to tell Antonin. By
Jove I haven’t enjoyed myself so much for ever so long.

MME. DUPONT [_becoming serious again_] I hope this won’t make any
difference to Julie.

DUPONT. Bah!

MME. DUPONT. Things are not going very well with her, I’m afraid.
Antonin is exacting and tyrannical, and she often locks herself into
her room to cry.

DUPONT. That always happens in the early days of marriage. People’s
angles need rubbing off. That sort of marriage turns out best in the
end. [_Julie comes in_] Here she is. Speak to her. Tell her these
things aren’t serious. Make her understand her duty. I must go back to
my accounts. [_To Julie_] Well? What did your sister Angèle say to you?

JULIE. Hardly anything. She didn’t know me, and I shouldn’t have known
her.

DUPONT. I told you so. Well, I must be off. Back soon. [_He goes out_].

MME. DUPONT. My dear—your husband may be rather put out when he comes
in.

JULIE. I am getting used to that.

MME. DUPONT. More so than usual, I mean.

JULIE. Why?

MME. DUPONT. Your father has been unable to keep his promise.

JULIE. About the twentyfive thousand francs?

MME. DUPONT. Yes. Antonin will have just heard about it.

JULIE [_depressed_] No matter. [_Suddenly, alarmed_] I do believe I
forgot to tell them to get out his grey suit. No: I remember. I did
tell them. How angry he would have been if I hadn’t!

MME. DUPONT. Of course. He is your husband.

JULIE. You think it quite natural that he should fly into a rage as he
did two days ago because something or other had been forgotten? And
that it is only reasonable he should order me to go to Mass merely that
Madame So-and-so may see me there! Well, he may order as much as he
likes. I shall not go. I _will_ not go!

MME. DUPONT. You make too much of it. My child, aren’t you happy?

JULIE [_ironically_] Of course.

MME. DUPONT. Your husband is fond of you, isn’t he?

JULIE. That depends on what you mean by fond.

MME. DUPONT. I mean he’s very much in love with you.

JULIE. I suppose so.

MME. DUPONT. You’re angry with him for that?

JULIE. No, I’m angry with myself.

MME. DUPONT. My dear! What do you mean?

JULIE. I am ashamed of myself.

MME. DUPONT. I don’t understand.

JULIE. Nor do I. Don’t let us talk about it.

MME. DUPONT. Please, dear.

JULIE [_breaking out_] Well, I _detest_ him. There!

MME. DUPONT. Tell me why.

JULIE. There is no why in that sort of dislike. It is born and grows
with every moment we are together. Every moment there comes some little
point on which we clash. We haven’t the same ideas on a single subject.
He and I are strangers. We are apart utterly, miserably. We are as far
from one another as two human beings can be. [_With a deep sigh_] Oh,
to realize that slowly, hopelessly. To feel that every fresh glimpse
into each other’s character only reveals a fresh source of offence.
Till at last it has come to this, that I am certain the more we know
each other the deeper will be our mutual loathing. Every day, every
hour will add a fresh hatred to the accumulated hatreds of the others.
Great Heavens! And unless we are divorced this will go on all our
lives. [_A pause_]. Why, there are moments when he is sitting there in
that chair, and I look at him fixedly, and it seems as if I had never
seen him before. And why not? After all, it is only six months since
I hardly recognized him when we passed in the street. And then I ask
myself what am I doing here? I, in my dressing-gown, with my hair down,
shut in with that man. And I long to run away screaming. And we are
husband and wife. Oh, mother, I am _ashamed_.

MME. DUPONT. You must try to be reasonable. Antonin is a fine fellow.
Many girls would have been glad to get him.

JULIE. Why didn’t they then, in Heaven’s name? Oh, if you knew how I
long to have a child to console me for all this. If I should never have
one. If I should never have one. [_Shudders_]. But I mustn’t even think
of that.

MME. DUPONT. My dear child, you must look at things more calmly. All
this will gradually settle down until at last it passes away altogether.

JULIE. Yes. When I am an old woman.

MME. DUPONT. Exactly, when you are an old woman.

JULIE. Thank you.

MME. DUPONT. In any case, you should try to control yourself a little.
If only for your father’s sake and mine.

JULIE. I will try. [_Antonin comes in_]. Hush. Here he is. Go away,
mother. You will only make things worse. [_Madame Dupont goes out_].

ANTONIN [_furious_] Well! This is the last straw. Your father won’t
keep his word. You have heard?

JULIE [_sitting on the sofa_] Yes.

ANTONIN. It doesn’t disturb you apparently.

JULIE. He cannot do otherwise.

ANTONIN. It will be the ruin of me. But you seem to be all in league
together, the whole lot of you. Oh, you’re a pretty family! Your
father owes us twenty-five thousand francs. He won’t pay them. The
other day your sister promised us fifteen thousand francs. To-day she
has changed her mind. As for you, you do everything in your power to
compromise my position.

JULIE. I?

ANTONIN. You. You disobey me.

JULIE. In what?

ANTONIN. Were you at Mass this morning?

JULIE. No.

ANTONIN. Why not?

JULIE. It is not my fault if I no longer believe.

ANTONIN. I don’t ask you to believe. I ask you to go to Mass. The two
things are totally different. A woman ought to go to Mass. If she
doesn’t believe she should appear to do so. It is usual among people of
good position. I wish you to do as others do. Do you understand? I wish
it. I have no desire to pass for a Freethinker when all my clients are
Catholics, confound them!

JULIE. I have not been and I do not intend to go.

ANTONIN. What do you say?

JULIE. You heard what I said. If you were a believer, if you asked me
to do this out of respect for your faith, I would do it. But it is a
piece of commercial trickery that you want from me. I refuse.

ANTONIN. You wish to do as you like, you mean?

JULIE [_breaking out_] Yes. You are quite right. I wish to do as I
like. That is it. That is just it. For once in my life I wish to do as
I like! All the time I was a girl I had to obey; to submit to authority
that was often unreasonable. Now I am to go on obeying, obeying. I have
had enough of this everlasting obedience.

ANTONIN. Then you shouldn’t have married.

JULIE. So that’s it, is it. The sole business of your wife’s life is to
be your slave, to help the servant to make you comfortable, brush your
clothes, taste your soup, and look up to you with admiring homage.

ANTONIN. That’s all nonsense.

JULIE. What is nonsense?

ANTONIN. What you have been saying. You know quite well that you have
other duties. You know quite well that it only rests with you to be a
happy wife. You know that I love you.

JULIE. Yes, yes. I forgot. You _love_ me! Which means that I am to
submit to your caresses when the fancy takes you. They used to say
of us women, ‘housekeeper or mistress.’ But we have moved with the
times. Now you want the same woman to play both parts. Housekeeper and
mistress. That is the only difference between us and the women you love
before you marry us. A wife is a mistress who minds the house. That is
not enough for me, thank you. No. No. No. I will not pass my whole life
between cooking your dinner and accepting your kisses.

ANTONIN. That’s right. Off we go on the old story of the wife who is
not understood; the poor woman who is a slave and a martyr. If you
really love me, if you thought a little more instead of cramming your
head with ideas which you don’t understand, you would be content with
the part, modest no doubt but not dishonorable, with which plenty of
women as good as you have contented themselves.

JULIE. Perhaps you are right. If I loved you, as you say, if we loved
one another nothing would matter. But I say again I do not love you.

ANTONIN. Be silent.

JULIE. I do not love you.

ANTONIN. Julie, I shall end by losing my temper. You will force me to
say things.

JULIE. To say things?

ANTONIN. Never mind.

JULIE. Oh, you may speak out. A little shame more or less doesn’t
matter. We are alone. Let us speak out and clear up the matter once and
for all. We _must_. It has been weighing on my mind for a long time.
Say what you have to say.

ANTONIN. No.

JULIE. Then _I_ will speak. I tell you that I do not love you and you
shrug your shoulders with a smile of self-complacency. But it’s no
laughing matter, Heaven knows; and I don’t imagine I am the only woman
for whom this subject, amusing enough for you men, has meant a whole
tragedy of sorrow and disgust.

ANTONIN. I don’t understand you.

JULIE. Yes, you _do!_! Your vanity makes you try to escape, but you
shall understand. You think I daren’t speak, but I will. Do you suppose
I will stay dumb and bear the kisses you give me, kisses which I end
by returning. My lips when you kiss them draw back in repulsion and
yet in the end they yield and go out to meet yours. Shall I go on? [_A
pause. She looks him full in the face_]. No. You understand now. You
can never again imagine the tears I shed are tears of love. They are
tears of remorse and misery. I hate you after your kisses. Our love is
a duel in which I am worsted because what is best in me turns traitor.
I blush at your victories because you could never have gained them
without the help of what is base in me, without the baseness you know
how to excite. It is not I who yield. It is the animal in me. It is all
that is vile. I hate you for the crime of our loveless marriage, the
crime you force me to share. I admit you are not the only guilty one,
you are not the only one worthy of contempt. But I have had enough of
it. Enough of it. I will no longer spend my days weeping over the shame
of my nights. Every evening I have said I will regain my freedom. Till
now I have not dared to say the words that would release me. Now I have
done it. I am free.

ANTONIN [_shrugging his shoulders_] You are nothing of the sort.

JULIE. What do you mean?

ANTONIN. I mean that I have more common sense than you. I mean that it
is my duty to guard you from these exaggerated fancies of yours. The
bonds that join us are not to be broken by a whim. You are my wife and
my wife you will remain. A divorce is impossible. I have given you no
cause. You may leave me, of course, but you know the life of the woman
who lives apart from her husband, a life without respect and without
social position. No: you will stay with me.

JULIE. And it is this prison that we call marriage. [_A pause_]. And
when I think that I looked forward with longing to this: that I sighed
for it: that all my girlhood I was hoping for it, dreaming of it. When
I think that at this very moment there are girls kneeling by their
bedsides, young girls whose hearts are yearning for this. [_She begins
to cry_]. Ah, poor girls! Poor girls! If they only knew. [_She wipes
her eyes, after a moment_] Just Heaven, what a fool I am. Here am I
crying when I should be laughing. The thing is ludicrous. Why, if one
dared, one would shake with laughter at it all. You may be tyrants, all
of you, but you are so absurd that, when one thinks, one can scarcely
hate you for it. What you have made of marriage! From start to finish:
from the wedding morning, with its monkey tricks, its vanity, and
its folly. When I think that there are still people who respect such
mummery! [_She bursts out laughing_].

ANTONIN. Julie. Don’t laugh like that.

JULIE. Oh, my dear sir, leave me alone. It’s well for you I take it
laughing. If I took it seriously, what sort of figure would you cut?
Everything about a wedding is absurd, just because it is so detestable.
Yes; everything. From the moment when you set it before us as a duty to
hand ourselves over to our lords on such and such a day, at such and
such an hour, at a date and a minute fixed beforehand. How is it that
brides do not die of shame under the curious eyes of the wedding guests
and the thoughts they hide? To think that they are passing the day
among people who know. Pah! Oh, yes; I am quite aware how ridiculous
the bride looks. [_She puts her hand familiarly on his shoulder_].
But don’t imagine the bridegroom cuts a very brilliant figure. [_She
laughs_]. You all wear a look of stupid complacency, like a contented
animal sure of its prey. And there must be a dot, and you must be
bought, and a price must be paid you in order that you may marry us.
Oh, yes. You have arranged things finely among you; with your Deputies’
scarves and your music and incense. And you need them. But do you think
they impose on anyone nowadays? No.

ANTONIN. You make out too good a case for yourself. And it’s not fair
to make me responsible. All this is as much the result of your acts as
of mine.

JULIE. Indeed! I am curious to hear what those acts are.

ANTONIN. I’ll tell you.

JULIE. Have I ever failed in my duty? Haven’t I been—

ANTONIN [_sternly_] Be silent. I’m going to have my say. It’s no good
your trying to play the injured victim. You did exactly the same as I
did. When I proposed for you, I was not in love with you. I admit it. I
didn’t love you as you want to be loved. Yet you accepted me.

JULIE. Do you suppose I knew? What did I understand about life? How
could I have guessed—

ANTONIN. You knew perfectly well the sort of love I felt for you, a
sort of love every mother tries to rouse in any young man she wants to
catch for her daughter. And the daughters take a hand in the game, too,
bless their little hearts!

JULIE. Do you mean to say _I_ did such a thing?

ANTONIN. Yes: I do. You began this plain speaking: I’m going on with
it. You wanted the cards on the table and you shall have them. Let
us both own up. We know now what marriage is, our own and everybody
else’s. We know all the tricks, all the humbug of it. Let’s look it in
the face. Your parents deceived mine.

JULIE. And yours?

ANTONIN. They did the same. I’m not denying it. But did you help them?
Yes or no?

JULIE. No.

ANTONIN. Yes: you did. I remember well enough how you helped them to
cajole me, trap me, dupe me. Oh I know it sounds ridiculous. I know
each petty incident taken by itself amounts to nothing. But these
deceptions of yours have their importance, for you only made use of
them to catch me. You played on my weaknesses. You knew I was fond of
money—we’re talking straight to each other, remember—you knew I was
fond of money and you represented yourself as a model young woman who
always made her own dresses. You remember that? And Wagner! Wagner,
whose music you professed to admire so much, when you knew as little
about him as I do. According to your own account lots of men had wanted
to marry you. That was a lie. You had helped your father in keeping his
books and were interested in my banking business. _That_ was a lie, too.

JULIE. If that is all you have to reproach me with—

ANTONIN. It is not all. There was another lie to which you
condescended. And that was a serious one, because you sacrificed your
womanly dignity to your interest. You have forgotten it? I have not.
Why it was here, here in this very room where we are at this moment,
that you sat dressed for a ball. You were not going to a ball. I knew
that later. But they told you to put on that dress, and you know why.
Well, that trick came off all right. [_Julie, confused, hides her face
in her hands_]. I behaved as most men behave. I wanted to take your
arm and kiss it. You objected as any decent woman would. But when
you saw I was annoyed you said to yourself that a husband was well
worth the sacrifice of a little modesty, and you came deliberately
and let me kiss you as I wished. Isn’t it true? Isn’t it? I tried to
deceive you, I admit it. But if I lied you lied, too. Marriages like
ours may be shameful. I don’t know. But don’t try to thrust the whole
responsibility on me when you’re equally guilty. [_Julie’s head sinks
lower. A pause_]. The other things you say about me I dare say I
deserve. I’m ambitious. I want to succeed. Is it my fault that success
is the only road to social consideration nowadays? In order to succeed
I must truckle to people who can be useful to me and I ask you to help
me. I’m not a hero. I’m like the rest of the world. I didn’t make
either myself or them. We are to be pitied, both of us. But I’m more to
be pitied than you are, for you don’t love me and I can’t help loving
you. What shall I do if you leave me? My position will be compromised,
my business ruined. And more than all that I shall have lost you. I
don’t speak as I ought, I am a fool, a dolt. I ought to have told you
this at first instead of going over all that wretched business. But
it’s true, it’s far worse for me than for you [_much moved_] for I
love you in spite of all you can say, and the idea of losing you is
like being told that I am going to die. [_He sobs_]. And what have I
done after all? I’ve only done as other men do. Why should _I_ be the
only one to be punished? Ah, Julie, my little Julie, pity me. I’m very
unhappy. [_He weeps, bowed over the table, his head in his hands_].

JULIE [_putting her hand upon his head and speaking in a low
expressionless voice_] Poor fellow.

ANTONIN [_still weeping_] You _are_ sorry for me, aren’t you. Say you
are.

JULIE. Yes, we are both of us victims.

ANTONIN. That’s it. Ever since I was born my parents have taught me
that the great thing in life was to be rich.

JULIE [_nodding sadly_] Mine too.

ANTONIN. Unless one gets on nobody thinks anything of one.

JULIE. And marriage is one of the ways of getting on.

ANTONIN. That’s what ruined us.

JULIE. Yes. It has ruined our lives as it has ruined so many others.

ANTONIN [_recovering his composure_] You understand, then? You _do_
understand, don’t you?

JULIE [_dully_] Yes.

ANTONIN [_taking her hand, which she does not draw away_] You’re not
angry? [_Julie says nothing_]. It is all over, isn’t it? [_patting her
hand_] All quite over and done with. [_She is still silent_]. You see
that I mustn’t do anything that might damage the business? You see that?

JULIE. Yes.

ANTONIN. And that it’s better not to offend people who may be useful to
us. Isn’t it?

JULIE. Yes.

ANTONIN. After all, why shouldn’t one go to Mass? Come, come. [_He
smiles_]. We have been silly, haven’t we, to say all that. It’s
forgotten now, isn’t it? Say it’s forgotten.

JULIE [_reluctantly_] Yes.

ANTONIN [_recovering his spirits_] That’s a good little woman. There,
there. One disputes, one flies into a passion, one runs on and on, one
says terrible things [_laughing_]. What things you said to me. Oh, it
was shocking. But there, we’ll never speak of it again. Never. Never.
Let’s make it up. [_He takes her in his arms: hesitating, she lets
him do so_]. We’re friends again, eh? And now go and wash your face,
or people will see you’ve been crying. Are my eyes red, too? No, I
expect not. Shall I tell you something? You won’t believe it. You’ll be
shocked. Do you know, I almost think perhaps it’s as well we’ve said
all these things to each other. You see, now we know each other better.
You understand about some of my worries. The business isn’t going as
I should wish. That makes my temper rather quick at times. No: things
might be better. If you would say a word to Caroline, perhaps she would
change her mind about that money.

JULIE [_still on her guard_] I will try.

ANTONIN. That’s a good girl. And it’s only for a little while that we
shall have to be careful. We are only two and we shall pull through it.
Luckily we’ve only ourselves to think of. Imagine what it would be if
we were expecting a baby!

JULIE. That would give me courage.

ANTONIN. Nonsense, my dear. We can do very well without that.

JULIE [_alarmed_] But we are going to have children, aren’t we?

ANTONIN [_after a moment’s hesitation, firmly_] No.

JULIE. Why not?

ANTONIN. How absurd you are. Because I don’t choose, of course.

JULIE. But we’ve often talked of having children. You’ve made plans
with me about what we should do with them.

ANTONIN [_laughing_] I know. You liked it, and it was something to
talk about. But for the future we’re to be perfectly straight with one
another.

JULIE. Do you mean that we are _never_ to have any children?

ANTONIN [_nods_] We can’t afford them, my dear, at present. And if we
wait till we’re forty [_shrugs_], people would laugh.

JULIE. Don’t you know what it was that made me willing to marry? Don’t
you know that it was this thought of having children, this and this
alone, that decided me? And you refuse me this. To be a wife, to be
a mother, is the natural end of life for me. And something will be
wanting and my life will be incomplete, and I shall not have _lived_
if my arms have never clasped a baby born of my flesh; if I have never
suckled it, cried over it, felt all the cares and all the joys that
mothers feel. And you would rob me of this. Merely because you love
money, because you are self-seeking and ambitious. Great Heavens, to
think that you should have such power over my life! People talk of
tyranny; they make revolts against Governments; there are women who
clamor for a vote; who demand that the marriage law should be the same
for women as for men; and they don’t understand that it is marriage
itself they should attack, that they should attack with fury, since it
allows such an infamy.

ANTONIN. For goodness sake don’t begin again. Remember, we made it up.

JULIE. Made it up! Just God, what name is there vile enough for me
to fling in your face? Are you so utterly base that you think _now_
there can be any thought of reconciliation between us? After what you
have just told me, do you suppose that I would submit to—Think what it
means. Think what the thing you men call love means to women if it has
neither affection nor children for its justification.

ANTONIN. I won’t answer you. You don’t know what you’re saying. You’re
mad, and I shall treat you accordingly. To begin with, go to your room
and try to calm yourself. Go. [_He tries to take her by the arm_].

JULIE [_shrieking_] Don’t touch me! Don’t touch me! [_She pushes him
violently away_].

ANTONIN [_furious_] Look here, Julie; I’m not going to stand this. I
tell you to go to your room at once.

JULIE. Don’t touch me.

ANTONIN. I shall touch you if I please. Oh, you may scream if you like.
You’re my wife, and I’ve the right to do as I choose with you.

JULIE. Take your hands off me. I hate you, I say. I hate you.

ANTONIN. You hate me. I dare say. But if you suppose that I’m a genteel
husband out of a book, who lets his wife lock her door against him,
you’re vastly mistaken. I’ve married you, I love you, and I intend to
keep you. Hate me, do you? Very well. Escape from me if you can. [_He
takes her in his arms. There is a struggle. Furniture is overturned. No
word is spoken, but you can hear their deep breathing. Suddenly Antonin
cries out_] Curse you, you’ve bitten me!

JULIE. Yes. And I will _kill_ you if you don’t let me go!

ANTONIN [_transported with rage_] We shall see which of us is master.

JULIE. We shall see!

ANTONIN. We _shall_! [_Antonin goes out in a violent passion_].

  _Julie, left alone, straightens her hair and dress mechanically,
  muttering to herself inaudibly. Suddenly she falls upon a couch, and
  then upon the ground, where she lies sobbing in an agony of misery._




ACT IV


  _The same scene. M. and Madame Dupont are sitting together._

DUPONT. She’s determined to leave him, then?

MME. DUPONT. Quite determined.

DUPONT. And he?

MME. DUPONT. After the scene I told you of he went straight out of the
house and he hasn’t come back since.

DUPONT. He didn’t sleep at home last night?

MME. DUPONT. No.

DUPONT [_scornfully_] He has gone back to ‘maman,’ no doubt. [_He goes
to the window_].

MME. DUPONT [_after a pause_] Why do you keep looking out of that
window?

DUPONT. I’m watching the lawyer’s opposite. Caroline went in five
minutes ago. I’m terribly afraid Angèle won’t come. [_To himself_]
Confound Caroline. Who the Dickens can have got hold of that other
fifteen thousand francs? [_Joyfully_] There’s Angèle. Look. She’s going
in now. What did you say? Bless my soul, my daughters give me worry
enough. Yes: he has gone back to ‘maman.’ And you think this won’t blow
over, eh?

MME. DUPONT. I’m certain it won’t. Julie will never forgive him.

DUPONT [_almost with triumph_] That means a divorce then, eh?

MME. DUPONT. Yes. A divorce.

DUPONT. Ah! And who was the clever one this time, too, eh? Who was it?

MME. DUPONT. I don’t know.

DUPONT. Of course not. Well, _I_ was.

MME. DUPONT. In what way?

DUPONT. You say she’ll ask for a divorce?

MME. DUPONT. Unless he does.

DUPONT. Very well, then. Whichever way it is her money was settled
on herself, and our good Antonin will have to give back the thirty
thousand francs and my house. Thanks to me. Thanks to me. [_He rubs his
hands_].

  _The maid comes in._

MAID. M. and Madame Mairaut.

DUPONT. Show them in. [_The maid goes out. To his wife_] Don’t go.

  _M. and Madame Mairaut come in._

MME. MAIRAUT [_turning to the door and speaking to her husband, who
hangs back_] Are you coming in or are you not?

MAIRAUT. I’m coming. [_He closes the door_].

  _Formal greetings are exchanged._

MME. MAIRAUT [_sitting down_] After what passed between us yesterday—

DUPONT [_with dangerous sweetness_] About Uncle Maréchal’s money?

MME. MAIRAUT [_appearing not to have heard_] After what passed between
us yesterday, I intended never to set foot in this house again.

DUPONT [_bowing_] It rested entirely with you, madame.

MME. MAIRAUT. Since then, however, grave differences have arisen
between our children.

DUPONT. Very grave.

MME. MAIRAUT. You know, then?

DUPONT. Yes.

MME. MAIRAUT. We are come therefore, my husband and I, in the name of
our son, formally to request your daughter, Madame Antonin Mairaut, to
return to her husband’s roof.

DUPONT. _His_ roof?

MME. MAIRAUT. To St. Laurent. My son awaits her there.

DUPONT. He’ll have to wait some time. My daughter will not return to
her husband. You are welcome to bring an officer of the Court to bear
witness to the fact. It will provide your son with a ground for his
divorce.

MME. MAIRAUT [_sweetly_] There is no question of a divorce.

DUPONT [_astonished_] What? No question of a divorce?

MME. MAIRAUT. None, monsieur.

DUPONT. In spite of my daughter’s refusal—

MME. MAIRAUT. In spite of her refusal.

DUPONT. In spite of what she has said to her husband?

MME. MAIRAUT. In spite of that, too.

DUPONT. In spite of anything she may do in the future?

MME. MAIRAUT. In spite of anything she may do. There is no question of
a divorce and there never will be.

DUPONT. On your part, you mean?

MME. MAIRAUT. On yours also. We shall give you no grounds. My son is
waiting for his wife to return to him. He is ready to receive her
whenever she sees fit to present herself.

DUPONT. Whatever she does?

MME. MAIRAUT. Whatever she does.

DUPONT. Even if—

MME. MAIRAUT. Even in that case. [_Movement of Mairaut_]. What is it,
my dear?

MAIRAUT. Nothing.

DUPONT. The truth is you would rather risk your son’s honor than give
back the thirty thousand francs.

MME. MAIRAUT [_still very sweetly_] After all, thirty thousand francs
is a considerable sum. [_Mairaut fidgets uneasily_].

DUPONT. Yesterday, when he went away, your son uttered certain threats.

MME. MAIRAUT [_still sweetly_] He has decided not to put them into
execution.

MME. DUPONT. You know, of course, that Julie will never agree—

MME. MAIRAUT. I can’t help that.

MME. DUPONT. All their lives they will be chained to one another. Young
as they are, they must give up the idea of having a home.

MME. MAIRAUT. Your daughter has only to return to her duty. Antonin
will receive her.

MAIRAUT [_breaking out_] No. I won’t have it. I have a word to say on
this.

MME. MAIRAUT. What’s the matter now? Pray speak if you have anything to
say.

MAIRAUT [_loudly_] What we are doing is an infamy.

MME. MAIRAUT. Hold your tongue.

MAIRAUT. I won’t.

MME. MAIRAUT. Hold your tongue, I tell you.

MAIRAUT. No. And don’t you try to shout me down. Do you hear?

MME. MAIRAUT. What’s taken the man? I’ve never seen him like this
before.

MAIRAUT. I tell you this is infamous! Infamous! I’ve thought so for a
long time, ever since the day you wouldn’t let me speak out about Uncle
Maréchal. I said nothing because I was afraid of you. For thirty years
I have said nothing. But now this is too much, and I say what I think.
It’s an infamy. Come what may, I will say it. Sit down. I tell you it’s
an infamy. Rogues have been meddling with these children’s lives too
long; it’s time for honest men to take a hand in them. I’m going to do
it.

MME. MAIRAUT. Pay no attention to him. He’s out of his senses.

MAIRAUT. Be silent, you. M. and Madame Dupont, this is what I have to
say to you. An effort must be made to reconcile Julie and Antonin. If
this is impossible, _I_ will pay you back the thirty thousand francs.

MME. MAIRAUT [_with a scream_] Good Heavens, what is he saying?

MAIRAUT. I will return the thirty thousand francs, and you’ll see after
that if my precious son won’t be the first to talk of a divorce.

MME. MAIRAUT [_to her husband_] You shall pay for this when we get home.

MAIRAUT. As you please. And now be off, and be quick about it. [_Madame
Mairaut goes out_]. Au revoir, M. and Madame Dupont. Do what you can
on your side, and I will try and make Antonin come and beg his wife’s
pardon.

DUPONT. Good evening, M. Mairaut.

MME. DUPONT. Count on me, M. Mairaut, and give me your hand. You’re a
good man.

MAIRAUT [_as he goes_] That’s all right. [_He goes_].

DUPONT. Are you really going to try?

MME. DUPONT. Yes.

DUPONT. But since old Mairaut is willing to give back the money.

MME. DUPONT. I won’t make up my mind to a divorce until I’m absolutely
convinced there’s no other way.

DUPONT. But there is no other way. You said so yourself.

MME. DUPONT. Are you sure you aren’t thinking more of your money than
of the happiness of your child?

DUPONT. I! Well, I declare! Are you taking a leaf out of old Mairaut’s
book?

MME. DUPONT [_gravely_] Perhaps so.

  _Madame Mairaut returns._

MME. MAIRAUT. I have come back for two things. First, to advise you not
to count too much on my husband’s promise. Next, to thank you for the
fresh insult you have put upon us.

DUPONT. What insult?

MME. MAIRAUT. You don’t know, I suppose, to whom Mlle. Caroline has
given half her legacy?

DUPONT. No. But I shall be glad to learn.

MME. MAIRAUT. To your clerk, Courthezon.

DUPONT. Courthezon? It’s a lie!

MME. DUPONT. Courthezon!

MME. MAIRAUT. She has just told me so herself.

  _Caroline comes in._

  MME. DUPONT.  { Caroline, is it really to Courthezon that
                { you’ve given the fifteen thousand
                { francs?
                {
  DUPONT.       { You have given fifteen thousand francs
                { to Courthezon!
                {
  MME. MAIRAUT. { Isn’t it to Courthezon that you have
                { given the fifteen thousand francs?

CAROLINE. Yes.

DUPONT. You are crazy!

MME. DUPONT. What possessed you to do that?

MME. MAIRAUT. For his invention! An invention not worth twopence,
Antonin says.

MME. DUPONT. You think more of strangers than your own flesh and blood.

DUPONT. Just at the very time when my plant needed renewing.

MME. MAIRAUT. And when her brother-in-law is on the verge of
bankruptcy. Yes, mademoiselle, yes! And this money, which you give to a
crack-brained inventor who is nothing to you, might perhaps have saved
your sister from penury. That is all I have to say to you. Good bye.
[_She goes_].

DUPONT. Well! Perhaps now you’ll tell us why you have done this?

MME. DUPONT. What has taken you? How did such an idea come into your
head?

DUPONT. Do you imagine his invention will make your fortune?

CAROLINE. No.

DUPONT. Do you know anything at all about it?

CAROLINE. No.

MME. DUPONT. Did he ask you to lend him money?

CAROLINE. No.

DUPONT. Then you ought to be put in an asylum. You’re out of your
senses.

MME. DUPONT. I still can’t make out how you came to have such an idea.

CAROLINE [_beginning to cry_] I was unhappy.

DUPONT. What! You give away fifteen thousand francs to the first comer
because you are unhappy!

CAROLINE. I hope he will be grateful for what I have done for him, and
that—

DUPONT. Well?

CAROLINE. I am no longer young, I know; but he is not young either.

DUPONT. You think he will _marry_ you!

CAROLINE. Yes.

DUPONT. Then you don’t know—

MME. DUPONT. Hush.

CAROLINE. I can’t go on living alone. I am too wretched. For a long
time I have thought—when I saw M. Courthezon, so steady and careful and
quiet—I thought I could be happy with him. But I knew he would never
marry me without money, and there was only enough for Julie. The time
when I was most unhappy was when M. Antonin was here. He used to talk
to Julie. They took no notice of me. They used to kiss one another.
And though I don’t think I’m jealous, it made me very wretched. So
when this legacy came, and I knew M. Courthezon needed money for his
invention, I thought I would give him some.

MME. DUPONT. You should at least have given him some idea of what you
meant. It would have saved you from disappointment, my poor child.

DUPONT. You should have spoken to me. I could have told you why you had
nothing to hope in that quarter.

CAROLINE. Nothing to hope? But why? Why?

DUPONT. Because for twenty years Courthezon has been living with a
married woman. He does not speak of it, of course, but they have two
children.

CAROLINE [_faintly_] God have pity on me! [_She almost falls_].

MME. DUPONT. Caroline! My child!

DUPONT. My child. Come, come. You must be reasonable.

MME. DUPONT. You mustn’t cry like that.

CAROLINE [_sobbing_] No.

DUPONT [_to his wife_] This is your fault. We should have told her that
Courthezon—But you always said no.

MME. DUPONT. One can’t tell things like that to a young girl. And
afterwards, when she was grown up, it didn’t seem worth while. [_To
Caroline_] Don’t cry any more, dear.

CAROLINE [_stifling her sobs by a great effort_] I am not crying any
more.

DUPONT. There is only one thing to be done. We must try and get the
money back from Courthezon.

CAROLINE. No! No!

DUPONT. We shall see. [_He hurries out_].

CAROLINE. Stop him. Stop him, mother. Go at once. Stop him, I beg of
you.

MME. DUPONT. Very well, dear. [_She follows her husband_].

  _Caroline is left alone for a moment. Then Angèle comes in._

ANGÈLE [_very tenderly_] Caroline, are you in trouble?

CAROLINE [_in a low voice_] Yes.

ANGÈLE. What about? Tell me.

CAROLINE [_in an expressionless voice, but not angrily_]. No. It is
over now.

ANGÈLE. You won’t tell me?

CAROLINE [_coldly_] It would be useless.

ANGÈLE. Who knows? Come. I can see you have been crying.

CAROLINE. Yes. We are very unfortunate, Julie and I.

ANGÈLE. Julie?

CAROLINE. She is leaving her husband.

ANGÈLE. Why?

CAROLINE. They cannot go on living together any longer.

ANGÈLE. And you?

CAROLINE. I? [_She makes a gesture of hopelessness_].

  _Julie comes in._

JULIE. I was looking for you, Caroline. I am going away sooner than I
expected. They say my husband is coming here. I do not wish ever to see
him again. So I am going.

CAROLINE. What will you do?

JULIE. I shall do as you do; hire a room somewhere and get work.

CAROLINE. What kind of work?

JULIE. I don’t know. Anything I can get.

CAROLINE. Don’t do that, Julie. Don’t! [_Deeply distressed_] If you
only knew!

JULIE. What?

CAROLINE. The wretchedness of living alone.

JULIE. I’m not afraid. I shall work so hard that I shall have no time
for moping.

CAROLINE. You will work. [_She sighs_]. It isn’t easy for a woman who
is alone to earn her living.

JULIE. Nonsense.

CAROLINE. I know what I’m talking about. Sometimes when I take my work
to the shop they refuse it with an insolent contempt they would never
dare to show to a man. It’s true. For I am doubly unprotected since I
am a woman and I need work.

JULIE. But in your own room, at least, you are free.

CAROLINE. Free! [_With a mirthless laugh_]. If that is freedom, give me
slavery.

JULIE. I shall have friends.

CAROLINE. Do you think so? The women will have nothing to do with you
because you’ll be a wife living apart from her husband, and because
you will be dull. And the men? What will people say if they visit you?

JULIE. Little I care what people will say.

CAROLINE. Still for your own sake you will have to send them away.

JULIE. What do you advise, then? That I should remain with my husband?

CAROLINE. Ah, Julie dear, you complain of not being loved as you wish
to be. What can _I_ say to that, I whom no man will ever take in his
arms? I who feel myself a thing apart, useless, absurd, incomplete.
You don’t know what a void that means for a woman: to have no one to
forgive, no one to devote herself to. And the world sneers at women for
remaining single. It makes their loneliness a reproach. Look at me,
hardly allowed to dispose of my own property, black looks all round me
because I have dared to use my own money in my own way.

JULIE. Poor Caroline.

CAROLINE. Yes. You may well pity me. And if I told you all. I turned to
religion for consolation. For a while it cheated my craving for love;
but it couldn’t give me peace, and it has only left me more bitter and
more disillusioned. For months I buoyed myself up on one last hope.
I was a fool. [_Weeping_] Ah, no one need tell me how absurd it was.
I know it well enough. I, at my age and in these clothes, much like
everyone else’s clothes, only everything looks ridiculous on me. _I_ to
fall in love! I must be crazy. Don’t laugh at me. I have suffered so
much. I knew he couldn’t love me, but I hoped he would be grateful for
what I—I only wanted his gratitude and his pity, no more, I swear to
you. And now it seems there is some other woman. [_A pause_]. Oh, what
good was it to guard my good name as a miser guards his gold if this
is all? No, Julie; don’t spoil your life a second time. If you cannot
resign yourself to living with your husband, at least don’t follow my
example. Don’t try to live my life. One of us is enough. Don’t try to
earn your bread. It is too hard, and men have made it too humiliating.

JULIE. But, Caroline, if people see me accepting hardship with courage,
living alone deliberately, because I choose, surely the dignity of my
life will make them respect me?

CAROLINE. No one will believe in the dignity of your life.

JULIE. Then it is monstrous! That is all I can say. Monstrous! And
since to pay for bread to eat and clothes to wear and a roof to cover
me I must either give myself to a husband I hate or to a lover whom,
perhaps, I may love, I choose the lover. If I must sell myself to
someone, I prefer to choose the buyer.

ANGÈLE. You are mad! Mad! Be reconciled to your husband. That is the
best thing you can do.

JULIE. So everybody says. Well, I tell you I will not. I will not.

ANGÈLE. You would soon be glad enough to have your married life back
again, bad as it may be; or even Caroline’s poverty.

JULIE [_scornfully_] You think so.

ANGÈLE [_passionately_] You don’t know what you are saying. You don’t
understand, Julie. You to talk like that! You to wish—Oh, you don’t
understand.

JULIE. You did it yourself.

ANGÈLE [_with great emotion_] Yes. I did it. But I would strangle
myself rather than begin it again. Julie, I entreat you. What am I to
say? How am I to stop you? I can’t tell you and Caroline all the shame
I have endured. Oh, don’t make me do that.

JULIE. Well, you’re happy _now_, at least.

ANGÈLE. Happy! When I went off with Georges—they told you, didn’t they?
Well, his people got him away from me. His mother was dying of grief.
Yes: I know that is not what you wish to hear, but I must tell you,
that you may understand how I came to fall as low as I did. I was left
alone with the child. I had to feed it, hadn’t I? You can understand
that, at least. But how? Work? I tried to get work. But they told me to
wait. How was I to wait? And then—my God! that I should have to tell
you all this—then I let myself go. [_She sobs_]. And afterwards—No:
I can’t speak of it. But you understand, Julie. You can guess. You
can imagine what my life was when you see that even now I can’t
bring myself to tell you about it. [_Mastering herself_]. You think
women—women like me—are happy because you see us laugh. But to laugh is
our trade. We are paid for that. And I swear to you often we would ask
nothing better than just to sit and cry. And you talk of _choosing_!
You poor child. Do you suppose we women _choose_? Oh, if you could but
know how one comes to loathe the whole world, to be wicked, _wicked_!
They despise us so. We have no friends, no pity, no justice. We are
robbed, exploited. I tell you all this anyhow, just as it comes, but
you understand, don’t you? And once you start downhill you can’t stop.
That is our life, the life of women like me. That is the slough in
which I have struggled ten years. No, no, Julie! No, little sister.
I implore you don’t do as I did. It is too horrible, too abject, too
degraded.

JULIE. Poor Angèle.

ANGÈLE. You understand, don’t you?

JULIE. Yes.

ANGÈLE [_rising_] I must go. Good-bye. I dare not look either of you in
the face again now that you know everything, now that I remember what I
once was. I knew you could never have anything more to do with me. But
I felt such a craving to be loved that I half fancied you, at least,
Caroline—I see I was wrong. Well, good-bye. 1 am going away. Forgive
me, both of you, for what I have done. Goodbye. [_She turns to the
door_].

CAROLINE. Angèle! [_A pause. Angèle turns at the door_]. I pity you
with all my heart. [_Another pause_]. May I kiss you? [_Angèle throws
herself into her arms_].

ANGÈLE. Caroline! My kind, good Caroline!

  _The three sisters embrace with tears._

  _Dupont, Antonin, and Mairaut come in._

ANTONIN [_pushed forward by his father. To Julie_] My dear wife, I have
come to ask you to forgive me.

JULIE. It is I who ask _you_ to forgive _me_. I was full of romantic
ideas. I thought marriage something quite different from what it is.
Now that I understand I will be reasonable. One must make allowances. I
will make some—to myself.

DUPONT. That’s right.

ANTONIN. That’s right. You can’t imagine how glad I am that you
understand me at last. It seems to me it’s only from today that our
marriage really begins.

JULIE. Perhaps.

ANTONIN. To celebrate our reconciliation I will give a grand dinner. I
will invite the Pouchelets, the Rambourgs, Lignol—

JULIE [_sadly, and with meaning_] Exactly—Lignol.

DUPONT. Ah, my children, everything comes right when once you make up
your mind to be like the rest of the world.

JULIE [_slowly_] Yes: like the rest of the world. I dreamed of
something better. But it seems it was impossible.
