THE GOLDEN HELMET




_PERSONS IN THE PLAY_


    CUCHULAIN
    LEAGERIE
    CONAL
    EMER, _Cuchulain’s wife_
    LEAGERIE’S WIFE
    CONAL’S WIFE
    LAEG, _Cuchulain’s chariot-driver_
    RED MAN
    HORSEBOYS AND SCULLIONS
    THREE BLACK MEN




THE GOLDEN HELMET


    _A house made of logs. There are two windows at the
    back and a door which cuts off one of the corners of
    the room. Through the door one can see rocks, which
    make the ground outside the door higher than it is
    within, and the sea. Through the windows one can see
    nothing but the sea. There are three great chairs at
    the opposite side to the door, with a table before
    them. There are cups and a flagon of ale on the table._

    _At the Abbey Theatre the house is orange red, and the
    chairs, tables and flagons black, with a slight purple
    tinge which is not clearly distinguishable from the
    black. The rocks are black, with a few green touches.
    The sea is green and luminous, and all the characters,
    except the RED MAN and the _Black Men_ are dressed in
    various tints of green, one or two with touches of
    purple which looks nearly black. The _Black Men_ are
    in dark purple and the RED MAN is altogether dressed
    in red. He is very tall and his height is increased by
    horns on the Golden Helmet. The Helmet has in reality
    more dark green than gold about it. The _Black Men_
    have cats’ heads painted on their black cloth caps. The
    effect is intentionally violent and startling._

CONAL.

Not a sail, not a wave, and if the sea were not purring a little like a
cat, not a sound. There is no danger yet. I can see a long way for the
moonlight is on the sea. [_A horn sounds._

LEAGERIE.

Ah, there is something.

CONAL.

It must be from the land, and it is from the sea that danger comes. We
need not be afraid of anything that comes from the land. [_Looking out
of door._] I cannot see anybody, the rocks and the trees hide a great
part of the pathway upon that side.

LEAGERIE [_sitting at table_].

It sounded like Cuchulain’s horn, but that’s not possible.

CONAL.

Yes, that’s impossible. He will never come home from Scotland. He
has all he wants there. Luck in all he does. Victory and wealth and
happiness flowing in on him, while here at home all goes to rack, and a
man’s good name drifts away between night and morning.

LEAGERIE.

I wish he would come home for all that, and put quiet and respect for
those that are more than she is into that young wife of his. Only this
very night your wife and my wife had to forbid her to go into the
dining-hall before them. She is young, and she is Cuchulain’s wife, and
so she must spread her tail like a peacock.

CONAL [_at door_].

I can see the horn-blower now, a young man wrapped in a cloak.

LEAGERIE.

Do not let him come in. Tell him to go elsewhere for shelter. This is
no place to seek shelter in.

CONAL.

That is right. I will tell him to go away, for nobody must know the
disgrace that is to fall upon Ireland this night.

LEAGERIE.

Nobody of living men but us two must ever know that.

CONAL [_outside door_].

Go away, go away!

    [_A YOUNG MAN covered by a long cloak is standing upon
    the rocks outside door._

YOUNG MAN.

I am a traveller, and I am looking for sleep and food.

CONAL.

A law has been made that nobody is to come into this house to-night.

YOUNG MAN.

Who made that law?

CONAL.

We two made it, and who has so good a right? for we have to guard
this house and to keep it from robbery, and from burning and from
enchantment.

YOUNG MAN.

Then I will unmake the law. Out of my way!

    [_He struggles with CONAL and shoves past into the
    house._

CONAL.

I thought no living man but Leagerie could have stood against me; and
Leagerie himself could not have shoved past me. What is more, no living
man could if I were not taken by surprise. How could I expect to find
so great a strength?

LEAGERIE.

Go out of this: there is another house a little further along the
shore; our wives are there with their servants, and they will give you
food and drink.

YOUNG MAN.

It is in this house I will have food and drink.

LEAGERIE [_drawing his sword_].

Go out of this, or I will make you.

    [_The YOUNG MAN seizes LEAGERIE’S arm, and thrusting
    it up, passes him, and puts his shield over the chair
    where there is an empty place._

YOUNG MAN [_at table_].

It is here I will spend the night, but I won’t tell you why till I
have drunk. I am thirsty. What, the flagon full and the cups empty and
Leagerie and Conal there! Why, what’s in the wind that Leagerie and
Conal cannot drink?

LEAGERIE.

It is Cuchulain.

CONAL.

Better go away to Scotland again, or if you stay here ask no one what
has happened or what is going to happen.

CUCHULAIN.

What more is there that can happen so strange as that I should come
home after years and that you should bid me begone?

CONAL.

I tell you that this is no fit house to welcome you, for it is a
disgraced house.

CUCHULAIN.

What is it you are hinting at? You were sitting there with ale beside
you and the door open, and quarrelsome thoughts. You are waiting for
something or someone. It is for some messenger who is to bring you to
some spoil, or to some adventure that you will keep for yourselves.

LEAGERIE.

Better tell him, for he has such luck that it may be his luck will
amend ours.

CONAL.

Yes, I had better tell him, for even now at this very door we saw what
luck he had. He had the slope of the ground to help him. Is the sea
quiet?

LEAGERIE [_looks out of window_].

There is nothing stirring.

CONAL.

Cuchulain, a little after you went out of this country we were sitting
here drinking. We were merry. It was late, close on to midnight, when a
strange-looking man with red hair and a great sword in his hand came in
through that door. He asked for ale and we gave it to him, for we were
tired of drinking with one another. He became merry, and for every joke
we made he made a better, and presently we all three got up and danced,
and then we sang, and then he said he would show us a new game. He said
he would stoop down and that one of us was to cut off his head, and
afterwards one of us, or whoever had a mind for the game, was to stoop
down and have his head whipped off. ‘You take off my head,’ said he,
‘and then I take off his head, and that will be a bargain and a debt
between us. A head for a head, that is the game,’ said he. We laughed
at him and told him he was drunk, for how could he whip off a head when
his own had been whipped off? Then he began abusing us and calling
us names, so I ran at him and cut his head off, and the head went on
laughing where it lay, and presently he caught it up in his hands and
ran out and plunged into the sea.

CUCHULAIN [_laughs_].

I have imagined as good, when I had as much ale, and believed it too.

LEAGERIE [_at table_].

I tell you, Cuchulain, you never did. You never imagined a story like
this.

CONAL.

Why must you be always putting yourself up against Leagerie and myself?
and what is more, it was no imagination at all. We said to ourselves
that all came out of the flagon, and we laughed, and we said we will
tell nobody about it. We made an oath to tell nobody. But twelve months
after when we were sitting by this table, the flagon between us—

LEAGERIE.

But full up to the brim—

CONAL.

The thought of that story had put us from our drinking—

LEAGERIE.

We were telling it over to one another—

CONAL.

Suddenly that man came in with his head on his shoulders again, and the
big sword in his hand. He asked for payment of his debt, and because
neither I nor Leagerie would let him cut off our heads he began abusing
us and making little of us, and saying that we were a disgrace, and
that all Ireland was disgraced because of us. We had not a word to say.

LEAGERIE.

If you had been here you would have been as silent as we were.

CONAL.

At last he said he would come again in twelve months and give us one
more chance to keep our word and pay our debt. After that he went down
into the sea again. Will he tell the whole world of the disgrace that
has come upon us, do you think?

CUCHULAIN.

Whether he does or does not, we will stand there in the door with our
swords out and drive him down to the sea again.

CONAL.

What is the use of fighting with a man whose head laughs when it has
been cut off?

LEAGERIE.

We might run away, but he would follow us everywhere.

CONAL.

He is coming; the sea is beginning to splash and rumble as it did
before he came the last time.

CUCHULAIN.

Let us shut the door and put our backs against it.

LEAGERIE.

It is too late. Look, there he is at the door. He is standing on the
threshold.

    [_A MAN dressed in red, with a great sword and red
    ragged hair, and having a Golden Helmet on his head, is
    standing on the threshold._

CUCHULAIN.

Go back into the sea, old red head! If you will take off heads,
take off the head of the sea turtle of Muirthemne, or of the pig
of Connaught that has a moon in his belly, or of that old juggler
Manannan, son of the sea, or of the red man of the Boyne, or of the
King of the Cats, for they are of your own sort, and it may be they
understand your ways. Go, I say, for when a man’s head is off it does
not grow again. What are you standing there for? Go down, I say. If I
cannot harm you with the sword I will put you down into the sea with my
hands. Do you laugh at me, old red head? Go down before I lay my hands
upon you.

RED MAN.

So you also believe I was in earnest when I asked for a man’s head?
It was but a drinker’s joke, an old juggling feat, to pass the time.
I am the best of all drinkers and tipsy companions, the kindest there
is among the Shape-changers of the world. Look, I have brought this
Golden Helmet as a gift. It is for you or for Leagerie or for Conal,
for the best man, and the bravest fighting-man amongst you, and you
yourselves shall choose the man. Leagerie is brave, and Conal is brave.
They risk their lives in battle, but they were not brave enough for my
jokes and my juggling. [_He lays the Golden Helmet on the ground._]
Have I been too grim a joker? Well, I am forgiven now, for there is the
Helmet, and let the strongest take it.

    [_He goes out._

CONAL [_taking Helmet_].

It is my right. I am a year older than Leagerie, and I have fought in
more battles.

LEAGERIE [_strutting about stage, sings_].

    Leagerie of the Battles
    Has put to the sword
    The cat-headed men
    And carried away
    Their hidden gold.

    [_He snatches Helmet at the last word._

CONAL.

Give it back to me, I say. What was the treasure but withered leaves
when you got to your own door?

CUCHULAIN.

    [_Taking the Helmet from LEAGERIE._]

Give it to me, I say.

CONAL.

You are too young, Cuchulain. What deeds have you to be set beside our
deeds?

CUCHULAIN.

I have not taken it for myself. It will belong to us all equally. [_He
goes to table and begins filling Helmet with ale._] We will pass it
round and drink out of it turn about and no one will be able to claim
that it belongs to him more than another. I drink to your wife, Conal,
and to your wife, Leagerie, and I drink to Emer my own wife. [_Shouting
and blowing of horns in the distance._] What is that noise?

CONAL.

It is the horseboys and the huntboys and the scullions quarrelling.
I know the sound, for I have heard it often of late. It is a good
thing that you are home, Cuchulain, for it is your own horseboy and
chariot-driver, Laeg, that is the worst of all, and now you will keep
him quiet. They take down the great hunting-horns when they cannot
drown one another’s voices by shouting. There—there—do you hear them
now? [_Shouting so as to be heard above the noise._] I drink to your
good health, Cuchulain, and to your young wife, though it were well if
she did not quarrel with my wife.

    _Many men, among whom is LAEG, chariot-driver of
    CUCHULAIN, come in with great horns of many fantastic
    shapes._

LAEG.

I am Cuchulain’s chariot-driver, and I say that my master is the best.

ANOTHER.

He is not, but Leagerie is.

ANOTHER.

No, but Conal is.

LAEG.

Make them listen to me, Cuchulain.

ANOTHER.

No, but listen to me.

LAEG.

When I said Cuchulain should have the Helmet, they blew the horns.

ANOTHER.

Conal has it. The best man has it.

CUCHULAIN.

Silence, all of you. What is all this uproar, Laeg, and who began it?

    [_The _Scullions_ and the _Horseboys_ point at LAEG and
    cry, ‘_He began it_.’ They keep up an all but continual
    murmur through what follows._

LAEG.

A man with a red beard came where we were sitting, and as he passed me
he cried out that they were taking a golden helmet or some such thing
from you and denying you the championship of Ireland. I stood up on
that and I cried out that you were the best of the men of Ireland. But
the others cried for Leagerie or Conal, and because I have a big voice
they got down the horns to drown my voice, and as neither I nor they
would keep silent we have come here to settle it. I demand that the
Helmet be taken from Conal and be given to you.

    [_The _Horseboys_ and the _Scullions_ shout, ‘_No, no;
    give it to Leagerie_,’ ‘_The best man has it_,’ etc._

CUCHULAIN.

It has not been given to Conal or to anyone. I have made it into a
drinking-cup that it may belong to all. I drank and then Conal drank.
Give it to Leagerie, Conal, that he may drink. That will make them see
that it belongs to all of us.

A SCULLION OR HORSEBOY.

Cuchulain is right.

ANOTHER.

Cuchulain is right, and I am tired blowing on the big horn.

LAEG.

Cuchulain, you drank first.

ANOTHER.

He gives it to Leagerie now, but he has taken the honour of it for
himself. Did you hear him say he drank the first? He claimed to be the
best by drinking first.

ANOTHER.

Did Cuchulain drink the first?

LAEG [_triumphantly_].

You drank the first, Cuchulain.

CONAL.

Did you claim to be better than us by drinking first?

    [_LEAGERIE and CONAL draw their swords._

CUCHULAIN.

Is it that old dried herring, that old red juggler who has made us
quarrel for his own comfort? [_The _Horseboys_ and the _Scullions_
murmur excitedly._] He gave the Helmet to set us by the ears, and
because we would not quarrel over it, he goes to Laeg and tells him
that I am wronged. Who knows where he is now, or who he is stirring up
to make mischief between us? Go back to your work and do not stir from
it whatever noise comes to you or whatever shape shows itself.

A SCULLION.

Cuchulain is right. I am tired blowing on the big horn.

CUCHULAIN.

Go in silence.

    [_The _Scullions_ and _Horseboys_ turn towards
    the door, but stand still on hearing the voice of
    LEAGERIE’S WIFE outside the door._

LEAGERIE’S WIFE.

My man is the best. I will go in the first. I will go in the first.

EMER.

My man is the best, and I will go in first.

CONAL’S WIFE.

No, for my man is the best, and it is I that should go first.

    [_LEAGERIE’S WIFE and CONAL’S WIFE struggle in the
    doorway._


_LEAGERIE’S WIFE sings._

    My man is the best.
    What other has fought
    The cat-headed men
    That mew in the sea
    And carried away
    Their long-hidden gold?
    They struck with their claws
    And bit with their teeth,
    But Leagerie my husband
    Put all to the sword.

CONAL’S WIFE.

    [_Putting her hand over the other’s mouth and getting
    in front of her._]

    My husband has fought
    With strong men in armour.
    Had he a quarrel
    With cats, it is certain
    He’d war with none
    But the stout and heavy
    With good claws on them.
    What glory in warring
    With hollow shadows
    That helplessly mew?

EMER.

    [_Thrusting herself between them and forcing both of
    them back with her hands._]

I am Emer, wife of Cuchulain, and no one shall go in front of me, or
sing in front of me, or praise any that I have not a mind to hear
praised.

    [_CUCHULAIN puts his spear across the door._

CUCHULAIN.

All of our three wives shall come in together, and by three doors equal
in height and in breadth and in honour. Break down the bottoms of the
windows.

    [_While CONAL and LEAGERIE are breaking down the
    bottoms of the windows each of their wives goes to the
    window where her husband is._

    _While the windows are being broken down EMER sings._

    My man is the best.
    And Conal’s wife
    And the wife of Leagerie
    Know that they lie
    When they praise their own
    Out of envy of me.
    My man is the best,
    First for his own sake,
    Being the bravest
    And handsomest man
    And the most beloved
    By the women of Ireland
    That envy me,
    And then for his wife’s sake
    Because I’m the youngest
    And handsomest queen.

    [_When the windows have been made into doors, CUCHULAIN
    takes his spear from the door where EMER is, and all
    three come in at the same moment._

EMER.

I am come to praise you and to put courage into you, Cuchulain, as a
wife should, that they may not take the championship of the men of
Ireland from you.

LEAGERIE’S WIFE.

You lie, Emer, for it is Cuchulain and Conal who are taking the
championship from my husband.

CONAL’S WIFE.

Cuchulain has taken it.

CUCHULAIN.

Townland against townland, barony against barony, kingdom against
kingdom, province against province, and if there be but two door-posts
to a door the one fighting against the other. [_He takes up the Helmet
which LEAGERIE had laid down upon the table when he went to break out
the bottom of the window._] This Helmet will bring no more wars into
Ireland. [_He throws it into the sea._]

LEAGERIE’S WIFE.

You have done that to rob my husband.

CONAL’S WIFE.

You could not keep it for yourself, and so you threw it away that
nobody else might have it.

CONAL.

You should not have done that, Cuchulain.

LEAGERIE.

You have done us a great wrong.

EMER.

Who is for Cuchulain?

CUCHULAIN.

Let no one stir.

EMER.

Who is for Cuchulain, I say?

    [_She draws her dagger from her belt and sings the same
    words as before, flourishing it about. While she has
    been singing, CONAL’S WIFE and LEAGERIE’S WIFE have
    drawn their daggers and run at her to kill her, but
    CUCHULAIN has forced them back. CONAL and LEAGERIE have
    drawn their swords to strike CUCHULAIN._

CONAL’S WIFE.

    [_While EMER is still singing._]

Silence her voice, silence her voice, blow the horns, make a noise!

    [_The _Scullions_ and _Horseboys_ blow their horns or
    fight among themselves. There is a deafening noise and
    a confused fight. Suddenly three black hands holding
    extinguishers come through the window and extinguish
    the torches. It is now pitch dark but for a very faint
    light outside the house which merely shows that there
    are moving forms, but not who or what they are, and in
    the darkness one can hear low terrified voices._

FIRST VOICE.

Did you see them putting out the torches?

ANOTHER VOICE.

They came up out of the sea, three black men.

ANOTHER VOICE.

They have heads of cats upon them.

ANOTHER VOICE.

They came up mewing out of the sea.

ANOTHER VOICE.

How dark it is! one of them has put his hand over the moon.

    [_A light gradually comes into the windows as if
    shining from the sea. The RED MAN is seen standing in
    the midst of the house._

RED MAN.

I demand the debt that is owing. I demand that some man shall stoop
down that I may cut his head off as my head was cut off. If my debt is
not paid, no peace shall come to Ireland, and Ireland shall lie weak
before her enemies. But if my debt is paid there shall be peace.

CUCHULAIN.

The quarrels of Ireland shall end. What is one man’s life? I will pay
the debt with my own head. [_EMER wails._] Do not cry out, Emer, for
if I were not myself, if I were not Cuchulain, one of those that God
has made reckless, the women of Ireland had not loved me, and you had
not held your head so high. [_He stoops, bending his head. Three _Black
Men_ come to the door. Two hold torches, and one stooping between them
holds up the Golden Helmet. The RED MAN gives one of the _Black Men_
his sword and takes the Helmet._] What do you wait for, old man? Come,
raise up your sword!

RED MAN.

I will not harm you, Cuchulain. I am the guardian of this land, and
age after age I come up out of the sea to try the men of Ireland. I
give you the championship because you are without fear, and you shall
win many battles with laughing lips and endure wounding and betrayal
without bitterness of heart; and when men gaze upon you, their hearts
shall grow greater and their minds clear; until the day come when I
darken your mind, that there may be an end to the story, and a song on
the harp-string.
