                                  TEJA

                           A DRAMA IN ONE ACT




                                PERSONS

      Teja, King of the Goths.
      Balthilda, Queen.
      Amalaberga, her mother.
      Agila, Bishop.
      Euric             \
      Theodemir          >Lords in the former kingdom of the Goths.
      Athanaric         /
      Ildibad, spearbearer of the King.
      Haribalt, a warrior.
      Two Camp Watchers.




                                  TEJA


_The scene represents the King's tent. The curtains are open in the
background and permit a view through the camp of the Gothic warriors,
over toward Vesuvius, and the distant sea, which shine in the splendour
of the setting sun. On the left stands the rudely constructed throne of
the King. In the centre, a table with seats around it. On the right,
the King's couch, consisting of skins pieced together; above, a rack
holding many kinds of weapons. Link torches on the right and left._


                             _FIRST SCENE_.

                           TWO CAMP WATCHERS.

                          First Camp Watcher.

Ho thou! Art thou fallen asleep?

                          Second Camp Watcher.

Why should I be fallen asleep?

                          First Camp Watcher.

Because thou leanest so limber upon thy spear, bent like the bow of a
Hun.

                          Second Camp Watcher.

I stand so bent, because thus hunger gripes me less.

                          First Camp Watcher.

'Tis of no avail. It availeth as little as thy belt. Afterward, in
standing upright, it is the more severe.

                          Second Camp Watcher.

How long is this to last?

                          First Camp Watcher.

Until the ships come--that is simple indeed.

                          Second Camp Watcher.

Yea, but when are the ships coming?

                          First Camp Watcher.

How can I know that? Look toward the heights. There, high upon the
Milchberg, there standeth the watch, and overlooketh the sea for twenty
miles. If he knoweth not! There, behind the Misenian hills, there they
must be coming.

                          Second Camp Watcher.

Verily, if the Byzantian let them pass.

                          First Camp Watcher.

The Byzantian hath no ships.

                          Second Camp Watcher.

The Byzantian hath so many ships that he can surround the whole Italian
world with them as with a hedge; as close as the Byzantian Eunuch hath
surrounded us, these seven weeks.

                          First Camp Watcher.

These seven weeks!

                          Second Camp Watcher.

Knowest thou what I got for nourishment, at noon this day? The same
rind of bacon on which I brake my teeth eight days ago. Forsooth, I had
cut my three crosses, with my knife. That was a meeting again! But
to-day, I devoured it ... a noble feast for a king's marriage day!

                          First Camp Watcher.

Think'st thou the King had more?

                          Second Camp Watcher.

And think'st thou we would suffer ourselves to be beaten to death,
suffer ourselves to be broken on the wheel, to be thrust through and
put to shame, if he had more than we? Think'st thou we would lie here
like chained dogs, and watch, did we not know that there is nothing to
watch?

                          First Camp Watcher.

There is gold enough.

                          Second Camp Watcher.

Gold! Pah, gold! Of gold I have enough myself. In my cellar at
Canusium, I have buried a treasure--eh! ... thou! The wives behind
there in the Wagenburg must have meat left ... wine too, they must
still have.

                          First Camp Watcher.

Yea, the wives are there well enough--thou hast none, I suppose.

                          Second Camp Watcher.

A Greek dishonoured mine, and I stabbed him to death! (_Pauses_.) Good!
The wives must have meat; they must have wine too. But how long that--
(_Noise and clash of weapons, slowly approaching_.) There, the marriage
is surely ended.

                          First Camp Watcher.

Silence! There cometh the aged Ildibad--with the King's shield. (_Both
put themselves on guard_.)


                            _SECOND SCENE_.

                           THE SAME. Ildibad.

                                Ildibad.

(_Hangs the shield in its place, and puts away the weapons lying
about_.) Hath any news been sent down?

                          First Camp Watcher.

Nay!

                                Ildibad.

Are ye hungry?

                          Second Camp Watcher.

Oh, yea.

                                Ildibad.

Hunger is for women--mark ye that! And show not such dark faces to our
young Queen. That becometh not a marriage day.


                             _THIRD SCENE_.

_Surrounded by noisy people_, Teja _and_ Balthilda _have appeared in
front of the tent. They enter led by_ Bishop Agila. _Before them, two
choir-boys swinging censers. Behind them_, Amalaberga, Euric,
Athanaric, Theodemir, _and other lords and military leaders. The tent
covers are let down. Exeunt the watchers_.

(Bishop _lets go the hands of the bridal pair, and turns back to_
Amalaberga.)

(Teja _stands gloomy and brooding_. Balthilda _casts a shy imploring
look around her. Painful silence_.)

                          Ildibad (_softly_).

Now must thou say something, King, to welcome thy young wife.

                            Teja (_softly_).

Must I? (_Taking one of the choir-boys by the nape of the neck_.) Not
so vehemently, boy; the smoke cometh up into our nostrils. What dost
thou when thou wieldest not thy censer?

                                  Boy.

I wield my sword, King.

                                 Teja.

That is right. But make ye haste with wielding the sword, or ye may
easily be too late. (_Softly_.) Nothing to be seen of the ships,
Ildibad?

                                Ildibad.

Nothing, my King. But thou must speak to thy young wife.

                                 Teja.

Yea ... so now I have a wife, Bishop?

                                Bishop.

Here standeth thy wife. King, and waiteth on thy word.

                                 Teja.

Forgive me, Queen, if I find not this word. I have been brought up in
the midst of battles, and other dwelling-place have I not known. It
will be hard for thee to share this with me.

                               Balthilda.

King ... my mother ... taught me ... (_She stops_.)

                    Teja (_with assumed kindness_).

And what taught thee thy mother?

                              Amalaberga.

That a wife belongeth to her husband--above all, in the hour of
distress; she taught her that, King.

                                 Teja.

That may indeed be true and holy to ye wives.... If only the husband
also belonged to his wife in the hour of distress. And yet one thing,
Amalaberga. It hath been told me that in the morning, cocks crow near
ye wives yonder in the Wagenburg. For weeks, the warriors have eaten no
meat. I counsel ye, give them the cocks. (Amalaberga _bows_.)

                                Bishop.

My King!

                                 Teja.

Heh! Thou hast but now spoken so beautifully at the field-altar,
Bishop. Dost thou desire to preach so soon again?

                                Bishop.

I will speak to thee, because bitterness devoureth thy soul.

                                 Teja.

Verily? Thou thinkest it? Then I give ear.

                                Bishop.

Behold, like the spirit of divine wrath, so hast thou risen up among
us, young man.... Not thy years did the nation count, only thy
deeds.... Old men bowed willingly to thy youth, and since thou hadst
yet a long time to serve, as one of the humblest, wert thou already our
ruler. From the golden throne of Theoderic, where mercy had sat in
judgment, where Totilas bestowed pardon with a smile, rang out sternly
thy bloody word ... And woe clave to us as a poisoned wound.... Pursued
hither and thither beneath the hot outpourings of Vesuvius, we are now
encamped with women and children; while Byzantium, with its hireling
soldiers, holdeth us surrounded.

                                 Teja.

That it surely doth, ha, ha! Not a mouse can come through.

                                Bishop.

Our gaze wandereth wistfully seaward: for thence hath God promised us
bread.

                                 Teja.

No tidings of the ships?

                           Ildibad (softly).

Nothing.

                                Bishop.

Before we armed ourselves for a new war with misery, as free men, true
to the ancient law, we determined to choose thee a wife, for in his own
body should the King taste why the Goth loveth death.

                                 Teja.

Found ye that your King loved life overmuch?

                                Bishop.

My King!

                                 Teja.

Nay, that dared ye not, for every hour of this life would hold ye up to
mockery.... And even if the ancient law required it, why must ye weld
me with this young thing which, trembling for fear before me and ye,
hideth in her mother's skirts? And especially on so fitting a day, when
hunger doth furnish the marriage music.... Look upon me, Queen--I must
call thee by thy title of a half-hour, for, by God! I hardly yet know
thy name. I pray thee, look upon me! Dost thou know me?

                               Balthilda.

Thou art the King, Sire.

                                 Teja.

Yea. But for thee I should be man, not King.... And knowest thou what
manner of man standeth here before thee?... Behold! These arms have
been hitherto plunged in reeking blood, not the blood of men shed in
manly strife, I speak not of that, that honoureth the man--blood of
unarmed pale children, of--(_shudders_)--Thou shalt have great joy, if
I come with these arms to wind them about thy neck.... Dost thou indeed
hear me? Have I not a beautiful voice, a sweet voice? Only it is a
little hoarse. It is weary with screaming loud commands to murder....
Peculiar pleasure shall be thine when thou hearest tender words with
this bewitching hoarseness. Am I not truly a born lover? These wise men
knew that; therefore they taught me my calling.... Or believe ye, it
was your duty to beguile your King in the weariness of camp life; as
the great Justinian dallied in golden Byzantium, and sent forth his
eunuchs to slay Gothic men? Ha, ha, ha!

                                Bishop.

My King, take heed lest thou be angry.

                                 Teja.

I thank thee, friend. Yet that signifieth nothing. It is but my
marriage humour.... But now I will speak to ye in earnest--(_Ascends to
the high seat of the throne_.) On the golden throne of Theoderic, where
mercy sat in judgment, can I, alas! not take my place; for that is
being chopped into firewood at Byzantium.... Neither smiling like
Totilas can I pardon, for no one longer desireth our pardon.... From
the glorious nation of the Goths, there hath sprung a horde of hungry
wolves therefore it needeth a wolf as master. Thou, Bishop, didst call
me the spirit of divine wrath, which I am not.... I am but the spirit
of your despair. As one who all his life hath hoped for nothing, hath
wished for nothing, I stand before you, and so I shall fall before you.
That ye knew, and therefore ye are wrong, ye men, to reproach me
secretly. Contradict me not!... I read it clearly enough between your
lowering brows.... Because it goeth ill with us, make not a scapegoat
of me--that I counsel ye.

                               Theodemir.

King, wound us not.... The last drop of our blood belongeth to thee.
Cast us not into the pot with these old men.

                                 Euric.

We old men fight as well as they; and love, young man, as well as they.

                                 Teja.

Then let that suffice. Your Queen shall soon enough learn how, in
misfortune, friends quarrel among themselves. And as ye pass through
the camp, tell the warriors, the only thing that frets the King this
day this day of joy, is it not?--is that he hath not the power to offer
them a worthy marriage feast ... or yet perchance-- Ildibad.

                                Ildibad.

(_Who on the right has secretly spoken in bewilderment to a watcher who
has just entered_.) Yea, Sire.

                                 Teja.

What have we still in our stores, old man?

                  Ildibad (_controlling his emotion_).

Truly, thou hast given away almost all thy provisions.

                                 Teja.

I ask thee, what remaineth?

                                Ildibad.

A jar of fermented milk, and two stale crusts of bread.

                                 Teja.

Ha, ha, ha! Now thou seest, Queen, what a poor husband thou hast got.
Yet if the ships be there, as the people say, then will I do royal
honours to every one, even as is his due. Yet tell it not, that would
mar their joy. But if they hear the trumpets sound, then tell them
there will be meat and wine on the long tables, so much as--

(_To_ Ildibad, _who glides across the stage to his side_) What is it?

                          Ildibad (_softly_).

The watch departeth. The ships are lost.

                                 Teja.

(_Without the least change of countenance_.) Lost--how--in what way?

                                Ildibad.

Treason.

                                 Teja.

Yea, verily! Yea--meat and wine so much as each one will, at long white
tables--I shall have it divided--and Sicilian fruits for the women, and
sweetmeats from Massilia. (_Sinks reeling upon the seat of the throne,
and gazes absently into the distance_.)

                                The Men.

What aileth the King? Look to the King!

                               Balthilda.

Surely he is hungry, mother. (_Approaches him. The men draw back_.) My
King!

                                 Teja.

Who art thou, woman? What wilt thou, woman?

                               Balthilda.

Can I help thee, Sire?

                                 Teja.

Ah, it is thou, the Queen! Pardon me; and pardon me, also, ye men.
(_Rises_.)

                                Bishop.

King, thou must husband thy strength.

                               Theoderic.

Yea, King, for the sake of us all.

                                The Men.

For the sake of us all.

                                 Teja.

In truth, ye warn me rightly. Women, I pray ye, return to your
encampment. We have to take counsel. Do thou, Bishop, see well to their
safe conduct.

                         Amalaberga (_softly_).

Make thy obeisance, child!

                         Balthilda (_softly_).

Mother, will he speak no more to me?

                              Amalaberga.

Make thy obeisance! (_Balthilda obeys_.)

                                 Teja.

Fare ye well! (_Exeunt_ Balthilda, Amalaberga, Bishop. _Shouts of
applause without, greet them_.)


                            _FOURTH SCENE_.

                                 Teja.

Theodemir. Euric. Ildibad. The Watcher. The Lords.

                                 Teja.

I have sent away the women and the priest; for what comes now
concerneth us warriors alone. Where is the watcher? Come forth, man.

                          The Men (muttering).

The watcher from the hill! The watcher!

                                 Teja.

Hereby ye know, men: the ships are lost. (_Tumult. Cries of horror_.)

                                 Teja.

Quiet, friends, quiet! Thy name is Haribalt.

                                Watcher.

Yea, Sire!

                                 Teja.

How long hast thou stood at thy post?

                                Watcher.

Since early yesterday, Sire.

                                 Teja.

Where are thy two companions?

                                Watcher.

They remain above, as thou hast commanded, Sire.

                                 Teja.

Good, then what saw ye?

                                Watcher.

The smoke of Vesuvius, Sire, descended upon the sea, beyond the
promontory of Misenum. Thus we saw nothing until to-day about the sixth
hour of the evening. Then suddenly the ships appeared five in number
quite near the shore, there where it is said a city of the Romans lies
buried in ruins.... One of us determined to hasten away, since----

                                 Teja.

Stay! What signal bare the ships?

                                Watcher.

The foresail bound crosswise and----

                                 Teja.

And?

                                Watcher.

A palm branch at the stern.

                                 Teja.

Ye saw the palm branch?

                                Watcher.

As I see thee, Sire.

                                 Teja.

Good, go on.

                                Watcher.

Then we perceived that the fishing-boats with which the Byzantians take
their food, closely surrounded the ships, and then----

                                 Teja.

What then?

                                Watcher.

Verily, Sire, they steered quite peaceably toward the camp of the
enemy. There they unloaded. (_The men cover their heads. Silence_.)

                                 Teja.

(_Who looks, smiling, from one to the other_.) It is good.... That is:
thou shalt say nothing there without.... From me they should learn it.
(_Exit Watcher_.)


                             _FIFTH SCENE_.

       TEJA. THEODEMIR. EURIC. ATHANARIC _and the_ OTHERS. LORDS.

                                 Teja.

Your counsel, ye men!

                               Theodemir.

Sire, we have none to give.

                                 Teja.

And thou, Euric, with all thy wisdom?

                                 Euric.

Sire, I have served the great Theoderic. And yet he would have had none
to give.

                                 Teja.
Come then, I know.... It is easy and quick to be understood: Die!...
Why look ye at me with such mistrust?... Do ye not yet understand me?
Think ye I require ye to wrap yourselves in your mantles, like cowardly
Greeks, and beg your neighbours for a thrust in the back? Be calm:
I will protect you against shame, since I can no more lead you to
honour.--Our place here cannot be taken, so long as thirty of us have
power to wield our spears. But the hour shall come--and at no distant
time--when the last arm, crippled by hunger, can no more be
outstretched to beg quarter of the invading murderers.

                               Theodemir.

No Gothic man doeth that, King!

                                 Teja.

For what thou art, thou canst give surety; for what thou shalt become,
thou givest no surety to me. So I counsel and command ye to prepare
yourselves for the last conflict. In the first gray of the morning, we
shall burst forth from the clefts, and array ourselves against the
Byzantian in open field.

                                  All.

Sire, that is impossible.

                               Theodemir.

King, consider, we are one against a hundred.

                                 Teja.

And thou, Euric?

                                 Euric.

Sire, thou leadest us to destruction.

                                 Teja.

Yea, verily. Said I anything else? Do ye believe me to be so untried in
things of war that I know not that? Why then halt ye? When Totilas led
us, we were more than a hundred thousand. Now we are but five. They all
knew how to die, and can we, a miserable remnant, have forgotten it?

                                  All.

Nay, King, nay!

                                 Euric.

Sire, grant us time to accustom ourselves to that horrible thing.

                                 Teja.

Horrible? What seemeth horrible to ye? I speak not indeed to Romans who
reel from the mass to the lupanar, and from the lupanar to the mass.
Yet there is not one among ye whose breast is not covered with scars
like an old stone with moss. These twenty years ye have made sport of
death, and now it cometh in earnest, doth a Gothic man speak of
"horrible"? What will ye? Will ye lie and hunger? Will ye devour one
the other, like rats? Good. But I shall not do it with ye! Not I!
To-morrow, I take spear and shield, and go to gain on my own account
the bit of death for which I long and languish like a thief since ye
made me leader of your lost cause.--And thou at least, my old
companion, thou comest with me--eh?

                  Ildibad (_falling down before him_).

I thank thee, Sire! Why ask whether I come!

                                  All.

We too, King. We all, we all!

                               Theodemir.

Thou shouldst be praised, King, that thou hast pointed to us the way of
happiness. And be not angry with us, if we were not able straightway to
follow thee. Now I perceive clearly thy great thought. From grief and
discord and despair, we rise, we do not go down to death.... Laughing,
treadeth each on the other's corpse, in order laughing to sink down
like him.... A light will go forth from us over the wide world.... Ah,
that will be a draught from golden goblets--that will be a riot of
exultant joy. Thank thee, my King. Often have I envied thee thy crown,
now I venture to envy it no more.

                                 Teja.

The thing will come to pass for the most part otherwise than thou dost
imagine it, Theodemir. Yet I am glad that among the Goths, such
inspiration still abideth.

                                 Euric.

Also to me, King, grudge not a word; for I have indeed seen golden
days.... Thou art not only the boldest, thou art also the wisest of
all.... Had we now faltered, so should we all have fallen without
defence, by the murderer's sword ... And not only we, but the sick--and
the children--and the wives.

                                 Teja.

Ay, indeed, the wives! Of them I had not thought at all.

                                 Euric.

But now to-morrow, we shall stand in battle, and on the second and
third day, if we hold out so long, so that astonishment and fear at the
miracle will lay hold on the Byzantian and all the rabble of Huns and
Suevians which he draggeth after him.... We cannot utterly destroy
them, but we can bait them with our blood till they be weary.... And
when no one on that side is able to hold spear and bow, then shall the
hour come when the Eunuch will have it said: "Depart in peace." How
many of ye are then still left? I fear not many----

                           Teja (_laughing_).

We, surely not!

                      All (_with cruel laughter_).

Nay, we surely not!

                                 Euric.

Then shall they take wives and children into the midst of them, and,
head high, with naked swords, descend straight through the Byzantian
camp toward Naples, to buy a piece of bread. And I tell ye, with such
fear shall they be gazed at, that not even once shall a dog of the Huns
dare to bark at them.

                                 Teja.

Wife and child! Wife and child! What have we to do with them?

                               Athanaric.

King, thou revilest the dearest of our possessions.

                                 Teja.

Maybe!--I know only that there were too many mouths in the morning when
the rations were divided. Otherwise we might have been able to support
ourselves. And yet, this one thing I say to ye--and I shall enjoin it
on the men without, upon their word as warriors--that none of the women
know aught of our purpose. I will not that even one man be softened by
the tears and cries of women.

                               Athanaric.

Sire, that is inhuman which thou requirest, to take no leave of our
wives.

                                 Teja.

Take leave of them, me notwithstanding, but remain dumb as ye do it. He
that hath wife and child here, let him go to the Wagenburg, and provide
himself food and drink, for the women delight to keep a remnant between
their fingers. This let him share with the unmarried, and be joyful
when he can.

                                 Euric.

And what should they say to their wives, Sire, since already thou hast
strictly forbidden communication?

                                 Teja.

Say ye, it happens because of my marriage! Or the ships are there, if
that sounds more worthy of belief. Say what ye will. Only that one
thing, keep for yourselves.

                               Theodemir.

And wilt thou thyself nevermore see thy young wife?

                                 Teja.

Eh? Nay.... I mark not the least desire to. Surely now I shall speak to
the people. I would that I had thy tongue, Theodemir.--The errand is
troublesome to me, for I should speak great words, and I feel them not.
Come! (_Exeunt all, with_ Ildibad _slowly following_.)


                             _SIXTH SCENE_.


_The stage remains unoccupied for a short time. The voice of the King
is heard, who is received with acclamation. Then after a few seconds,
subdued cries of woe_. Ildibad _returns and sits down upon a stump near
the curtain. Then he lights two torches which he puts into the links,
and prepares the weapons of the King. Outside arises a shout of
enthusiasm, which again is subdued_.


                            _SEVENTH SCENE_.

ILDIBAD. BISHOP AGILA (_tottering in with exhaustion and excitement_).

                                Ildibad.

Wilt thou not be seated, most worthy lord?

                                Bishop.

And goest thou not to hear what the King saith?

                                Ildibad.

That hath naught to do with me, most worthy lord. The King and I--for a
long time, we are united in action.

                                Bishop.

Verily, he standeth there like the angel of death.

                                Ildibad.

Whether angel or devil, it is the same for me. (_The shout of
enthusiasm rises anew and approaches the tent_.)


                            _EIGHTH SCENE_.

     THE SAME. THE KING (_with flaming eyes, pale yet calm_).

                                 Teja.

Are the weapons in order?--Ah, 'tis thou, Bishop!

                                Bishop.

King, my King!

                                 Teja.

Surely, thou shall now be driven to seek another flock, Bishop. Wilt
thou but give me thy blessing, pray give it quickly.... Theodemir is
about to come.

                                Bishop.

And dost thou know thyself to be free, my son, from the trembling of
every dying creature?

                                 Teja.

Bishop, I have been a good servant of thy church. To dedicate her
temples, as once Totilas did, have I not been able; but what there was
to kill, I have killed for her welfare. Shall I perform a posture for
the blessed Arius?

                                Bishop.

My son, I understand thee not.

                                 Teja.

For that I am sorry, my father.

                                Bishop.

And hast thou taken leave?

                                 Teja.

Leave--of whom? Rather have I a mind to cry "welcome"; but yet nothing
is there!

                        Bishop (_indignantly_).

I speak of thy wife, Sire.

                                 Teja.

At this hour, I know only men, Bishop. Of wives I know nothing.
Farewell! (_Enter_ Theodemir _and_ Ildibad.)

                                Bishop.

Farewell--and God be gracious to thy soul!

                                 Teja.

I thank thee, Bishop.... Ah, there art thou, Theodemir. (_Exit_ Bishop
Agila.)


                             _NINTH SCENE_.

Teja. Theodemir. Ildibad (_in the background, occupied with the King's
weapons, going noiselessly in and out_).

                                 Teja.

What are the warriors doing?

                               Theodemir.

They who have their wives here, are gone to the Wagenburg.... There
they will surely eat and drink and play with their children.

                                 Teja.

And is thy wife here also?

                               Theodemir.

Yea, Sire!

                                 Teja.

And thy children?

                               Theodemir.

Two boys, Sire!

                                 Teja.

And thou didst not go?

                               Theodemir.

I waited on thy call, Sire.

                                 Teja.

What hour is it?

                               Theodemir.

The ninth, Sire.

                                 Teja.

And what do they who are free--the unmarried, and they whose wives are
not here?

                               Theodemir.

They lie by the fires and are silent.

                           (_Exit_ Ildibad.)

                                 Teja.

See to it that something is brought to them also. I already ordered it.
Will they sleep?

                               Theodemir.

No one will sleep.

                                 Teja.

At midnight, come and fetch me.

                               Theodemir.

Yea, Sire. (_Makes as if to go_.)

                   Teja (_with a shade of anxiety_).

Theodemir, stay!... Thou hast always been my adversary.

                               Theodemir.

I was, Sire. For a long time I have ceased to be.

                    Teja (_stretches out his arms_).

Come! (_They hold each other in a close embrace; then they clasp
hands_.) I would fain hold thee here, but truly thou must go to thy
wife. (Ildibad _again enters_.) And forget not to have food brought to
those who are gazing at the fires. They should have occupation.
Brooding profiteth not in such an hour.

                               Theodemir.

Yea, Sire. (_Exit_.)


                             _TENTH SCENE_.

                             TEJA. ILDIBAD.

                                 Teja.

Now, my old man, we should have nothing further to do upon this earth.
Shall we talk?

                                Ildibad.

Sire, if I might beg a favour for myself.

                                 Teja.

Still favours, at this time?... I believe thou wouldst flatter me, old
companion!

                                Ildibad.

Sire, I am old. My arm would grow weary with bearing a spear, more
quickly than is good for thy life. And by my fault shouldst thou not
fall, Sire.... If no one else sleeps, think not evil of me, and let me
sleep away the two hours.

                                 Teja.

(_With a new gleam of deep anxiety_.) Go, but not far away.

                                Ildibad.

Surely, Sire, I have always lain as a dog before thy tent. In respect
of that, on this last night, nothing will be changed.... Hast thou
orders to give, Sire?

                                 Teja.

Good-night! (_Exit_ Ildibad.)


                           _ELEVENTH SCENE_.

TEJA. _Afterward_ BALTHILDA. (TEJA _left alone, throws himself on his
couch, staring straight before him with a bitter, wearied smile_.
BALTHILDA _enters shyly. In one hand she carries a basket containing
meat, bread, and fruits; in the other, a golden tankard of wine. She
advances a few steps toward the table_.)

                         Teja (_half rising_).

Who art thou?

                   Balthilda (_feebly and timidly_).

Knowest thou me not, King?

                    Teja (_rising from his couch_).

The torches burn dimly.... Thy voice I have heard before!... What wilt
thou of me?

                               Balthilda.

I am indeed thy wife, King.

                       Teja (_after a silence_).

And what wilt thou of me?

                               Balthilda.

My mother sendeth me. I am to bring thee food and wine. The others eat
and drink, and so my mother saith---- (_She stops_.)

                                 Teja.

How didst thou enter here?... Did not the watch forbid thee to enter?

                   Balthilda (_drawing herself up_).

I am the Queen, Sire.

                                 Teja.

Yea, verily. And Ildibad, what said he?

                               Balthilda.

Thy old spearbearer lay and slept. I stepped across him, Sire.

                                 Teja.

I thank thee, Balthilda.... I am not hungry. I thank thee. (_Silence_.
Balthilda _stands and looks tearfully at him_.)

                                 Teja.

I see, thou hast still a request to make of me. I pray thee, speak!

                               Balthilda.

My King, if I return home with a well-filled basket, then shall I be
mocked by all the women.... And the men shall say----

                           Teja (_smiling_).

And what shall the men say?

                               Balthilda.

He esteemeth her so little that--he consenteth not to take food from
her hand.

                                 Teja.

On my word, I assure thee, Balthilda, the men have other things to
think on ... yet nevertheless ... reproach thou shalt not suffer
through me. Set thy basket there.... Have ye still much of such things?

                               Balthilda.

Sire, these two weeks have my mother and I and the women about us put
aside the best of our share--flour and fruits--and the fowls have we
not killed till this very day.

                                 Teja.

Then indeed must ye have been mightily hungry, ye women?

                               Balthilda.

Ah, it hath done us no hurt, Sire.... It was for a feast.

                                 Teja.

In truth? Ye believed we should celebrate a feast to-day?

                               Balthilda.

Well ... is it then not a feast, Sire?

                                 Teja.

(_Is silent and bites his nether lip, examining her furtively_.) Wilt
thou not be seated, Balthilda?... I should not yet let thee go home!
That too would be a reproach, would it not?

                (Balthilda _is silent and looks down_.)

                                 Teja.

And if I bade thee, wouldst thou wish to stay?

                               Balthilda.

Sire, how should a wife not wish to stay beside her husband?

                                 Teja.

Hast thou then the feeling in thy heart, that I--am--thy--husband?

                               Balthilda.

Indeed, how could it be otherwise? The Bishop hath joined us together.

                                 Teja.

And wert thou glad when he did it?

                               Balthilda.

Yea.... Nay, I was not glad then.

                                 Teja.

Why not?

                  Balthilda (_with a bright glance_).

Perhaps because, because ... I was afraid, Sire, and I was praying.

                                 Teja.

What didst thou pray?

                               Balthilda.

That God would grant to me, his humble handmaid, the power to bring
thee the happiness which thou needest, and which thou awaitest from me.

                                 Teja.

Which I from thee--that didst thou pray?

                               Balthilda.

Sire, may I not offer thee the food, and the wine?

                                 Teja.

Nay, nay!... Hearken, Balthilda: without, by our fires, are
warriors--they are hungry--I am not hungry.

                               Balthilda.

Sire, give them what thou pleasest ... give them everything!

                                 Teja.

I thank thee, Balthilda. (_Raising the curtain_.) Ho there, watch! Come
in, but prudently so as not to wake the old man.... (_Watcher enters_.)
Here, take this basket with food and wine, and divide it honestly....
Say your Queen sends it.

                                Watcher.

May I thank the Queen, Sire?

        (Teja _nods_. Watcher _shakes her hand heartily. Exit_.)

                                 Teja.

Go--and bring me to eat!

                        Balthilda (_perplexed_).

Sire--why--mockest thou--me?

                                 Teja.

Dost thou then not understand me? If thou wilt be my wife, thou must
offer me my property, not thine!

                               Balthilda.

Is not all of mine thy property, Sire?

                                 Teja.

Hm! (_Silence. He takes her hands._) Call me not Sire and call me not
King.... Knowest thou not my name?

                               Balthilda.

Thy name is Teja!

                                 Teja.

Say it yet once again!

                  Balthilda (_softly, turning away_).

Teja!

                                 Teja.

Is the name so strange to thee?

                     (Balthilda _shakes her head_.)

                                 Teja.

Then why hesitate?

                               Balthilda.

Not for that, Sire! Since I knew that I was to serve thee as thy wife,
I have often named thee by day and in the night. Only I never said it
aloud....

                                 Teja.

And before thou knewest it, what was then thy thought?

                               Balthilda.

Sire, why dost thou ask?

                                 Teja.

And why dost thou not answer?

                               Balthilda.

Sire, when I heard of thy bloody commands, and the others feared
thee--then I often thought: How unhappy must he be that the destiny of
the Goths compelleth him to such deeds!

                                 Teja.

That hast thou thought?--That hast thou----?

                               Balthilda.

Sire, was it wrong that I should think it?

                                 Teja.

Thou hadst never seen my face, and thou didst understand me? And they
who were around me, the wise men and tried soldiers, they understood me
not!... Who art thou, woman? Who hath taught thee to read my heart?
Thee, thee alone of all?

                               Balthilda.

Sire--I----

                                 Teja.

All shuddered and muttering hid themselves from me in corners--and saw
not the way, the only way which haply might still have saved them. When
the butcher's knife was already at their throat, they still told
themselves some tale of compromise. And then came the crafty Greeks,
measured themselves with them, and killed them one by one. Thus
perished the hundred thousand. And I wrapped myself in grief and
anger--I cast hope away from me like a bloody rag, I sprang into the
breach with scornful laughter. I sowed horrors about me, when my own
heart was convulsed with horror of myself. I have not once been drunk
with all the blood. I have killed, killed, and still knew all the
while: it is in vain! (_He sinks to his seat overcome with anguish, and
stares straight before him_.)

             Balthilda (_with a shy attempt at a caress_).

My poor dear King! Dear Teja!

                                 Teja.

(_Raises his head and looks confusedly around him_.) My God, what do I
here?... Why do I tell all this to thee? Thou must not despise me
because I am such a babbler.... Nor must thou believe that it is aught
of remorse that compels me to this confession.... Perhaps I feel pity
for the victims, but my conscience stands high above all that!... Far
higher than my poor Gothic throne.... Look not upon me so.... There is
in thy eye something that compels me to reveal my inmost thought to
thee.... Who hath endued thee with this power over me?... Begone!...
Nay, stay ... Stay! I wish to tell thee yet something, quite in secret,
before thou goest.... Besides, I should not cry out so, otherwise the
watch may hear.... Incline thine ear to me. Never yet have I confessed
it to any man, nor have I held it possible that I should ever confess
it.... I bear an envy within me which devoureth my heart, whenever I
think--knowest thou toward whom?... Toward Totilas.... Yea, toward
Totilas in his grave.... They called him the "shining" Totilas and
their affection still cleaveth to him to-day.... Their eyes still flash
when they even think of him.

                               Balthilda.

Ah, Sire, how thou dost fret thyself!

                          Teja (_anxiously_).

Didst thou ever see him?

                               Balthilda.

Never.

                                 Teja.

God be thanked! For hadst thou ever seen him as I saw him on the
morning of the battle in which he fell ... arrayed in golden armour ...
and the white steed pranced beneath him, and his yellow locks streamed
like sunlight about him. And he laughed the foe in the face.... Laughed
like a child!... Ah, laughing to die like him!

                               Balthilda.

His lot was easy, Sire! He went from hence, but left to thee as an
inheritance the half-destroyed kingdom.... How shouldst thou then have
laughed?

                           Teja (_eagerly_).

Is it not so?--Is it not so?--How ... Ah, that doeth good! (_Stretching
himself_.) Ah, thou doest me good!

                               Balthilda.

How proud thou makest me, Sire!

                                 Teja.

But hadst thou seen him and compared him to me, thou wouldst spit upon
me!

                        Balthilda (_fervently_).

I should have seen only thee, Sire dear, dear Sire!

(Teja _looks askance at her, shyly and distrustfully, then walks
silently to the left, sinks down before the seat on the throne, and
burying his face in the chair, weeps bitterly_.)

                               Balthilda.

(_Follows him shyly and kneels down beside him_.) Teja, beloved, if I
hurt thee, pardon me!

                   Teja (_rises and grasps her arm_).

Tell it to no one!

                               Balthilda.

What, Sire?

                                 Teja.

That thou hast seen me weep! Swear it to me!

                               Balthilda.

It hath been told me that I am now even as a piece of thy body--and of
thy soul also!... Wherefore should I swear?

                                 Teja.

If thou art a piece of my body, then come nearer to me, that thou mayst
not see my tears.

                               Balthilda.

Let me dry them for thee! See, for this cause am I here.

                                 Teja.

Ah, 'tis well with me.... I must indeed have died of shame, for never
yet hath a Gothic man been seen to weep. Even when we buried Totilas,
we wept not.... Yet I am not ashamed.... If I but knew why suddenly it
is so well with me!... Balthilda, I will tell thee something. But thou
must not laugh me to scorn.

                               Balthilda.

How should I laugh at thee, beloved?

                                 Teja.

I am hungry.

                Balthilda (_springing up in surprise_).

Alas, surely thou hast given everything away!

                                 Teja.

Oh, by no means! Go just over there, wilt thou? (_She obeys_.) Behind
my couch--seest thou the fireplace?

                               Balthilda.

Here where the ashes lie?

                                 Teja.

There standeth a chest?

                               Balthilda.

Yea.

                                 Teja.

Wilt thou open the lid?

                               Balthilda.

Ah, it is heavy!

                                 Teja.

Now feel within! Deep, deep!... There Ildibad the old miser--well?

                     Balthilda (_disappointedly_).

A couple of bread crusts; is that all, Sire?

                                 Teja.

There is indeed nothing more.

                               Balthilda.

May I not then go quickly over to the Wagenburg?... Perhaps still ...

                                 Teja.

Oh nay.... They themselves need the fragments.... Bring that hither! As
brothers we shall share it--eh? And then there is sufficient for both.
Wilt thou?

                               Balthilda.

Yea. (_She sits beside him_.)

                                 Teja.

So, now give to me! Ah, that is good to the taste! Is it not good to
the taste? But ah, thou also must eat.

                               Balthilda.

I fear there is not enough for thee.

                                 Teja.

Nay, that is against the agreement.... So.... Is it not good to the
taste?

                               Balthilda.

To me nothing hath ever tasted half so sweet.

                                 Teja.

Pray come nearer to me ... I will take the crumbs from thy lap ...
So--why is it that suddenly I am hungry? See, now we celebrate our
marriage feast.

                               Balthilda.

And better than those without, with meat and wine--do we not?

                                 Teja.

Well, did I not tell thee?... But thou hast a bad seat!

                               Balthilda.

Nay, I am seated well!

                                 Teja.

Come, stand up! Pray, stand up!

                         Balthilda (_rising_).

Well?

                                 Teja.

Sit there, just above!

                        Balthilda (_terrified_).

Upon the throne--for God's sake--how dare I----?

                                 Teja.

Art thou not then the Queen?

                        Balthilda (_decidedly_).

If I must sit there in earnest! But in jest--nay!

                                 Teja.

Ah, the stupid bit of wood! (_He hurls down the throne_.) At least it
should be of use for something!... So now lean against it!

                               Balthilda.

Beloved, doest thou justly?

                          Teja (_surprised_).

Nay! (_He sets the throne up again, leads her to her former place,
and places her head against the seat_.) There indeed thou art well
seated--yea!... And we trespass not against this trash. If the Bishop
had seen that--he, ha, ha, ha! Wait, I will eat again!

                               Balthilda.

There, take!

                                 Teja.

Still--remain quite still! I shall fetch it for myself. (_He kneels
upon the podium beside her_.) Now I am quite upon my knees before
thee.... What is there that we do not learn!... Thou art beautiful!...
I never knew my mother!

                               Balthilda.

Never knew!

                                 Teja.

Never had a sister.... No one.... Never played in my life.... That I am
surely learning last not least.

                               Balthilda.

Why last not least?

                                 Teja.

Ask not--nay? Ah thou, thou! Ha, ha, ha! Pray eat! Bite from mine--yea?
Obediently--thou knowest what the Bishop said?

                Balthilda (_bites and then springs up_).

But wilt thou not also drink?

                                 Teja.

Ah, surely! Bring me only the milk jar! Bring me only the milk jar....
Thou knowest the one that Ildibad told us of.

                  Balthilda (_who has walked across_).

Is this the one?

                            Teja (_rising_).

That is indeed it. But thou also must drink.

                               Balthilda.

Is it fitting so?

                                 Teja.

I know not. It should be!

                               Balthilda.

So be it, then. (_She drinks and shakes with laughter_.) Ugh! That hath
a bad taste.

                                 Teja.

Give it to me. (_He drinks_.) Nay! (_He drinks again_.) Go!... Art thou
then such a despiser of nourishment?... Yea, who art thou then? And how
comest thou hither? And just what wilt thou of me?

                               Balthilda.

I will love thee!

                                 Teja.

Thou--my wife! Thou ... (_They fly into one another's arms. Softly_.)
And wilt thou not kiss me?

                (Balthilda _shakes her head, ashamed_.)

                                 Teja.

Why not?

                  (Balthilda _again shakes her head_.)

                                 Teja.

Yet tell me, why not?

                               Balthilda.

I will tell thee in thine ear.

                                 Teja.

Well?

                               Balthilda.

Thou hast a downy beard.[1]

                                 Teja.

(_Wipes his month in terror, then in assumed anger_.) What have I?
Knowest thou not who I am? How then dost thou suffer thyself to tell
thy King he--say it yet once more! I will but see.

                        Balthilda (_laughing_).

A--downy--beard.

                           Teja (_laughing_).

Now, wait!


                            _TWELFTH SCENE_.

                           THE SAME. ILDIBAD.

                                Ildibad.

Sire, thou calledst? (_He stands rigid with astonishment, and is about
to retire silently_.)

                                 Teja.

(_Collects himself abruptly. He appears to wake out of a dream. His
manners and bearing revert to the gloomy energy which previously had
the ascendency_.) Stop, stay, what happens without?

                                Ildibad.

The warriors return from the Wagenburg, sire, and most of the wives
come with them.

                                 Teja.

Are the leaders assembled?

                                Ildibad.

Yea, Sire.

                                 Teja.

They might have patience for a moment more.

                                Ildibad.

Yea, Sire.

                                 Teja.

For I also have a wife.

                                Ildibad.

Yea, verily, Sire.

                               [_Exit_.]


                          _THIRTEENTH SCENE_.

                            TEJA. BALTHILDA.

                               Balthilda.

Teja, beloved, what happeneth to thee?

                                 Teja.

(_Remains standing before her and takes her head in his hands_.) To me,
it is as if in this hour we had strayed hand in hand through a whole
world of joy and sorrow. That disappeareth--all disappeareth. I am
again the--I was--nay, I am not he.--But be thou high above all the
women, the Queen ... Wilt thou?

                               Balthilda.

Sire, what dost thou require of me?

                                 Teja.

Thou wilt not entreat and wilt not cry out?

                               Balthilda.

Nay, Sire.

                                 Teja.

The day draweth nigh. Before us standeth death.

                               Balthilda.

Sire, I understand thee not. None can attack us, and until the ships
come----

                                 Teja.

The ships come never more.

(Balthilda _strokes herself on the cheeks, and then stands
motionless_.)

                                 Teja.

But we men are going forth upon the field, to fight.

                               Balthilda.

That can ye not do--that is surely--impossible.

                                 Teja.

We must. Art thou the Queen, and perceivest not that we must?

                               Balthilda.

Yea--I--per--ceive--it.

                                 Teja.

The King fights in the foremost rank, and we shall see each other no
more alive.... Knowest thou that?

                               Balthilda.

Yea, I know it!... (_Silence. They look at each other_.)

                                 Teja.

Thy blessing will I have upon the way. (_He sinks on his knees before
her; she lays her hands upon his head, bends down to him, trembling,
and kisses him on the forehead_.)

                                 Teja.

(_Springs up and tears back the curtain_.) Enter, who waiteth there!


                          _FOURTEENTH SCENE_.

THE SAME. AMALABERGA, EURIC, AGILA, ATHANARIC, THEODEMIR, _and other
leaders_.

                              Amalaberga.

King, I sent my child to thee.... I hear ye men have to act.... Give
her again to me.

                                 Teja.

Here hast thou thy child! (_Exeunt_ Amalaberga _and_ Balthilda.)


                           _FIFTEENTH SCENE_.

             THE SAME. _Except_ AMALABERGA _and_ BALTHILDA.

                                 Teja.

(_Stares after them, rouses himself, and perceives the Bishop_.)
Bishop, I treated thee basely this evening. Forgive me and have my
thanks, for surely I also know why the Goth loveth death.... (_Grasps
his sword_.) Now be ye ready? Have the farewells been said?

                               Theodemir.

Sire, we have disobeyed thy command. Which of our wives betrayed it,
and which of us told it, that cannot be determined. Enough, they all
know it.

                                 Teja.

And then have cried ah and woe?

                               Theodemir.

Sire, they have silently kissed the blessing of death upon our brows.

                   Teja (_exclaims half to himself_).

They also! (_Aloud_.) Truly we are a nation of kings. It is our
misfortune. So come! (_He strides to the background. The others follow.
Amid the noisy cries of the people greeting the King, the curtain
falls_.)
