                         THE FAR-AWAY PRINCESS

                          A COMEDY IN ONE ACT




                               CHARACTERS


      The Princess von Geldern.
      Baroness von Brook, her maid of honour.
      Frau von Halldorf.
      Liddy      \
                  > her daughters
      Milly      /
      Fritz Strübel, a student.
      Frau Lindemann.
      Rosa, a waitress.
      A Lackey.


                            The Present Day.


_The scene is laid at an inn situated above a watering-place in central
Germany._





                         THE FAR-AWAY PRINCESS


_The veranda of an inn. The right side of the stage and half of the
background represent a framework of glass enclosing the veranda. The
left side and the other half of the background represent the stone
walls of the house. To the left, in the foreground, a door; another
door in the background, at the left. On the left, back, a buffet and
serving-table. Neat little tables and small iron chairs for visitors
are placed about the veranda. On the right, in the centre, a large
telescope, standing on a tripod, is directed through an open window_.
Rosa, _dressed in the costume of the country, is arranging flowers on
the small tables_. Frau Lindemann, _a handsome, stoutish woman in the
thirties, hurries in excitedly from the left_.


                            Frau Lindemann.

There! Now she can come--curtains, bedding--everything fresh and clean
as new! No, this honour, this unexpected honour--! Barons and counts
have been here often enough. Even the Russian princes sometimes come
up from the Springs. I don't bother my head about them--they're just
like--that!--But a princess--a real princess!

                                 Rosa.

Perhaps it isn't a real princess after all.

                    Frau Lindemann (_indignantly_).

What? What do you mean by that!

                                 Rosa.

I was only thinking that a real princess wouldn't be coming to an inn
like this. Real princesses won't lie on anything but silks and velvets.
You just wait and see; it's a trick!

                            Frau Lindemann.

Are you going to pretend that the letter isn't genuine;--that the
letter is a forgery?

                                 Rosa.

Maybe one of the regular customers is playing a joke. That student,
Herr Strübel, he's always joking. (_Giggles._)

                            Frau Lindemann.

When Herr Strübel makes a joke, he makes a decent joke, a real, genuine
joke. Oh, of course one has to pretend to be angry sometimes--but as
for writing a forged letter--My land!--a letter with a gold crown on
it--there! (_She takes a letter from her waist, and reads._) "This
afternoon, Her Highness, the Princess von Geldern, will stop at the
Fairview Inn, to rest an hour or so before making the descent to the
Springs. You are requested to have ready a quiet and comfortable room,
to guard Her Highness from any annoying advances, and, above all, to
maintain the strictest secrecy regarding this event, as otherwise the
royal visit will not be repeated. Baroness von Brook, maid of honour to
Her Highness." Now, what have you got to say?

                                 Rosa.

Herr Strübel lent me a book once. A maid of honour came into that, too.
I'm sure it's a trick!

            Frau Lindemann (_looking out toward the back_).

Dear, dear, isn't that Herr Strübel now, coming up the hill? To-day of
all days! What on earth does he always want up here?

                          Rosa (_pointedly_).

He's in such favour at the Inn.--He won't be leaving here all day.

                            Frau Lindemann.

That won't do at all. He's got to be sent off. If I only knew how I
could--Oh, ho! I'll be disagreeable to him--that's the only way to
manage it!

(Strübel _enters. He is a handsome young fellow without much polish,
but cheerful, unaffected, entirely at his ease, and invariably
good-natured._)

                                Strübel.

Good day, everybody.

                   Frau Lindemann (_sarcastically_).

Charming day.

                 Strübel (_surprised at her coolness_).

I say! What's up? Who's been rubbing you the wrong way? May I have a
glass of beer any way? Glass of beer, if you please!--Several glasses
of beer, if you please.--(_Sits down._) Pestiferously hot this
afternoon.

                   Frau Lindemann (_after a pause_).

H'm, H'm!

                                Strübel.

Landlady Linda, dear, why so quiet to-day?

                            Frau Lindemann.

In the first place, Herr Strübel, I would have you know that my name is
Frau Lindemann.

                                Strübel.

Just so.

                            Frau Lindemann.

And secondly, if you don't stop your familiarity----

                                Strübel.

(_Singing, as_ Rosa _brings him a glass of beer._)
"Beer--beer!"--Heavens and earth, how hot it is! (_Drinks._)

                            Frau Lindemann.

If you find it so hot, why don't you stay quietly down there at the
Springs?

                                Strübel.

Ah, my soul thirsts for the heights--my soul thirsts for the heights
every afternoon. Just as soon as ever my sallow-faced pupil has thrown
himself down on the couch to give his red corpuscles a chance to grow,
"I gayly grasp my Alpine staff and mount to my beloved."

                     Frau Lindemann (_scornfully_).

Bah!

                                Strübel.

Oh, you're thinking that _you_ are my beloved? No, dearest: my beloved
stays down there. But to get nearer to her, I have to come up here--up
to your telescope. With the aid of your telescope I can look right into
her window--see?

                           Rosa (_laughing_).

Oh, so that's why----

                            Frau Lindemann.

Perhaps you think I'm interested in all that?--Besides, I've no more
time for you.--Moreover, I'm going to have this place cleaned right
away. Good-bye, Herr Strübel. (_Goes out._)

                         Strübel (_laughing_).

I certainly caught it that time! See here, Rosa, what's got into her
head?

                         Rosa (_mysteriously_).

Ahem, there are crowned heads and other heads--and--ahem--there are
letters _with_ crowns and letters _without_ crowns.

                                Strübel.

Letters--? Are you----?

                                 Rosa.

There are maids of honour--and other maids! (_Giggles._)

                                Strübel.

Permit me. (_Tapping her forehead lightly with his finger._) Ow! Ow!

                                 Rosa.

What's the matter?

                                Strübel.

Why, your head's on fire! Blow! Blow! And while you are getting some
salve for my burns, I'll just-- (_Goes to the telescope._)

(_Enter_ Frau Von Halldorf, Liddy, _and_ Milly. Frau Von Halldorf _is
an aristocratic woman, somewhat supercilious and affected._)

                                 Liddy.

Here's the telescope, mother. Now you can see for yourself.

                           Frau v. Halldorf.

What a pity that it's in use just now.

                       Strübel (_stepping back_).

Oh, I beg of you, ladies--I have plenty of time. I can wait.

                 Frau v. Halldorf (_condescendingly_).

Ah, thanks so much. (_She goes up to the telescope, while Strübel
returns to his former place._) Waitress! Bring us three glasses of
milk.

           Liddy (_as_ Milly _languidly drops into a chair_).

Beyond to the right is the road, mother.

                           Frau v. Halldorf.

Oh, I have found the road, but I see no carriage--neither a royal
carriage nor any other sort.

                                 Liddy.

Let me look.

                           Frau v. Halldorf.

Please do.

                                 Liddy.

It has disappeared now.

                           Frau v. Halldorf.

Are you quite sure that it was a royal carriage?

                                 Liddy.

Oh, one has an instinct for that sort of thing, mother. It comes to one
in the cradle.

                           Frau v. Halldorf.

(_As_ Milly _yawns and sighs aloud._) Are you sleepy, dear?

                                 Milly.

No, only tired. I'm always tired.

                           Frau v. Halldorf.

Well, that's just why we are at the Springs. Do as the princess does:
take the waters religiously.

                                 Milly.

The princess oughtn't to be climbing up such a steep hill either on a
hot day like this.

                   Frau v. Halldorf (_more softly_).

Well, you know why we are taking all this trouble. If, by good luck, we
should happen to meet the princess----

                                 Liddy.

(_Who has been looking through the telescope._) Oh, there it is again!

                     Frau v. Halldorf (_eagerly_).

Where? Where? (_Takes_ Liddy's _place._)

                                 Liddy.

It's just coming around the turn at the top.

                           Frau v. Halldorf.

Oh, now I see it! Why, there's no one inside!

                                 Liddy.

Well, then she's coming up on foot.

                     Frau v. Halldorf (_to_ Milly).

See, the princess is coming up on foot, too. And she is just as anæmic
as you are.

                                 Milly.

If I were going to marry a grand-duke, and if I could have my own
carriage driven along beside me, I wouldn't complain of having to walk
either.

                           Frau v. Halldorf.

I can't see a thing now.

                                 Liddy.

You have to turn the screw, mother.

                           Frau v. Halldorf.

I have been turning it right along, but the telescope won't move.

                                 Liddy.

Let me try.

                                Strübel.

(_Who has been throwing little wads of paper at_ Rosa _during the
preceding conversation._) What are they up to?

                                 Liddy.

It seems to me that you've turned the screw too far, mother.

                           Frau v. Halldorf.

Well, what shall we do about it?

                          Strübel (_rising_).

Permit me to come to your aid, ladies. I've had some experience with
these old screws.

                           Frau v. Halldorf.

Very kind indeed. (Strübel _busies himself with the instrument._)

                                 Liddy.

Listen, mother. If the carriage has almost reached the top the princess
can't be far off. Wouldn't it be best, then, to watch for them on the
road?

                           Frau v. Halldorf.

Certainly, if you think that would be best, dear Liddy.

                                Strübel.

This is not only an old screw, but it's a regular perverted old screw!

                           Frau v. Halldorf.

Ah, really?--(_Aside to her daughters._) And if she should actually
speak to us at this accidental meeting--and if we could present
ourselves as the subjects of her noble fiancé, and tell her that we
live at her future home--just imagine what an advantage that would give
us over the other women of the court!

                                Strübel.

There, ladies! We have now rescued the useful instrument to which the
far-sightedness of mankind is indebted.

                           Frau V. Halldorf.

Thanks, so much.--Pardon me, sir, but have you heard anything about the
report that the princess is going to make the journey up here to-day?

                                Strübel.

The princess? The Princess of the Springs? The Princess of the lonely
villa? The Princess who is expected at the iron spring every morning,
but who has never been seen by a living soul? Why, I am enormously
interested. You wouldn't believe how much interested I am!

                  Liddy (_who has looked out, back_).

There--there--there--it is!

                           Frau v. Halldorf.

The carriage?

                                 Liddy.

It's reached the top already. It is stopping over there at the edge of
the woods.

                           Frau v. Halldorf.

She will surely enter it there, then. Come quickly, my dear children,
so that it will look quite accidental.--Here is your money. (_She
throws a coin to_ Rosa _and unwraps a small package done up in tissue
paper which she has brought with her._) Here is a bouquet for you and
here's one for you. You are to present these to the princess.

                                 Milly.

So that it will look quite accidental--oh, yes! (_All three go out._)

                                Strübel.

Good heavens! Could I--? I don't believe it! Surely she sits--Well,
I'll make sure right away-- (_Goes up to the telescope and stops._) Oh,
I'll go along with them, anyhow. (_Exit after them._)

                      Frau Lindemann (_entering_).

Have they all gone--all of them?

                                 Rosa.

All of them.

              Frau Lindemann (_looking toward the right_).

There--there--two ladies and a lackey are coming up the footpath. Mercy
me! How my heart is beating!--If I had only had the sofa re-covered
last spring!--What am I going to say to them?--Rosa, don't you know a
poem by heart which you could speak to the princess? (Rosa _shrugs her
shoulders._) They're coming through the court now!--Stop putting your
arms under your apron that way, you stupid thing!--oh dear, oh dear----

(_The door opens_. A Lackey _in plain black livery enters, and remains
standing at the door. He precedes_ The Princess _and_ Frau Von Brook.
The Princess _is a pale, sickly, unassuming young girl, wearing a very
simple walking costume and a medium-sized leghorn hat trimmed with
roses_. Frau Von Brook _is a handsome, stately, stern-looking woman, in
the thirties. She is well dressed, but in accordance with the simple
tastes of the North German nobility._)

                             Frau v. Brook.

Who is the proprietor of this place?

                            Frau Lindemann.

At your command, your Highness.

                     Frau v. Brook (_reprovingly_).

I am the maid of honour.--Where is the room that has been ordered?

                Frau Lindemann (_opens the door, left_).

Here--at the head of the stairs--my lady.

                             Frau v. Brook.

Would your Highness care to remain here for a few moments?

                             The Princess.

Very much, dear Frau von Brook.

                             Frau v. Brook.

Edward, order what is needed for Her Highness and see that a room next
to Her Highness is prepared for me. I may assume that these are your
Highness's wishes?

                             The Princess.

Why certainly, dear Frau von Brook. (The Lackey, _who is carrying
shawls and pillows, goes out with_ Rosa, _left._)

                             The Princess.

Mais puisque je te dis, Eugenie, que je n'ai pas sommeil. M'envoyer
coucher comme une enfant, c'est abominable.

                             Frau v. Brook.

Mais je t'implore, chérie, sois sage! Tu sais, que c'est le médecin,
qui----

                             The Princess.

Ah, ton médecin! Toujours cette corvée. Et si je te dis----

                             Frau v. Brook.

Chut! My dear woman, wouldn't it be best for you to superintend the
preparations?

                            Frau Lindemann.

I am entirely at your service. (_About to go out, left._)

                             Frau v. Brook.

One thing more. This veranda, leading from the house to the
grounds--would it be possible to close it to the public?

                            Frau Lindemann.

Oh, certainly. The guests as often as not sit out under the trees.

                             Frau v. Brook.

Very well, then do so, please. (Frau Lindemann _locks the door._) We
may be assured that no one will enter this place?

                            Frau Lindemann.

If it is desired, none of us belonging to the house will come in here
either.

                             Frau v. Brook.

We should like that.

                            Frau Lindemann.

Very well. (_Exit._)

                             Frau v. Brook.

Really, you must be more careful, darling. If that woman had understood
French-- You must be careful!

                             The Princess.

What would have been so dreadful about it?

                             Frau v. Brook.

Oh, my dear child! This mood of yours, which is due to nothing but
your illness--that reminds me, you haven't taken your peptonised milk
yet--this is a secret which we must keep from everyone, above all from
your fiancé. If the Grand-Duke should discover----

               The Princess (_shrugging her shoulders_).

Well, what of it?

                             Frau v. Brook.

A bride's duty is to be a happy bride. Otherwise----

                             The Princess.

Otherwise?

                             Frau v. Brook.

She will be a lonely and an unloved woman.

          The Princess (_with a little smile of resignation_).

Ah!

                             Frau v. Brook.

What is it, dear? (The Princess _shakes her head._) And then think of
the strain of those formal presentations awaiting you in the autumn!
You must grow strong. Remember that you must be equal to the most
exacting demands of life.

                             The Princess.

Of life? Whose life?

                             Frau v. Brook.

What do you mean by that?

                             The Princess.

Ah, what good does it do to talk about it?

                             Frau v. Brook.

Yes, you are right. In my soul, too, there are unhappy and unholy
thoughts that I would rather not utter. From my own experience I know
that it is best to keep strictly within the narrow path of Duty.

                             The Princess.

And to go to sleep.

                             Frau v. Brook.

Ah, it isn't only that.

                             The Princess.

Look out there! See the woods!--Ah, to lie down on the moss, to cover
oneself with leaves, to watch the clouds pass by high above----

                      Frau v. Brook (_softening_).

We can do that, too, sometime.

                    The Princess (_laughing aloud_).

Sometime!

                  (The Lackey _appears at the door_).

                             Frau v. Brook.

Is everything ready? (The Lackey _bows._)

                   The Princess (_aside to_ Frau v. Brook).

But I simply cannot sleep.

                             Frau v. Brook.

Try to, for my sake. (_Aloud._) Does your Highness command----

                 The Princess (_smiling and sighing_).

Yes, I command. (_They go out, left._)

(_The stage remains empty for several moments. Then_ Strübel _is heard
trying the latch of the back door._)

                            Strübel's Voice.

Hullo! What's up! Why is this locked all of a sudden? Rosa!--Open up!
I've got to look through the telescope! Rosa! Won't you?--Oh, well,
I know how to help myself. (_He is seen walking outside of the
glass-covered veranda. Then he puts his head through the open window at
the right._) Not a soul inside?-- (_Climbs over._) Well, here we are.
What on earth has happened to these people? (_Unlocks the back door and
looks out._) Everything deserted. Well, it's all the same to me.
(_Locks the door again._) But let's find out right away what the
carriage has to do with the case. (_Prepares to look through the
telescope_. The Princess _enters cautiously through the door at the
left, her hat in her hand. Without noticing_ Strübel, _who is standing
motionless before the telescope, she goes hurriedly to the door at the
back and unlocks it._)

                                Strübel.

(_Startled at the sound of the key, turns around._) Why, how do you do?
(The Princess, _not venturing to move, glances back at the door through
which she has entered._) Wouldn't you like to look through the
telescope a while? Please do. (The Princess, _undecided as to whether
or not she should answer him, takes a few steps back toward the door at
the left._) Why are you going away? I won't do anything to you.

                      The Princess (_reassured_).

Oh, I'm not going away.

                                Strübel.

That's right. But--where have you come from? The door was locked.
Surely you didn't climb through the window as I did?

                      The Princess (_frightened_).

What?--You came--through the window?----

                                Strübel.

Of course I did.

                   The Princess (_frightened anew_).

Then I had rather (_About to go back._)

                                Strübel.

Oh, my dear young lady, you just stay right here. Why, before I'd drive
you away I'd pitch myself headlong over a precipice!

                  The Princess (_smiling, reassured_).

I only wanted to go out into the woods for half an hour.

                                Strübel.

Oh, then you're a regular guest here at the Inn?

                       The Princess (_quickly_).

Yes--yes, of course.

                                Strübel.

And of course you drink the waters down below?

                  The Princess (_in a friendly way_).

Oh, yes, I drink the waters. And I'm taking the baths, too.

                                Strübel.


Two hundred metres up and down every time! Isn't that very hard on you?
Heavens! And you look so pale! See here, my dear young lady, don't you
do it. It would be better for you to go down there--that is-- Oh,
forgive me! I've been talking without thinking. Of course, you have
your own reasons-- It's decidedly cheaper up here. _I_ know how to
value a thing of that sort. I've never had any money in all my life!

               The Princess (_trying to seem practical_).

But when one comes to a watering-place, one must have money.

               Strübel (_slapping himself on the chest_).

Do I look to you as if I drank iron? Thank Heaven, I can't afford such
luxuries! No; I'm only a poor fellow who earns his miserable pittance
during vacation by acting as a private tutor--that's to say,
"miserable" is only a figure of speech, for in the morning I lie abed
until nine, at noon I eat five, and at night seven, courses; and as for
work, I really haven't a thing to do! My pupil is so anæmic--why,
compared to him, _you're_ fit for a circus rider!

               The Princess (_laughing unrestrainedly_).

Oh, well, I'm rather glad I'm not one.

                                Strübel.

Dear me, it's a business like any other.

                             The Princess.

Like any other? Really, I didn't think that.

                                Strübel.

And pray, what did you think then?

                             The Princess.

Oh, I thought that they were--an entirely different sort of people.

                                Strübel.

My dear young lady, all people are "an entirely different sort." Of
course _we_ two aren't. We get along real well together, don't we? As
poor as church mice, both of us!

                 The Princess (_smiling reflectively_).

Who knows? Perhaps that's true.

                          Strübel (_kindly_).

Do you know what? If you want to stay down there--I'll tell you how one
can live cheaply. I have a friend, a student like myself. He's here to
mend up as you are. I feed him up at the house where I'm staying.
(_Frightened at a peculiar look of_ The Princess's.) Oh, but you
mustn't be-- No, I shouldn't have said it. It wasn't decent of me.
Only, let me tell you, I'm so glad to be able to help the poor fellow
out of my unexpected earnings, that I'd like to be shouting it from the
housetops all the time! Of course, you understand that, don't you?

                             The Princess.

You like to help people, then?

                                Strübel.

Surely--don't you?

                      The Princess (_reflecting_).

No. There's always so much talk about it, and the whole thing
immediately appears in the newspapers.

                                Strübel.

What? If you help some one, that appears----?

              The Princess (_quickly correcting herself_).

I only mean if one takes part in entertainments for charity----

                                Strübel.

Oh, yes, naturally. In those things they always get some woman of rank
to act as patroness, if they can, and she sees to it, you may be sure,
that the newspapers make a fuss over it.

                       The Princess (_demurely_).

Oh, not every----

                                Strübel.

Just try to teach me something I don't know about these titled women!
Besides, my dear young lady, where is your home--in one of the large
cities, or----?

                             The Princess.

Oh, no. In quite a small town--really more like the country.

                                Strübel.

Then, I'm going to show you something that you probably never saw
before in all your life.

                             The Princess.

Oh do! What is it?

                                Strübel.

A princess! H'm--not a make-believe, but a real, true-blue princess!

                             The Princess.

Oh, really?

                                Strübel.

Yes. Our Princess of the Springs.

                             The Princess.

And who may that be?

                                Strübel.

Why, Princess Marie Louise.

                             The Princess.

Of Geldern?

                                Strübel.

Of course.

                             The Princess.

Do you know her?

                                Strübel.

Why, certainly.

                             The Princess.

Really? I thought that she lived in great retirement.

                                Strübel.

Well, that doesn't do her any good. Not a bit of it. And because you
are such a jolly, good fellow, I'm going to tell you my secret. I'm in
love with this princess!

                             The Princess.

Oh!

                                Strübel.

You can't imagine what a comfort it is. The fact is, every young poet
has got to have a princess to love.

                             The Princess.

Are _you_ a poet?

                                Strübel.

Can't you tell that by looking at me?

                             The Princess.

I never saw a poet before.

                                Strübel.

Never saw a poet--never saw a princess! Why, you're learning a heap of
things to-day!

                      The Princess (_assenting_).

H'm--And have you written poems to her?

                                Strübel.

Why, that goes without saying! Quantities of 'em!

                             The Princess.

Oh, please recite some little thing--won't you?

                                Strübel.

No, not yet. Everything at the proper time.

                             The Princess.

Ah, yes, first I should like to see the princess.

                                Strübel.

No, first I am going to tell you the whole story.

                             The Princess.

Oh, yes, yes. Please do. (_Sits down._)

                                Strübel.

Well, then--I had hardly heard that she was here before I was dead in
love with her. It was just as quick as a shot, I tell you. Just as if I
had waited all my life long to fall in love with her. Besides, I also
heard about her beauty--and her sorrow. You see, she had an early love
affair.

                     The Princess (_disconcerted_).

What? Are they saying that?

                                Strübel.

Yes. It was a young officer who went to Africa because of her--and died
there.

                             The Princess.

And they know that, too?

                                Strübel.

What don't they know?--But that's a mere detail--it doesn't concern
me. Even the fact that in six months she will become the bride of a
grand-duke--even that can make no difference to me. For the present she
is _my_ princess.--But you're not listening to me!

                             The Princess.

Oh, yes I am!

                                Strübel.

Do you know what that means--_my_ princess? I'll not give up _my_
princess--not for anything in all the world!

                             The Princess.

But--if you don't even know her----?

                                Strübel.

I don't know her? Why, I know her as well as I know myself!

                             The Princess.

Have you ever met her, then?

                                Strübel.

I don't know of any one who has ever met her. And there's not a soul
that can tell what she looks like. It is said that there were pictures
of her in the shop-windows when she first came, but they were removed
immediately. In the morning a great many people are always lurking
around the Springs trying to catch a glimpse of her. I myself have
gotten up at six o'clock a couple of times--on the same errand--and if
you knew me better, you'd realise what that meant. But not a sign of
her! Either she has the stuff brought to her house, or she has the
power of making herself invisible. (The Princess _turns aside to
conceal a smile._) After that, I used to hang around her garden--every
day, for hours at a time. Until one day the policeman, whom the
managers of the Springs have stationed at the gates, came up to me and
asked me what on earth I was doing there. Well, that was the end of
those methods of approach! Suddenly, however, a happy thought struck
me. Now I can see her, and have her near to me as often as I wish.

                             The Princess.

Why, that's very interesting. How?

                                Strübel.

Yes, that's just the point. H'm, should I risk it? Should I take you
into my confidence?

                             The Princess.

You promised me some time ago that you would show her to me.

                                Strübel.

Wait a second. (_Looks through the telescope._) There she is. Please
look for yourself.

                             The Princess.

But I am-- (_She, too, looks through the telescope._) Actually, there
is the garden as plain as if one were in it.

                                Strübel.

And at the corner window on the left--with the embroidery-frame--that's
she.

                             The Princess.

Are you absolutely certain that that is the princess?

                                Strübel.

Why, who else could it be?

                             The Princess.

Oh, 'round about a princess like that--there are such a lot of people.
For instance, there is her waiting-woman, there's the seamstress and
her assistants, there's----

                                Strübel.

But my dear young lady, if you only understood anything about these
matters, you would have been certain at the very first glance that it
was she--and no one else. Observe the nobility in every motion--the
queenly grace with which she bends over the embroidery-frame----

                             The Princess.

How do you know that it's an embroidery-frame?

                                Strübel.

Why, what should a princess be bending over if not an embroidery-frame?
Do you expect her to be darning stockings?

                             The Princess.

It wouldn't hurt her at all!

                                Strübel.

Now, that's just one of those petty, bourgeois notions which we ought
to suppress. It's not enough that we have to stick in this misery, but
we'd like to drag her down, too--that being far above all earthly
care----

                             The Princess.

Oh, dear me!

                                Strübel.

What are you sighing about so terribly?

                             The Princess

Tell me, wouldn't you like to have a closer acquaintance with your
princess, sometime?

                                Strübel.

Closer? Why should I?--Isn't she close enough to me, my far-away
princess?--for that's what I call her when I talk to myself about her.
And to have her _still_ closer?

                             The Princess.

Why, so that you could talk to her and know what she really was like.

                         Strübel (_terrified_).

Talk to her! Heaven forbid! Goodness gracious, no! Just see here--how
am I to face a princess? I'm an ordinary fellow, the son of poor folks.
I haven't polished manners--I haven't even a decent tailor. A lady like
that--why, she'd measure me from top to toe in one glance.--I've had my
lessons in the fine houses where I've applied as tutor. A glance from
boots to cravat--and you're dismissed!

                             The Princess.

And you think that I--(_correcting herself_)--that this girl is as
superficial as that?

                                Strübel.

"This girl"! Dear me, how that sounds! But, how should I ever succeed
in showing her my real self? And even if I should, what would she
care?--Oh, yes, if she were like you--so nice and simple--and with such
a kindhearted, roguish little twinkle in her eye----!

                             The Princess.

Roguish--I? Why so?

                                Strübel.

Because you are laughing at me in your sleeve. And really I deserve
nothing better.

                             The Princess.

But your princess deserves something better than your opinion of her.

                                Strübel.

How do you know that?

                             The Princess.

You really ought to try to become acquainted with her sometime.

                                Strübel.

No, no, no--and again no! As long as she remains my far-away princess,
she is everything that I want her to be--modest, gracious, loving. She
smiles upon me dreamily. Yes, she even listens when I recite my poems
to her--and that can't be said of many people! And as soon as I have
finished, she sighs, takes a rose from her breast, and casts it down to
the poet.--I wrote a few verses yesterday about that rose, that flower
which represents the pinnacle of my desires, as it were.

                       The Princess (_eagerly_).

Oh, yes. Oh, please, please!

                                Strübel.

Well, then, here goes. H'm--"Twenty roses nestling close----"

                             The Princess.

What? Are there twenty now?

                         Strübel (_severely_).

My princess would not have interrupted me.

                             The Princess.

Oh please--forgive me.

                                Strübel.

I shall begin again.

            Twenty roses nestling close
              Gleam upon thy breast,
            Twenty years of rose-red love
              Upon thy fair cheeks rest.

            Twenty years would I gladly give
              Out of life's brief reign,
            Could I but ask a rose of thee
              And ask it not in vain.

            Twenty roses thou dost not need
              --Why, pearls and rubies are thine!--
            With nineteen thou'dst be just as fair,
              And _one_ would then be _mine_!

            And twenty years of rose-wreathed joy
              Would spring to life for me--
            Yet twenty years could ne'er suffice
              To worship it--and thee!

                             The Princess.

How nice that is! I've never had any verses written to me b----

                                Strübel.

Ah, my dear young lady, ordinary folks like us have to do their own
verse-making!

                             The Princess.

And all for one rose!--Dear me, how soon it fades! And then what is
left you?

                                Strübel.

No, my dear friend, a rose like that never fades--even as my love for
the gracious giver can never die.

                             The Princess.

But you haven't even got it yet!

                                Strübel.

That makes no difference in the end. I'm entirely independent of such
externals. When some day I shall be explaining Ovid to the beginners,
or perhaps even reading Horace with the more advanced classes--no, it's
better for the present not to think of reaching any such dizzy heights
of greatness--well, then I shall always be saying to myself with a
smile of satisfaction, "You, too, were one of those confounded artist
fellows--why, you once went so far as to love a princess!"

                             The Princess.

And that will make you happy?

                                Strübel.

Enormously!--For what makes us happy after all? A bit of happiness?
Great heavens, no! Happiness wears out like an old glove.

                             The Princess.

Well, then, what does?

                                Strübel.

Ah, how should I know! Any kind of a dream--a fancy--a wish
unfulfilled--a sorrow that we coddle--some nothing which suddenly
becomes everything to us. I shall always say to my pupils--"Young men,
if you want to be happy as long as you live, create gods for yourselves
in your own image; these gods will take care of your happiness."

                             The Princess.

And what would the god be like that you would create?

                                Strübel.

_Would be? Is, my dear young lady, is!_--A man of the world, a
gentleman, well bred, smiling, enjoying life--who looks out upon
mankind from under bushy eyebrows, who knows Nietzsche and Stendhal by
heart, and--(_pointing to his shoes_) who isn't down at the heels--a
god, in short, worthy of my princess. I know perfectly well that all my
life long I shall never do anything but crawl around on the ground like
an industrious ant, but I know, too, that the god of my fancy will
always take me by the collar when the proper moment comes and pull me
up again into the clouds. Yes, up there I'm safe.--And your god, or
rather your goddess--what would she look like?

                     The Princess (_thoughtfully_).

That's not easy to say. My goddess would be--a quiet, peaceful woman
who would treasure a secret, little joy like the apple of her eye, who
would know nothing of the world except what she wanted to know, and who
would have the strength to make her own choice when it pleased her.

                                Strübel.

But that doesn't seem to me a particularly lofty aspiration, my dear
young lady.

                             The Princess.

Lofty as the heavens, my friend.

                                Strübel.

My princess would be of a different opinion.

                             The Princess.

Do you think so?

                                Strübel.

For that's merely the ideal of every little country girl.

                             The Princess.

Not her ideal--her daily life which she counts as naught. It is my
ideal because I can never attain it.

                                Strübel.

Oh. I say, my dear young girl! It can't be as bad as that! A young girl
like you--so charming and--I don't want to be forward, but if I could
only help you a bit!

                             The Princess.

Have you got to be helping all the time? Before, it was only a cheap
lunch, now it's actually----

                                Strübel.

Yes, yes, I'm an awful donkey, I know, but----

                       The Princess (_smiling_).

Don't say any more about it, dear friend! I like you that way.

           Strübel (_feeling oppressed by her superiority_).

Really you are an awfully strange person! There's something about you
that--that--

                             The Princess.

Well?

                                Strübel.

I can't exactly define it.--Tell me, weren't you wanting to go into the
woods before? It's so--so oppressive in here.

                             The Princess.

Oppressive? I don't find it so at all--quite the contrary.

                                Strübel.

No, no--I'm restless. I don't know what--at all events, may I not
escort you--? One can chat more freely, one can express himself more
openly--if one-- (_Takes a deep breath._)

                       The Princess (_smiling_).

And you are leaving your far-away princess with such a light heart?

                        Strübel (_carelessly_).

Oh, she! She won't run away. She'll be sitting there tomorrow
again--and the day after, too!

                             The Princess.

And so that is your great, undying love?

                                Strübel.

Yes, but when a girl like you comes across one's path----

                           Frau v. Halldorf.

(_Hurrying in and then drawing back in feigned astonishment._) Oh!

                     Liddy and Milly (_similarly_).

Oh!

                                Strübel.

Well, ladies, didn't I tell you that you wouldn't find her? Princesses
don't grow along the roadside like weeds!

                           Frau v. Halldorf.

(_Disregarding him ceremoniously._) The infinite happiness with which
this glorious event fills our hearts must excuse in some measure the
extraordinary breach of good manners which we are committing in daring
to address your Highness. But, as the fortunate subjects of your
Highness's most noble fiancé, we could not refrain from----

                                Strübel.

Well, well! What's all this?

                           Frau v. Halldorf.

--from offering to our eagerly awaited sovereign a slight token of our
future loyalty. Liddy! Milly! (Liddy _and_ Milly _come forward, and,
with low court bows, offer their bouquets._) My daughters respectfully
present these few flowers to the illustrious princess----

                                Strübel.

I beg your pardon, but who is doing the joking here, you or----?

(Frau v. Brook _enters_. The Princess, _taken unawares, has retreated
more and more helplessly toward the door at the left, undecided whether
to take flight or remain. She greets the arrival of_ Frau v. Brook
_with a happy sigh of relief._)

                       Frau v. Brook (_severely_).

Pardon me, ladies. Apparently you have not taken the proper steps
toward being presented to Her Highness. In matters of this sort one
must first apply to me. I may be addressed every morning from eleven to
twelve, and I shall be happy to consider your desires.

                   Frau v. Halldorf (_with dignity_).

I and my children, madame, were aware of the fact that we were acting
contrary to the usual procedure; but the impulse of loyal hearts is
guided by no rule. I shall be glad to avail myself of your very kind
invitation.

        (_All three go out with low curtsies to_ The Princess.)

                             Frau v. Brook.

What forwardness!--But how could you come down without me?--And what is
that young man over there doing? Does he belong to those people?

(The Princess _shakes her head_. Strübel, _without a word, goes to get
his hat which has been lying on a chair, bows abruptly, and is about to
leave._)

                             The Princess.

Oh, no! That wouldn't be nice. Not that way----

                       Frau v. Brook (_amazed_).

What?--What!--Why, your Highness----!

                             The Princess.

Let me be, Eugenie. This young man and I have become far too good
friends to part in such an unfriendly, yes, almost hostile, fashion.

                             Frau v. Brook.

Your Highness, I am _very_ much----

                      The Princess (_to_ Strübel).

You and I will certainly remember this hour with great pleasure, and I
thank you for it with all my heart. If I only had a rose with me so as
to give you your dear wish!--Eugenie, haven't we any roses with us?

                             Frau v. Brook.

Your Highness, I am _very_ much----

                             The Princess.

(_Examining herself and searching among the vases._) Well, how are we
going to manage it?

                                Strübel.

I most humbly thank--your Highness--for the kind intention.

                             The Princess.

No, no--wait! (_Her glance falls upon the hat which she is holding in
her hand with a sudden thought._) I have it!--But don't think that I'm
joking.--And we'll have to do without scissors! (_She tears one of the
roses from the hat._) I don't know whether there are just twenty
(_Holding out one of the roses to him._) Well?--This rose has the
merit of being just as real as the sentiment of which we were speaking
before--and just as unfading.

                                Strübel.

Is this--to be--my punishment? (The Princess _smilingly shakes her
head._) Or does your Highness mean by it that only the Unreal never
fades?

                             The Princess.

That's exactly what I mean--because the Unreal must always dwell in the
imagination.

                                Strübel.

So that's it! Just as it is only the _far-away_ princesses who are
always near to us.

                             Frau v. Brook.

Permit me to remark, your Highness that it is _high_ time----

                             The Princess.

As you see, those who are near must hurry away. (_Offering him the rose
again._) Well?

                                Strübel.

(_Is about to take it, but lets his hand fall._) With the far-away
princess there--(_pointing down_) it would have been in harmony, but
with the-- (_Shakes his head, then softly and with emotion._) No,
thanks--I'd rather not. (_He bows and goes out._)

                             The Princess.

(_Smiling pensively, throws away the artificial flower._) I'm going to
ask my fiancé to let me send him a rose.

                             Frau v. Brook.

Your Highness, I am _very_ much--surprised!

                             The Princess.

Well, I told you that I wasn't sleepy.



                                Curtain.
