THE EDITOR

A PLAY IN FOUR ACTS

DRAMATIS PERSONAE

     EVJE, a prosperous distiller.
     MRS. EVJE. GERTRUD, their daughter, engaged to
     HARALD REJN.
     The DOCTOR.
     The EDITOR.
     HAAKON REJN, a yeoman farmer.
     HALVDAN REJN and HARALD REJN, his brothers.
     The DOCTOR'S ASSISTANT.
     INGEBORG, maid to the Evjes.
     JOHN, coachman to the Evjes.
     HALVDAN REJN's HOUSEKEEPER.
     HALVDAN REJN's MAID.
     A Lamplighter.

The action takes place in a town in Norway.




ACT I

(SCENE.--The breakfast-room at the EVJES' house. A glass-cupboard, in
two partitions, stands against the left-hand wall, well forward. On the
top of it stand a variety of objects. Beyond it, a stove. At the back of
the room, a sideboard. In the middle of the room a small round folding
table, laid for four persons. There is an armchair by the stove; a sofa
on the right; chairs, etc. A door at the back of the room, and another
in the left-hand wall. There are paintings on the walls, and the general
impression of the room is one of snug comfort. EVJE, MRS. EVJE, and
GERTRUD are seated at the table. INGEBORG is standing by the sideboard.
Breakfast is proceeding in silence as the curtain rises. INGEBORG takes
away EVJE'S cup and re-fills it. As she brings it back to him, a ring is
heard at the bell. GERTRUD gets up.)

Evje. Sit still; John will go to the door. (GERTRUD sits down again.
Directly afterwards, another ring is heard.)

Mrs. Evje. What can John be doing?

Ingeborg. I will go. (Goes out. She comes back, showing in HARALD REJN,
who hangs up his hat and coat in the hall before coming in.)

Harald. Good morning!

Evje and Mrs. Evje. Good morning! (HARALD shakes hands with them.)

Harald (to GERTRUD, who is sitting on the right). Good morning, Gertrud!
Am I a bit late to-day? (GERTRUD, who has taken his hand, looks lovingly
at him but says nothing.)

Mrs. Evje. Yes, I suppose you have been for a long constitutional,
although the weather is none of the best.

Harald. It is not; I expect we shall have a thick fog by the afternoon.

Evje. Did you have breakfast before you went out?

Harald. I did, thanks. (To INGEBORG, who has come forward with a cup of
coffee.) No, thank you. I will sit down here while you are finishing.
(Sits down on the sofa behind GERTRUD.)

Mrs. Evje. How is your brother Halvdan?

Harald. A little better to-day, thanks--but of course we cannot build on
that.

Evje. Is your eldest brother coming to see him?

Harald. Yes, we expect him every day. Probably his wife has come with
him, and that has been the reason of the delay; she finds it difficult
to get away.

Mrs. Evje. Halvdan so often talks of her.

Harald. Yes, I believe she is the best friend he has.

Evje. No wonder, then, that she wants to come and say good-bye to him.
By the way, have you seen how the paper bids him good-bye to-day?

Harald. Yes, I have seen it.

Mrs. Evje (hurriedly). I hope Halvdan has not seen it?

Harald (smiling). No, it is a long time now since Halvdan read a
newspaper. (A pause.)

Evje. Then I suppose you have read what they say about you too?

Harald. Naturally.

Mrs. Evje. It is worse than anything they have said about you before.

Harald. Well--of course, you know, my election meeting comes on this
evening.

Evje. I can tell you it has upset _us_.

Mrs. Evje. Day after day we wake up to find our house invaded by these
abominations. That is a nice thought to begin your day's work with!

Harald. Is it so indispensable, then, to educated people to begin their
day by reading such things?

Mrs. Evje. Well--one must have a paper.

Evje. And most people read it. Besides, one can't deny that a lot of
what is in it is true, although its general tendency is to run everyone
down.

Harald (getting up). Quite so, yes. (Leans over GERTRUD'S shoulder.)
Gertrud, have you read it?

Gertrud (does not look at him, and hesitates for a moment; then says
gently): Yes.

Harald (under his breath). So that is it! (Walks away from her.)

Evje. We have had a little bit of a scene here, I must tell you.

Harald (walking up and down). Yes, I can understand that.

Evje. I will repeat what I have said already: they write about _you_,
and _we_ have to suffer for it.

Mrs. Evje. Yes, and Gertrud especially.

Gertrud. No--I don't want anyone to consider me in the matter at all.
Besides, it is not what they say of you in the paper that hurts me--.
(Stops abruptly.)

Harald (who has come up to her). But what your parents are feeling about
it? Is that it? (GERTRUD does not answer.)

Evje (pushing back his plate). There, I have finished! (They rise from
the table. MRS. EVJE helps INGEBORG to clear away the things, which
INGEBORG carries out of the room.)

Mrs. Evje. Couldn't you wash your hands of politics, Harald? (GERTRUD
goes out to the left.)

Evje (who has followed GERTRUD with his eyes). We cannot deny that it
pains us considerably that in our old age our peaceful home should be
invaded by all this squabbling and abomination.

Mrs. Evje (who rung for INGEBORG to move the table). You have no need
to do it, either, Harald! You are a grown man, and your own master.
(INGEBORG comes in. HARALD helps her to move the table.)

Evje (to his wife). Don't let Ingeborg hear. Come along, we will go into
my room.

Mrs. Evje. You forget, all the windows are open there. I have had the
fire lit here, so that we could stay here.

Evje. Very well--then we will sit here. (Sits down by the fire.) Will
you have a cigar?

Harald. No, thanks. (INGEBORG goes out.)

Evje (taking a cigar and lighting it). As my wife said just
now--couldn't you wash your hands of politics, Harald? You, who have
both talent and means, need not be at a loss for a vocation in life.

Harald (sitting down on the sofa). If I have any talent, it is for
politics--and so I intend to devote my means to that.

Evje. What do you propose to gain by it?

Harald. What any one who believes in a cause hopes to gain--that is to
say, to help it on.

Evje. And to become a cabinet minister?

Harald. I certainly can't do that any other way; well, I admit--that
_is_ my idea.

Evje. You will not be elected now.

Harald. That we shall see.

Evje. But suppose you are not re-elected to-morrow?

Harald. Then I must find some other way.

Evje. Always with the same object?

Harald. Always with the same object. (EVJE sighs.)

Mrs. Evje (who has taken her sewing and sat down by the fire). Oh, these
politics!

Harald. At any rate, they are the most prominent factors in life just
now.

Evje. We do not suppose we can exercise any influence over you. But
at any rate it is possible that you yourself have not considered the
position into which you have put the whole of us. (Both he and his wife
avoid looking at HARALD during this discussion.)

Mrs. Evje. Say what you really mean, dear--that he is making us all
thoroughly unhappy, and that is the truth!

Harald (getting up, and walking up and down). Well, look here--I have
a proposal to make. It is, that you should abandon all opposition to
Gertrud's marrying me at once. To-day again my brother has expressed the
wish that we should be married by his bedside; so that he should be able
to take part in it. I scarcely need add how happy it would make me.

Evje. But whether she is here at home or married to you, you know, her
parents' distress would be just as great every time their child was
persecuted.

Mrs. Evje. Surely you can appreciate that!

Harald. But what answer am I to give to my brother's request?--most
likely the last he will ever--. (Stops.)

Evje (after a pause). He is very kind to wish it, as he always is.
Nothing would make us happier; but we who are her parents do not
consider that you could make our daughter happy as long as you remain in
politics and on the lines on which you are now travelling.

Harald (after a pause, during which he has stood still). That is to say,
you contemplate breaking off our engagement?

Evje (looking at him quickly). Far from it!

Mrs. Evje (at the same time). How can you say such a thing?

Evje (turning towards the fire again). We have spoken about it to
Gertrud to-day--as to whether it would not be possible to induce you to
choose some other career.

Mrs. Evje. You understand now, why you found Gertrud upset. You must
listen to us now, as she did, in all friendliness.

Evje (getting up and standing with his back to the fire). The first
thing I do in the morning is to read my paper. You know what was in it
to-day--the same as is in it now every day.

Mrs. Evje. No; I am sure it has never been as bad as to-day.

Harald (walking up and down again). The election is just at hand!

Evje. Well--it is just as painful to us, her father and mother, whether
it is before or after the election. We are not accustomed to associate
with any one who has not first-class credentials--and now we have to
endure seeing doubt cast upon our own son-in-law's. Do not misunderstand
me; to my mind, for credentials to be first-class they must not only
actually be so, but must also be considered to be so by people in
general. (HARALD begins to walk up and down again.) The second thing I
do in the morning is to open my letters. Amongst to-day's were several
from friends we had invited to a party we thought of giving--if, that
is to say, your brother's illness took no sudden turn for the worse. No
fewer than ten of them refuse our invitation--most of them making some
excuse, and a few with a little more show of a real reason; but one of
them speaks straight out, and I have his letter here. (Takes it from his
pocket.) I have kept it for you. It is from my father's old friend,
the bishop. I haven't my spectacles--and for me to have mislaid my
spectacles will show you what a state of mind I am in. I don't think I
have done such a thing for--. Here, read it yourself! Read it aloud!

Harald (taking the letter). "My dear Mr. Evje. As you are my poor dear
friend's son, you must listen to the truth from me. I cannot willingly
come to your house while I might meet there a certain person who,
certainly, is one of you, but nevertheless is a person whom I cannot
hold in entire respect."

Mrs. Evje. Well, Harald, what do you think our feelings must be when we
read things like that?

Evje. Do not imagine that, in spite of that, _we_ do not hold you in
entire respect. We only ask you to ensure our daughter's happiness. You
can do that with a word.

Mrs. Evje. We know what you are, whatever people say--even if they are
bishops. But, in return, you ought to have confidence in our judgment;
and our advice to you is, have done with it! Marry Gertrud at once, and
go away for your honeymoon; by the time you come back, people will have
got something else to talk about--and you will have found something else
to occupy you as well.

Evje. You must not misunderstand us. We mean no coercion. We are
not insisting on this alternative. If you wish to be married, you
shall--without feeling yourself obliged to change your vocation for
_our_ sakes. We only want to make it clear that it would pain us--pain
us very deeply.

Mrs. Evje. If you want to take time to think it over, or want to talk it
over with Gertrud or with your brother, do! (GERTRUD comes in and goes
about the room looking for something.)

Evje. What are you looking for, dear?

Gertrud. Oh, for the--.

Mrs. Evje. I expect it is the newspaper; your grandfather has been
asking for it.

Evje. Surely there is no need for _him_ to read it?

Mrs. Evje. He asked me for it, too. He knows quite well what has made us
all unhappy.

Evje. Can't you tell him? No, that wouldn't do.

Mrs. Evje (to GERTRUD). I suppose you have had to confess to him what is
the matter?

Gertrud (trying to conceal an emotion that is almost too much for her).
Yes. (Finds the paper, and goes out.)

Mrs. Evje (when GERTRUD has gone). Poor child!

Evje. Does not what she is carrying to him, with all that it says about
you and about your brother, seem to you like an omen? I will tell you
how it strikes me. Your brother is a very much more gifted man than I
am; and although it is true, as that paper says, that nothing of all
that he has worked for has ever come to anything, still perhaps he may
nevertheless have accomplished more than either you or me, although we
have done a good deal between us to increase the prosperity of our town.
I feel that to be so, although I cannot express what I mean precisely.
But consider the reputation he will leave behind him. All educated
people will say just what that paper says to-day--and to-morrow he will
be forgotten. He will scarcely find a place in history, for history only
concerns itself with the great leaders of men. What does it all come
to, then? Neither present nor posthumous fame; but death--death all the
time. He is dying by inches now, dying of the most horrible persecution;
and the emotion that his end will cause among a few individuals cannot
be called posthumous fame. (HARALD begins to speak, but checks himself.)
Can _you_ hope to make a better fight of it? You think you are stronger?
Very well; perhaps you may have the strength to endure it until other
times come and other opinions with them. But there will be one by
your side who will not have the strength to endure it. Gertrud is not
strong--she could never stand it; indeed now--already--. (Is stopped by
his emotion.)

Mrs. Evje. She hides it from you, but she cannot hide it from us.
Besides, a friend of ours--our dear doctor--said only yesterday--.
(Breaks off in tears.)

Evje. We never told you, but he warned us some time ago; we had no
idea it was so serious, or that it had anything to do with this.
But yesterday he frightened us; he said she--. Well, you can ask him
yourself. He will be here directly. (HARALD fills a glass of water and
raises it to his lips, but sets it down again untasted.)

Mrs. Evje (going to him). I am so sorry for you, Harald! To have this
come on you just now--when your splendid brother is at the point of
death, and you yourself are being persecuted! (A ring is heard at the
bell.)

Evje. But it should be a warning to you! Sometimes a single movement
will change the course of a whole life.

Mrs. Evje. And do have a little confidence in us! (A ring is heard
again.)

Evje. What on earth has become of John to-day? That is the second time
the bell has rung.

Mrs. Evje. One of the maids is opening the door, I can hear.

Evje. I expect it is the doctor.

Mrs. Evje. Yes, it is he--I know his ring. (A knock is heard at the
door.)

Evje. Come in! (The DOCTOR comes in.)

The Doctor. Good morning! (Lays down his hat and stick.) Well, so I hear
John has been up to his pranks again? The rascal is in bed.

Evje and Mrs. Evje. In bed?

The Doctor. Came home at four o'clock in the morning, drunk. Ill to-day,
naturally. Ingeborg asked me to go in and see him.

Evje. Well!--I am determined to put an end to it!

Mrs. Evje. Yes, I have never been able to understand why you were so
lenient with John.

Evje. He has been with us five years; and, besides, it makes people talk
so, if you have to send your servants away.

Mrs. Evje. But surely this sort of thing makes them talk much worse!

Evje. Well--he shall leave this very day.

The Doctor (to HARALD). How are you, Rejn?--Oho! I understand. I have
come at an inopportune moment with my complaints of John? You have all
got something more serious on your minds?

Mrs. Evje. Yes, we have had it out, as we agreed yesterday.

The Doctor. You must forgive me, my dear Rejn, for having told my old
friends the whole truth yesterday. She (pointing to MRS. EVJE) was an
old playfellow of mine, and her husband and I have been friends from
boyhood; so we have no secrets from each other. And Gertrud's condition
makes me very uneasy.

Harald. Why have you never told me that before?

The Doctor. Goodness knows I have often enough given her parents hints
that she was not well; but they have only made up their minds that her
happiness in her engagement would quite cure her. They are a considerate
couple, these two dear people, you know; they didn't want to seem
interfering.

Harald. Their consideration--which I appreciate and have lately had
constant reason to be grateful for--has all at once become a more
powerful weapon than open opposition. It makes a duty of what I should
otherwise have felt to be unfair coercion. But now the situation is such
that I can neither go forward nor back. After what I have gone through,
you must see that I cannot withdraw on the very eve of the election--and
after the election it will be too late. On the other hand--(with
emotion)--I cannot, I dare not, go on with it if it is to cost me--.
(Breaks off.)

Evje (standing in front of the fire). There, there! Take time to think
it over, my dear boy; talk it over with her and with your brother.

The Doctor (who has sat down on a chair to the left, a little away from
the others). I have just been to see your brother. A remarkable man! But
do you know what occurred to me as I sat there? He is dying because he
_is_ a man. The only people that are fit for political life nowadays are
those whose hearts have been turned to stone. (Picks up something from
the table and gets up.) Ah, just look here! Here is a fine specimen
of petrifaction. It is a fragment of palm leaf of some kind, found
impressed in a bit of rock from Spitzbergen. I sent it you myself, so
I know it. That is what you have to be like to withstand arctic
storms!--it will take to harm. But your brother--well, his life had been
like that of the original palm tree, with the air sighing through its
branches; the change of climate was too sudden for him. (Goes up to
HARALD.) You have still to try it. Shall you be able to kill all the
humanity that is in you? If you can make yourself as insensate a thing
as this stone, I daresay you will be able to stand the life. But are you
willing to venture upon political life at such a price? If you are--so
be it; but remember that in that case you must also kill all humanity
in Gertrud--in these two--in every one that is dear to you. Otherwise no
one will understand you or follow you. If you cannot do that, you will
never be more than a dabbler in politics--a quarter, an eighth part, of
a politician--and all your efforts, in what you consider your vocation,
will be pitiable!

Mrs. Evje (who has been occupied at the back of the room, but now sits
down by the fare). That is quite true! I know cases of petrifaction like
that--and God preserve anyone that I love from it!

Evje (coming forward towards HARALD). I don't want to say anything to
hurt your feelings--least of all just now. But I just want to add my
warning, because I believe I have discovered that there is a danger that
persecution may make you hard.

Harald. Yes!--but do you suppose it is only politics that offer that
dangerous prospect?

The Doctor. You are quite right! It is all the cry nowadays, "Harden
yourself!" It isn't only military men and doctors that have to be
hardened; commercial men have to be hardened, civil servants have to be
hardened, or dried up; and everybody else has to be hardened for life,
apparently. But what does it all mean? It means that we are to drive out
all warmth from our hearts, all desire from our imaginations. There is a
child's heart at the bottom of every one of our hearts-ever young, full
of laughter and tears; and that is what we shall have killed before we
are "fitted for the battle of life," as they put it. No, no--that is
what we ought to preserve; we were given it for that! (HARALD hides his
face in his hands, and sits so for some time.)

Mrs. Evje. Any mother or any wife knows that.

Evje (standing with his back to the fire). You want to bring back the
age of romance, doctor!

The Doctor (with a laugh). Not its errors--because in those days unclean
minds brought to birth a great deal that was unclean. (Seriously.) But
what is it, when all is said and done, but a violent protest on the
part of the Teutonic people against the Romanesque spirit and school--a
remarkable school, but not _ours_. To us it seems a barren, merely
intellectual school--a mere mass of formulas which led to a precocious
development of the mind. And that was the spirit it bred--critical and
barren. But these schools of thought are now all we have, and both of
them are bad for us! They have no use for the heart or the imagination;
they do not breed faith or a longing for high achievement. Look at _our_
life! Is our life really our own?

Mrs. Evje. No. You have only to think of our language, our tastes, our
society, our--

The Doctor (interrupting her). Those are the externals of our life,
merely the externals! No, look within--look at such a view of life as
we were talking about, clamouring for "hardening"--is that ours? Can we,
for all our diligence, make as much way in it as, for instance, a born
Parisian journalist?--become like a bar of steel with a point at each
end, a pen-point and a sword-point? _We_ can't do that; the Teutonic
temperament is not fitted for it.

Evje. Oh, we are well on the way towards it. Look at the heartless
intolerance in our politics; it will soon match what you were
describing.

Harald. Everyone that disagrees with you is either an ambitious
scoundrel, or half mad, or a blockhead.

The Doctor (laughing). Yes, and here in the north, in our small
communities, where a man meets all his enemies in the same barber's
shop, we feel it as keenly as if we were digging our knives into each
other! (Seriously.) We may laugh at it, but if we could add up the sum
of suffering that has been caused to families and to individuals--if we
could see the concrete total before us--we should be tempted to believe
that our liberty had been given to us as a curse! For it _is_ a cursed
thing to destroy the humanity that is in us, and make us cruel and hard
to one another.

Harald (getting up, but standing still). But, my good friends, if you
are of the same mind about that, and I with you--what is the next thing
to do?

The Doctor. The next thing to do?

Harald. Naturally, to unite in making an end of it.

Mrs. Evje (as she works). What can _we_ do?

Evje. I am no politician and do not wish to become one.

The Doctor (laughing, and sitting down). No, a politician is a
principle, swathed round with a printed set of directions for use. I
prefer to be allowed to be a human being.

Harald. No one can fairly insist on your taking up any vocation to which
you do not feel you have a calling.

The Doctor. Of course not.

Harald. But one certainly might insist on your not helping to maintain a
condition of affairs that you detest.

All. We?

Harald. This newspaper, which is the ultimate reason of all this
conversation we have had--you take it in.

Evje. Why, you take it in yourself!

Harald. No. Every time there is anything nasty in it about me or mine,
it is sent to me anonymously.

The Doctor (with a laugh). I don't take it in; I read my hall-porter's
copy.

Harald. I have heard you say that before. I took an opportunity to ask
your hall-porter. He said _he_ did not read it, and did not take it in
either.

The Doctor (as before). Then I should like to know who does pay for it!

Evje. A newspaper is indispensable to a business man.

Harald. An influential business man could by himself, or at any rate
with one or two others, start a paper that would be as useful again to
him as this one is.

Evje. That is true enough; but, after all, if we agree with its
politics?

Harald. I will accept help from any one whose opinions on public affairs
agree with my own. Who am I that I should pretend to judge him? But I
will not give him my help in anything that is malicious or wicked.

The Doctor. Pshaw!

Harald. Everyone who subscribes to, or contributes to, or gives any
information to a paper that is scurrilous, is giving his help to what
is wicked. And, moreover, every one who is on terms of friendship with a
man who is destroying public morality, is helping him to do it.

The Doctor (getting up). Does he still come here? (A silence.)

Evje. He and I are old schoolfellows--and I don't like breaking with old
acquaintances.

Mrs. Evje. He is a most amusing man, too--though I can't deny that he is
malicious. (The DOCTOR sits down again, humming to himself.)

Harald. But that is not all. Both you and the Doctor have--with some
eloquence--

The Doctor (with a laugh). Thank you!

Harald.--expressed your abhorrence of certain political tendencies with
which neither you nor I have any sympathy--which affront our ideas of
humane conduct. You do not feel called upon to enter actively into the
lists against them; but why do you try to prevent those who do feel so
called upon? You lament the existing state of things--and yet you help
to maintain it, and make a friend of the man who is its champion!

The Doctor (turning his head). Apparently we are on our defence, Evje!

Harald. No--I am. I was told a little while ago that I was in a fair way
to become hardened and callous, and that I must abandon my career--and
that I must do so for Gertrud's sake, too, because she would never be
able to share the fight with me. I was told this at one of the bitterest
moments in my life. And that made me hesitate for a moment. But now I
have turned my face forward again, because you have enlightened me! (A
short, sharp cough is heard in the hall.)

Mrs. Evje (getting up). That is he! (A knock is heard at the door; the
DOCTOR gets up and pushes his chair back. The EDITOR comes in.)

The Editor. Good morning, my children! How are you?

Mrs. Evje (sitting down). I did not hear the bell.

The Editor. I don't suppose you did--I came in by the back door. I took
you by surprise, eh? Discussing me, too--what? (Laughs.)

Evje. You have given us enough reason to, to-day, any way.

The Editor. Yes, haven't I? Such a thing for a man to do to his best
friends--eh?

Evje. That is true.

The Editor. To his old schoolfellows--his neighbours--eh? I expect it
has disturbed your natural moderation--eh?

Evje. I pride myself on my moderation.

The Editor. As much as on your brandy!

Evje. Are you going to begin your nonsense again?

The Editor. Good-morning, Doctor! Have you been making them a fine
speech this morning?--about my paper? or about humanity?--romanticism?
or catholicism?--eh? (Laughs.)

The Doctor (laughing). Certainly one of us two has made a fine speech
this morning!

The Editor. Not me; mine was made yesterday!--How is your hall-porter?

The Doctor (laughing). Quite well, I am ashamed to say.

The Editor. There's a faithful subscriber to my paper, if you like! (The
DOCTOR laughs.) Well, Mrs. Evje, I can give you news of your man, Master
John!

Mrs. Evje. Can you? It is more than I can.

The Editor. Yes--he is in bed still. That is why I came in the back
way--to enquire after his health.

Mrs. Evje. But how--?

The Editor. How is he after last night?

Mrs. Evje. Really, I believe you know everything. We had no idea he was
out last night.

The Editor. Oh, that is the very latest intelligence! He has been
figuring as a speaker--he was drunk, of course--before the Association
founded by his master's future son-in-law. And he made a most effective
speech--indeed, the speakers at that Association always make most
effective speeches! It was all about a Sliding Scale of Taxation,
Profit-Sharing for Workers, the necessity for a Labour majority in
Parliament, etc., etc., all the usual Socialist rhodomontade. You see
how infectious intellectual ideas are!

Evje. Well!--I shall turn him out of the house to-day!

The Editor. But that is not in accordance with your love of moderation,
Evje!

Evje. It is a scandal.

The Editor (to EVJE). But not the worst. Because, if you want to avoid
that sort of thing, there are others you must turn out of the house.
(Glances towards HARALD.)

Evje. You seem determined to quarrel to-day?

The Editor. Yes, with your "moderation."

Evje. You would be none the worse of a little of it.

The Editor. "Brandy and Moderation" is your watchword--eh?

Evje. Do stop talking such nonsense!--I know one thing, and that is that
you seem to find the brandy from my distillery remarkably to your taste!

The Doctor (interrupting them). When you are in these provoking moods
there is always some grievance lurking at the back of your mind. Out
with it! I am a doctor, you know; I want to get at the cause of your
complaint!

The Editor. You were not very successful in that, you know, when you
said my maid had cholera, and she really only was--. (Laughs.)

The Doctor (laughing). Are you going to bring that story up again? Every
one is liable to make mistakes, you know--even you, my boy!

The Editor. Certainly. But before making a mistake this time--ahem!--I
wanted first of all to enquire whether--

The Doctor. Ah! now it is coming!

The Editor--whether you have any objection to my mentioning John in my
paper?

Mrs. Evje. What has John to do with us?

The Editor. Just as much as the Association, where he delivered his
speech, has; it--ahem!--is one of the family institutions!

Evje. I have had no more to do with making John what he is than I have
had with making that Association what it is.

The Editor. Your future son-in-law made the Association what it is, and
the Association has made John what he is.

The Doctor. Or, to put it the other way round: John is Mr. Evje's
servant; John has become an active member of the Association; therefore
Mr. Evje is a patron of the Association.

The Editor. Or this way: John, being the well-known Mr. Evje's servant,
has for that reason become an active member of the Association which--as
he expressed it--his employer's future son-in-law "has had the honour to
found!"

Mrs. Evje. Surely you never mean to put that in the paper?

The Editor (laughing). They are John's own words.

Mr. Evje. Of course, he would never put a tipsy man's maunderings into
the paper. (To his wife.) Don't you understand that he is joking?

The Editor (clearing his throat). It is already in type.

The Doctor. Oh, nonsense!

The Editor. The scene afforded an opportunity for an extremely amusing
sketch, without mentioning any names.

Mr. Evje. I sincerely hope that

The Doctor (to EVJE). Oh, he is only teasing you! You know him.

The Editor. What do you think of this? "Those who indirectly support
so dangerous an institution will have to face exposure."--I quite agree
with it.

Mrs. Evje (getting up). What do you mean? Do you mean that my husband--?

The Editor. A little fright will be a good discipline for him!

Evje. Is what you quoted meant as an accusation against us--whether you
are serious or whether you are joking?

The Doctor. He is only trying to frighten you with a bogey; it is not
the first time, you know!

Evje. Yes, but what have _I_ to be frightened of? I don't belong to the
Association.

The Editor. But persons who do belong to it frequent your house. A man
is known by the company he keeps.

Mrs. Evje. I really begin to think he _does_ mean it seriously.

The Editor. It is too ugly a thing to jest about, you mean?

Evje. Is it possible that you seriously mean to allude to John as my
servant?

The Editor. Isn't he your servant?

Evje. And to put that in the paper for every one to read?

The Editor. No--only for those who read the paper.

Evje. And you have come here to tell us that?

The Editor. Do you suppose I would do it without telling you?

Mrs. Evje. It is perfectly shameless!

The Editor. It certainly is.

Evje. Is it your intention to quarrel with me?

The Editor. Of course!

Evje. With your own schoolfellow?--one who has been it true friend to
you in all your ups and downs? It is abominable!

The Editor. Perhaps it was to ensure my holding my tongue that you have
been my friend!

Mrs. Evje. You _couldn't_ behave in such a fashion to a friend!

The Editor (drily). To my own brother, if he stood in my way!

Harald (to himself). This is too much! (Comes forward.) Is your hatred
for me so bitter that on my account you must persecute even my future
parents-in-law, your own old friends?

The Editor (who, as soon as HARALD came forward, has turned away to
the DOCTOR). Have you heard how people are being beaten up to go to
the meeting of electors to-night? The last political speeches of the
campaign must be made with red fire burning at the wings! (Laughs.)

Mrs. Evje (coming up to him). No, you are not going to get out of it by
changing the subject. Is it really your intention to put my husband in
your paper?

The Editor. He is putting himself there.

Evje. I, who all my life have avoided being drawn into any political
party?

The Doctor. What has Evje to do with Harald Rein's politics?

The Editor. He endorses them!

Mrs. Evje. No!--a thousand times no!

Evje. Why, only to-day

The Doctor. I can bear witness to that!

The Editor. It is no use protesting!

Evje. But you must believe our protestations!

The Editor. Bah! You will see something more to-morrow--

Evje. Something more?

Mrs. Evje. Against my husband?

The Editor. That scandal about the Stock Exchange Committee. No
less than three Letters to the Editor about it have been lying in my
pigeon-holes for some time.

Evje (in bewilderment). Are you going to put nonsense of that sort in
your paper? The most respected men on the Exchange--?

Mrs. Evje. Members of the Committee--?

The Editor. They are only respected men so long as they respect
themselves. When their chairman enters into connections which offend
public opinion, the whole crew of them must be made to feel what sort of
a man it is they are associating with.

The Doctor. So on Mr. Rejn's account you are going to expose Evje, and
on Evje's account the Stock Exchange Committee? I suppose my turn will
come soon!

The Editor. It will come.

The Doctor. Indeed!

The Editor. The letters that have been sent to me are all from highly
respected men. That shows that public opinion has turned round; and
public opinion must be obeyed! (Throws out his hands.)

Evje (in a troubled voice). It is quite true that I have noticed in
several little ways that their temper--. (Looks round him, and checks
himself. Then speaks more confidently.) But it was just at such a time
that I looked for help from you, my friend. That is why I did not bother
myself much about it.

The Editor (to EVJE). But you know it is you that are attacking me now!

Evje. I?

Mrs. Evje. He?

The Editor. And, besides, I have no choice in the matter. You have made
your bed, and must lie on it.

Evje (growing angry again). But do you really mean that you don't feel
yourself how shocking such behaviour in an old friend is?

The Editor. "Old friend," "old schoolfellow," "neighbour,"--out with the
whole catalogue!

Mrs. Evje. I am sure you don't deserve to be either one or the other!
(The EDITOR laughs.) Think what you wrote to-day about Halvdan Rejn, who
is dying. A man could only write that who--who--

The Editor. Well?--who?

Mrs. Evje. Who has not an atom of heart.

The Editor. Ha, ha! "The natural affections!"--"family considerations!"
Truth, my dear lady, has no family ties; it has no respect even for a
"dying man."

Mrs. Evje. Yes, indeed--every decent man has some respect for suffering,
and even wicked men are silent in the presence of death!

The Editor. "Sufferer"--"dying man"--"martyr," I suppose! Oh, we know
all that old story!

Harald (coming forward). Let me tell you that you are a--person with
whom I will not condescend to argue. (Walks away from him.)

The Editor (who has at once crossed the room). This theatrical flaunting
of the "dying man" before people's eyes, that a calculating brother has
permitted himself, is of course what is really shocking in the whole
affair. But I will tear the mask off him.

The Doctor (following him). Listen to me, now; listen! We are
gentlefolk, you know! And even if Mr. Rejn has let himself be so carried
away as to mention his dying brother on a public occasion--well, I am
not going to say that I approve of it, but surely it is excusable and--

Harald (coming forward). I want none of your defence, thank you!

The Doctor. The one of you is just as mad as the other! (To the EDITOR.)
But what has all this to do with Evje, seeing that, after all, the whole
of this affair of the Rejns'--

Evje (to the EDITOR, eagerly). I give you my word of honour that I have
never approved of Harald's utterances about his brother, either. I am a
man of moderation, as you know; I do not approve of his politics. Only
to-day--

Mrs. Evje. And what on earth have politics to do with the Stock Exchange
Committee?

The Doctor. Or with Evje's coachman!

Evje. You might just as well take it into your head to write about my
clerks, or my workmen, or--

The Doctor. His carpenters, or his brewers--or his horses!

The Editor (stands suddenly still and says, drily): You may assure
yourselves that things are quite sufficient as they are! (Begins to
button up his coat.)

Evje. Is it so bad as all that!

Mrs. Evje. Good gracious!--what is it then?

The Editor (taking up his hat). You will be able to read it to-morrow,
together with some more about the "dying man." Good-bye!

Evje and Mrs. Evje (together.) But before you go--

The Doctor. Hush, hush! Let us remember we are gentlefolk! What will you
bet that the whole thing is not just a bogey to frighten you?

The Editor (holding out his hand towards the DOCTOR). I hold Mr. Evje's
position in the town in the hollow of my hand!

Evje (fuming). Is your object to ruin _that_, then?

Mrs. Evje. You will never succeed in that!

The Doctor. Hush, hush! let us remember we are gentlefolk!

Evje. In my own house--my old schoolfellow--that he should have the
audacity--!

The Editor. I have told you the truth openly. And, as far as that goes,
you have stood more than that from me in your own house, my boy. Because
the misfortune is that you are a coward.

Evje. _I_ a coward?

The Doctor (laughing). Hush, hush! Let us remember we are gentlefolk!

Evje. Yes, I have been weak enough to be afraid of scandal, especially
in the newspapers, it is true; that is why I have put up with you too
long! But now you shall see that I am not a coward. Leave my house!

Mrs. Evje. That's right!

The Doctor. But you must part like gentlefolk, you know.

The Editor. Pooh! You will be sending me a message directly, to call me
back!

Evje. You have the face to say that?

Mrs. Evje (to EVJE). Come, dear, don't provoke him any more!

The Editor (turning to go). You daren't do otherwise.

The Doctor. But part like gentlefolk--!

Evje (following the EDITOR). No, as sure as I live--

The Editor. You will be sending a message to call me back! Ha, ha, ha!

Evje. Never, never!

Mrs. Evje. My dear--!

The Editor. Yes, you will--directly--this very day! Ha, ha, ha!

The Doctor. Don't part like that! Part like gentle--

Evje. No, I tell you!

The Editor (laughing all the time). Yes!

Mrs. Evje. My dear-remember you may bring on one of your attacks!

The Editor (at the door). You are too much of a coward! Ha! ha! (Goes
out.)

Evje (in a rage). No!

The Editor (sticking his head in at the door). Yes! (Goes away.)

The Doctor. What a visit! I cannot help laughing, all the same! Ha, ha,
ha, ha!

Evje. Do you dare to laugh at that?

The Doctor. "Old schoolfellows"--ha, ha! "Moderation"--ha, ha! "The same
party"--ha, ha, ha!

Mrs. Evje. Oh, my husband is ill!

Evje (faintly). Yes--a little water!

Mrs. Evje. Water, water, Harald!

The Doctor. One of his attacks--that is another affair altogether. Here
(takes a bottle from his pocket)--smell this! That's it! Now, a little
water! (Gives him some.) No danger this time. Cheer up, old boy!

Evje. What a scandal!

Mrs. Evje. Yes, you will never be able to bear it, dear; I told you so.

Evje. To think of _my_ name appearing in the papers, when all my life I
have--

Mrs. Evje.--done everything you could to keep clear of such things! And
you such a dear, good, upright man!--Oh, these politics are the curse of
the world!

The Doctor (laughing). As I told you, you must go through a special
process of hardening before you can stand them.

Evje. And think of public opinion--my position--my connections! It is
more than I can bear!

Mrs. Evje (to the Doctor). I am sure the first time he reads something
about himself in the paper, it will make him really ill! He won't be
able to stand it, I know.

The Doctor. Oh, he will get over it.

Mrs. Evje. No, he won't. I am frightened at the mere thought of it. He
will never be able to bear it, never!

Evje. When all my life I have tried to keep clear of such things--!

Mrs. Evje. And now in your old age, though you deserve it no more than
a child does, to be dragged into it! If I could prevent that, I would
willingly take on my own shoulders whatever--

Evje. No, no--not you! Not you!

The Doctor. But the thing is not necessarily done because he threatened
he would do it.

Evje. Do you think--?

The Doctor. He is so dreadfully hot-headed, but I am sure he will think
twice--

Mrs. Evje.--before he attacks a lifelong friend! Yes, that is so, isn't
it!

Evje. Do you really think that there is any possibility then--?

The Doctor. I really can't say!

Mrs. Evje. Nothing in the world is impossible!

Evje. We were both so hot-headed.

The Doctor. Yes, it will have to be a more peaceable conversation than
that of a few minutes ago!

Evje. I don't know how it is--there is something so provoking about him.

Mrs. Evje. Yes, and you have not been very well lately, either. I have
often said so to you.

Evje. No, I haven't. It has been just one thing after another! And all
my life I have tried to keep clear of such things!

The Doctor. I will tell you what, old friend; I am sure the best thing
to do would be--

Evje. What?

The Doctor. I am sure you will not be easy in your mind until someone
has talked to him.

Mrs. Evje. Yes, couldn't that be done? Good gracious, that is not
sending a message to him!

Evje. But who would--? (A short silence.)

The Doctor. I don't know who would be best.

Mrs. Evje. All our old friends have deserted us; we shall soon have
none.

The Doctor. Well, at all events, you have me.

Evje. Would you really be willing to--? Do you mean it? (Grasps his
hand.)

The Doctor. Of course I will! He can't eat me!

Mrs. Evje. How good you are! Of course you only need tell him--what is
quite true--that my husband would never be able to bear it! He, who all
these years--

Evje.--have put up with an incredible amount for his sake, both from
himself and from others!

Mrs. Evje. Yes, that is true! And now you will go, dear friend--our only
friend!--and talk to him quite amicably and sensibly, won't you?

Evje. But don't delay! He is so hot-headed that we must find him
before--

The Doctor. Oh, I will find him; he is always about the town.

Evje. And tell him--ask him--

The Doctor. Oh, I know what to say to him.

Mrs. Evje. That is right!

Evje. Thank you! I shall never forget how, at a moment when everything
threatened to overwhelm me, you were the only one to stand by me! Ah, I
feel as if a load had fallen off my shoulders! I feel all at once quite
happy again!

The Doctor. That's right. You pull yourself together! I will see to
everything else.

Evje. Thanks, thanks! But make haste!

The Doctor. I am off! My hat? (Turns, and sees HARALD, and says to
himself.) A-ha! He looks as if he had had about enough of this. It would
have been a joke to--

Evje. Oh, do make haste, my friend!

The Doctor. Yes, yes--if only I could find my hat.

Mrs. Evje. It is on the table.

The Doctor. So it is!

Evje. Good luck to you!

Mrs. Evje. And do it very tactfully!

The Doctor (meaningly). And I hope you three will enjoy yourselves!
(Goes out.)

Evje. What a morning!

Mrs. Evje. We, who have always endeavoured to take everything quietly
and indulgently--

Evje. Yes, and to conduct our family affairs peaceably and
affectionately! (Jumps up and turns to HARALD.) The whole thing is
_your_ fault!

Mrs. Evje. Yes, it is Harald's fault! From the day this unfortunate
engagement came about, we have scarcely had a moment's peace here.

Evje. No, no, that is not the case! We must be reasonable. At first,
when Mr. Rejn had a fine future before him, when people vied with one
another to catch him, then the engagement was an honour to us as well
as to our daughter. But from the moment he took up these wretched
politics--that is to say, from the time his brother fell ill--well, he
can see for himself what the result has been to us!

Mrs. Evje. And he certainly must admit that it is not what we have
deserved; indeed it is more than a respected and well-bred family can
put up with.

Harald. I quite agree that it is more than a respected and well-bred
family _ought_ to put up with.

Mrs. Evje. Oh, so _you_ feel that too?

Harald. Certainly. And the only excuse I can see is that there are many
more in the same case. It is only in that way that such things become
possible.

Evje. I do not understand. Many more like--?--like whom?

Harald. Like you!

Mrs. Evje. In what respect?

Harald. I will explain. Most of the successful politicians nowadays have
not gained their position by means of any greatness of their own, but
by the pitiable weakness of others. Another age will form a different
estimate of them--see them in their proper perspective, and find them to
be much smaller men!

Evje. But what has that to do with us?

Harald. Well, just try to size up that man whom a little while ago you
turned out of your house and afterwards sent a message to--

Evje. We sent _no_ message to him!

Mrs. Evje. A friend of ours has gone to talk to him. That is quite a
different thing!

Harald. Well, take his measure by yours and yours by his! He went away,
and he will come back like a conquering hero. Will that be thanks to
his greatness, or his talent--to the loftiness of his opinions or his
feelings? No,--it will be thanks to your pitiable weakness.

Mrs. Evje. Upon my word!

Evje. Well, I--!

Harald. Do you think any one who has any pluck in his disposition would
consent to be a party to such a contemptible state of things? Think of
your own daughter, educated by that good old man who lies in there, but
an obedient child to you; think how she must be perpetually torn between
what she loves and respects and what she sees going on here! No wonder
she is ill! But remember this--she is not ill because she sticks to me;
she is ill because of your pitiable weakness!

Mrs. Evje. How can you dare to say such things! So you too--!

Evje. Such an absolute want of respect!

Harald. Listen to me, once for all. I intend, God helping me, to take
up the fight that has killed my brother, the noblest man I know! And
Gertrud is going to take up _her_ share in the fight, as I do mine. But
to come to this house as long as _he_ comes here--to go through what I
have gone through to-day--sullies my self-respect to such an extent,
and offends my better feelings so deeply, that either he never sets foot
here again, or I do not!

Evje and Mrs. Evje. But--!

Harald (quietly). When I came here to-day, I thought we should be able
to arrange matters without my speaking out; but there is nothing else
for it, so good-bye! (Goes out. A moment's silence follows.)

Mrs. Evje. Is _he_ giving _us_ our dismissal? Or does he not really mean
to break with us?--My dear, what is the matter? (Goes to her husband's
side.)

Evje (without moving). Tell me, my dear--am I a bad man?

Mrs. Evje. You, a bad man?

Evje. Because, if I were not a bad, wicked man, they could not behave in
such a way to me, one after the other.

Mrs. Evje. But, my dear, you are the best and dearest and most
considerate of men! And they are shameless traitors to you, my dear
husband!

Evje. But how on earth, then, could it come about that I, who all my
life have tried to keep clear of such things--for I have, haven't I?

Mrs. Evje. Every one knows that, that knows anything about you.

Evje. How could it come about that in my old age I should be despised
and forsaken by everybody? Surely it is no crime to want to live in
peace, apart from all that sort of thing?

Mrs. Evje. No, indeed; that is what all decent people want to do.

Evje. Yes, I thought so too. But now you see!

Mrs. Evje. But _you_ have been dreadfully unfortunate.

Evje. Why should I have been just the one to be dreadfully unfortunate?
Most people escape such things altogether.

Mrs. Evje (starting). Here is Gertrud.

Evje. Poor child!

Mrs. Evje. What on earth are we to say to her?

Evje. Be careful, my dear! be careful! (GERTRUD comes in quietly and
comes forward to them.)

Gertrud. Did I see Harald go away?

Mrs. Evje. Yes, my child, he--he went away.

Gertrud. Without saying good-bye to me?

Evje. That's true, he didn't say good-bye to you.

Mrs. Evje. Were you expecting him to come into grandfather's room to say
good-bye to you?

Gertrud. Yes. Tell me how things went here?

Evje. Why were you not here, dear?

Gertrud (in astonishment). I here? You said you did not want me to be
present--

Evje. I remember, yes; we thought it would not be advisable.

Gertrud (still speaking quietly, but in growing alarm). But how did
things go, then?

Evje. How did they go? Badly.

Mrs. Evje (hurriedly). That is to say, he did not behave at all well.
You must prepare yourself for the worst, my child!

Gertrud. Is it something very bad, then?

Evje. You know he is a little hasty just now, when he has so much on his
hands. He lacks a proper sense of moderation--but he will learn it, sure
enough.

Gertrud (almost inaudibly). But what does it mean? Is he never coming
back?

Evje. Never coming back? What an extraordinary question! Of course he
will come back. He was only a little over-hasty, you know--

Gertrud. And said he would never come back?

Mrs. Evje. Come, come, my dear--you mustn't be alarmed.

Evje. He talked such a lot, you know, that we must not attach any
particular importance to anything he said.

Gertrud. So that is how it is!

Mrs. Evje. We must make allowances for all that he is going through just
now--

Evje (suddenly). My child, you look so pale--

Mrs. Evje (going to her). Gertrud!

Gertrud (with a quiet movement of protest). I must give grandfather his
drink; that was really what I came for. And that was how I happened to
see Harald through the window. I will take grandfather his drink. (The
curtain falls as she goes out of the room.)




ACT II

(SCENE.--A street in the "villa quarter" of the town. Between it and
another street running parallel with it in the background, are two
houses standing in gardens, half of the facade of one of them projecting
into the stage on the right. On the left a third street runs at right
angles to the others, to the back of the stage. The left side of this
third street opens onto a well-wooded park. The house in the foreground
on the right is in two stories. There is a narrow strip of garden in
front of it, enclosed by an iron railing with a gate in it. The gate is
standing open. The entrance door to the house is immediately behind this
gate. There is light in a small window by the door; the ground floor
windows are in darkness; in those of the upper floor, light is visible
through heavy curtains. It is a wintry evening, and everything is
swathed in an unusually thick fog, in which the gas lamps in the streets
show dimmer and dimmer as they recede in the distance. As the curtain
goes up, a lamplighter is seen descending his ladder from a lamp-post,
where he has just lit the lamp at the corner of the house.)

The Lamplighter (as he reaches the ground). It's all one whether the
lamps are lit or not, in such a fog as this. (MRS. EVJE is seen drawing
back the curtain at a window on the first floor. She opens the window
and looks out.)

Mrs. Evje. The fog is so thick, my dear, that I can't see across the
street.

Evje (coming to the window, with fur coat and cap on). So it is!--Well,
so much the better, my dear! (They withdraw into the room; the window is
shut and the curtains drawn. Two passers-by come along the street from
the right, talking.)

First Passer-by. The Land of Fogs--the old idea of the land of Fogs was
that of a vision of confused and faint sensation, with the light of the
intelligence dimmed and blurred like these gas lamps in the fog.

Second Passer-by. It would be that, if our hearts did not often act as
guiding lights to our befogged intelligences. Look at this house behind
us--the brandy distiller's. The devilish workings of his intelligence
have befogged the whole country--befogged it with brandy--and some such
guiding light is much needed there.

First Passer-by. Ah, well,--the old idea of the Land of Fogs was that
fogs were--. (The sound of their conversation dies away as they pass
into the park on the left. GERTRUD, closely veiled and wrapped in furs,
comes slowly out of the park. She stops at the corner and looks down the
street, then passed slowly along to the right, looking up at the house
as she goes. She is scarcely out of sight when the house-door opens and
EVJE comes out.)

Evje. This is about the time he comes home--I daren't go to his house
and ask for him; I don't know if he would admit me. I daren't trust to
the Doctor alone.--This uncertainty is dreadful! (He starts at seeing
GERTRUD, whom he does not recognise in the fog, walking towards him. She
turns suddenly and walks back the way she came.) Who was that? She gave
me quite a fright in this fog! Her furs seemed rather like--no, no,
it couldn't be. I must not let any one recognise me. (Puts up the high
collar of his coat, so that only his nose is visible.) Both of them
called me a coward, but they are very much mistaken. It is not cowardice
for a man who is respected and honoured to try and avoid scandal. Hm!
Naturally those who trade in scandals think otherwise!--To act without
attaching weight to the opinion of others, to disregard one's own
predilections, to put up with being laughed at--all for the sake of
preventing a scandal--that is to be strong and courageous. And it _is_
admirable, too; for it is admirable to act fearlessly in the interest
of one's family, and of one's business, and of propriety. (Starts as he
hears his door opened. JOHN has come along the street and gone into the
house.) Is that some one coming out of my house? No, it is a man going
in. And then to think of Harald Rejn beginning that nonsense about my
being a coward, because I refused to become a party man! Every one
ought to take sides in politics--that is their cry. Hm! I should say it
required rather more courage nowadays to _refrain_ from taking sides.
(Starts again.) Who is that? Oh, only that woman again. She is waiting
for some one too. I expect we shall both catch bad colds. (Walks up and
down.) It is an odd sensation to be walking up and down on the watch
outside one's own house. Cowardice? Pshaw! To let one's self be abused
in a public street without stirring a finger to prevent it, _that_ would
be cowardice. I only hope he has not gone round the other way? There is
much more traffic in that street, and some one might easily--. I think I
will take a turn towards the town, and turn back when I am a little way
from here; it will look less suspicious. I must catch him, because his
paper will be going to press. (Looks up at his house.) My poor wife,
sitting up there dreadfully alarmed on my account! (Goes out to the
right. As soon as he has gone, the house-door opens and JOHN comes
warily out.)

JOHN. So he has gone out, has he! Oh, well, he is bound to come in
again! I will wait and catch him, that I will! Tra, la, la, la, la! I
can play about here in the fog till he comes back; I have nothing to
lose! And it will be best to catch him in the street; he will make less
fuss, and can't run away from me! Tra, la, la, la, la! (Lounges out to
the right. A moment later, HARALD comes out of the park. He is dressed
much as EVJE is, but has not his coat-collar turned up.)

Harald. There is a light in her window! Then she is alone in her room.
What am I going to do now? Twice already I have come to look at that
light; now I have seen it--and must go away! Good-bye, my darling! Be
patient, and wait! I know your thoughts are with me now; and I know you
feel that mine are with you! (As he turns away from the house he sees
the veiled figure of GERTRUD, who, as soon as she has come nearer,
rushes to him, throws up her veil, and falls into his arms in a glad
embrace.)

Gertrud. I was certain that, if you could not go into the house again,
you would be out here! I knew you would not go away from me, dear!

Harald. No--neither now nor ever.

Gertrud. And, while I was walking up and down here in the fog, I felt
that though there might be all this gloom tend cold around us outside,
there was the brightness and warmth of certainty in our hearts.

Harald. Yes, our love is the one certainty for me! Fog may obscure the
goal I aim at, the road I have to I read, the very ground I stand on;
doubts may even for a while attack my faith; but my love for you shines
clear through it all!

Gertrud. Thank you, my darling! If that is so, there is nothing that we
cannot overcome!

Harald. Of course, you know what took place to-day?

Gertrud. I can guess.

Harald. Is it true that you are ill? Why did you never tell me?

Gertrud. No, the doctor is not telling the truth; I am not ill! Even
if I were, what matter? I should go on living as long as I could--and
should have done my duty before I gave in!

Harald. That is the way to look at it!

Gertrud. But I am not ill! I suffer, it is true--and am likely to--every
time you are persecuted, or my parents on my account. Because _I_ have
drawn them into all this that, they are so unfitted for, and that is why
it pains me so to see how unprepared it finds them--most of all when,
out of tenderness for me, they try to conceal it. But I can't alter
things. We are fighting for a cause that you believe to be right, and
so do I; surely that is better than never to suffer at all in any good
cause. Try me! Let me share the fight with you! I am not weak; it is
only that my heart is sore for those I love.

Harald. You splendid, loyal creature!--and you are mine! (Embraces her.)

Gertrud. You should hear what grandfather says!

Harald. Yes, how is the dear old gentleman?

Gertrud. Pretty well, thanks, though he never gets out now. But he is
following your work, and he says that what you are aiming at is right,
if you ask for God's guidance on your way. Harald--you will always be
the same as you are now--good and genuine--won't you, dear? Not like
the rest of them--nothing but bitterness and malice, always talking of
principles and consequences and all the rest of it, and always attacking
others? If one were obliged to be like that, it would be a curse to be a
politician.

Harald. I will be what you make me! I think that behind every man's
public life you can see his private life--whether he has a real home,
and what it is like, or whether he only has a place he lives in--that is
to say, no real home.

Gertrud. With God's help I shall try to make a bright, snug and cosy
home for you! And this fog is delightful, because it only makes the
thought of such a home all the cosier and snugger! It makes us seem so
alone, too; no one is out driving or walking; and we can talk as loud as
we please, because the fog deadens the sound of our voices. Oh, I
feel so happy again now! Do you know, I think it is rather nice to be
persecuted a little; it makes our meetings so much more precious!

Harald. But, you know dear, to meet you like this--and just now--

Gertrud (as they walk up and down together). Yes, of course! I had
altogether forgotten how much you have to bear just now; I have been
chattering away--. Oh, I don't know how I could feel so happy, because
I am really dreadfully distressed. But, you know, I sit the whole
play beside grandfather, thinking, without even being able to talk.
I generally read aloud to him; now and then he makes a remark, but he
really lives more in the next world than in this one now. (They hear a
cough in the distance, and give a start, because they recognise it. The
EDITOR and EVJE, walking along together, EVJE apparently talking very
earnestly, are seen, indistinctly through the fog, in the street running
parallel with the one HARALD and GERTRUD are in. JOHN is seen following
them cautiously. They disappear into the park.)

Harald. I hear the enemy! I am sure I caught a glimpse of him over there
through the fog, talking to another man.

Gertrud. Is he always about the streets even in weather like this?

Harald. Well, we won't let him disturb us. (They begin walking up and
down again in front of the house.)

Gertrud. Do you know whom I met out here? Father!

Harald. Really? Then it is as I thought; the other man over there was
your father!

Gertrud. Do you think it was? Poor father!

Harald. Yes, he is weak.

Gertrud. But you must be good to him. He is so good himself. Think how
mother loves him; she is absolutely wrapped up in him, because he is so
good!

Harald. He is a good man, and an able man. But, but, but--

Gertrud. They have lived a very tranquil life. We of the younger
generation try to undertake heavier duties and greater responsibilities
than the older generation did. But we must not be angry with them.

Harald. I am afraid it is only too easy to feel angry with them.

Gertrud. No, do as grandfather does! If he thinks any one is going to
be amenable to it, he talks to them quietly; if not, he only behaves
affectionately to them. Do you understand, dear?--just affectionately.

Harald. Well, to-day--ought I to have put up with their allowing
themselves to be treated in such an unseemly way, and their treating me
in such an unseemly way?

Gertrud. Was it really as bad as that?

Harald. You would not believe what it was like, I assure you!

Gertrud (standing still). Poor father! Poor father! (Throws her arms
round HARALD'S neck.) Be good to them, Harald!--just because of
their faults, dear! We are their children, you know, and it is God's
commandment, even if we were not their children.

Harald. If only I could take you up in my arms and carry you off home
with me now! Your love takes possession of my heart and my will, and
purifies both of them. I am at a crisis in my life now--and now you
should be on my side!

Gertrud. Listen!--to begin with, I will go with you to your meeting
to-night!

Harald. Yes, yes,--I will come and fetch you!

Gertrud. Down at the door here!

Harald. Yes!

Gertrud. And, in the next place, I am going to walls into the town with
you now.

Harald. But then I shall have to see you home again.

Gertrud. Do you object?

Harald. No, no! And you shall teach me a lot of things on the way!

Gertrud. Yes, you will be so wise before we get back! (They go out to
the right.)

(The EDITOR and EVJE come out of the park. JOHN follows them, unseen by
them, and slips past them to the right when they stop for a moment. The
following conversation is carried on in hurried tones, and every time
the EDITOR raises his voice EVJE hushes him, and speaks himself in a
persistently lowered voice.)

Evje. But what concern of yours--or of the public's--are my private
affairs? I don't want to have anything to do with politics.

The Editor, Well, then, you ought not to have had anything to do with
_him_.

Evje. When I first made his acquaintance he was not a politician.

The Editor. Then you ought to have dropped him when he became one.

Evje. Ought I to have dropped you too, when you became one?

The Editor. Let me repeat, for the last time, that we are not talking
about me!

Evje. Hush, hush! What a fellow you are! You get into a rage if any one
chaffs you. But you want to hit out at everybody all round!

The Editor. Do you suppose I am myself?

Evje. Who the devil are you, if you are not yourself?

The Editor. I am merely the servant of the public.

Evje. The public executioner, that is to say?

The Editor. Well, yes, if you prefer it. But you shall pay for that word
some day.

Evje. There--you see! Always talking of paying for things!--of revenge!

The Editor. You shall pay for it, I tell you!

Evje. You are absolutely mad!--Poof! I am sweating as if it were the dog
days! (Changes his tone.) Think of the time when we used to go to school
together--when you never could go to bed without first coming to thank
me for the jolly times we were having together!

The Editor. None of that nonsense! I am accustomed to be hated,
despised, spit upon, scourged; if any one speaks kindly to me, I do not
trust them!

Evje. You must trust me!

The Editor. No--and, besides, I observed very clearly to-day that you
had counted on having me in reserve if ever you got into a scrape.

Evje. Well, who doesn't count on his friends? Doesn't every one take
them into his reckoning?

The Editor. I don't; I have no friends.

Evje. Haven't you me? Do you think I would leave you in the lurch?

The Editor. That is hypocrisy! At times when I have needed it, the very
last thing you have thought of has been to give me any help!

Evje. Have I not helped you?

The Editor. That is hypocrisy, too-to pretend you think I am speaking
of money. No; when I have been accused of being dishonourable--of
lying--you, the "old schoolfellow," the "old friend," the "neighbour,"
have never once had the courage to come forward on my behalf.

Evje. I never meddle with politics.

The Editor (with rising temper). More hypocrisy! Another of your damned
evasions!

Evje. Hush, hush, hush!

The Editor. You try to excuse yourself with a lie! You are doubly a
traitor!--And then you expect me to have compassion on you!

Evje. As sure as I stand here, I have never thought of deserting you,
however bad things were.

The Editor. And you have the face to take credit to yourself for that?
It is all calculation from beginning to end! You thought it would be the
best way of making me remember your loyalty, and reward you for it.

Evje. This is abominable!

The Editor. Oh, you are cunning enough! You represent wealth of another
kind, which at first was not entirely irreproachably come by--

Evje. There you go again!

The Editor.--and want to give it the cachet of good society; so you take
care to keep friends with a newspaper that may be able to give you a
helping hand in gaining what you want. Can you deny it?

Evje. There may be a slight tinge of calculation even in our highest
purposes. But the misfortune about you is that you can see nothing but
the calculation, though it may be only an infinitesimal part of the
whole thing.

The Editor. Oho--I have had experience of you!

Evje. Then you must have had experience of your party's loyalty, too.

The Editor. My party's loyalty!

Evje. Well, after all, it keeps you where you are to-day.

The Editor. _It_ keeps me there?

Evje. And you have friends in that party-myself amongst others--who
certainly would rather stand outside altogether, but nevertheless give
you their advice and support when you are in difficulties. You cannot
deny that.

The Editor. I have friends in the party? Oh yes; and if we lose a fight
these fine counsellors are the first to run away! They are always egging
me on and egging me on; but only let public opinion once get tired of
me, and they will throw me overboard without more ado! By that sort of
treachery they manage to fill the sails of the party craft with a new
breeze--and leave me to shift the best way I can!--they, for whom I
have fought with all my might and main! I despise my opponents--they are
either scoundrels and thieves, or they are blockheads and braggarts.
But my supporters are lick-spittles, fools, cravens. I despise the whole
pack of them, from first to last! If any one would give me the assurance
that if, as a pledge that I would never use a pen again, I were to chop
off my right hand I should thereby gain the prospect of a peaceful life
a thousand miles away from here, I believe I would do it!--I despise the
whole pack of them--oh, how I despise them!

Evje. But this is horrible! Do you find no comfort in religion? Or, at
all events, you have your paper!

The Editor. My paper, yes--but what good do you suppose that is to me?
And do you think I give the impression of being a religious man?

Evje. Then what do you work for?

The Editor. Perhaps you think I work for your sake?--or for the sake of
prosperity, or order, or whatever it is you cowards or self-seekers like
to imagine it is that you personify? No, the whole human race is not
worth the powder and shot that they are holding at each other's heads.

Evje. Then why do you come and almost threaten my life, if the whole
thing seems so worthless to you?

The Editor. Do you seriously suppose that I would give in, so as to
spare you or some other shopkeeper?--so that you should be able to
say triumphantly, "You see he didn't dare! He didn't dare quarrel with
Capital!"--or, "You see he has given in--he has turned tail!" No; what
I should like to do would be to lay a mine underground, and blow myself
and the whole lot of you sky high!

Evje. And I and all the happiness of my family life are to be sacrificed
in order that you shall not have to give in on a side issue of no
importance!--Oh, I am chilled to the bone!

The Editor. Ha, ha! It is good to hear you speaking like yourself again,
because it reminds me that it is time to put an end to this solemn
nonsense! (Looks at his watch.) A quarter past! You must be quick!

Evje. Are you really in earnest?

The Editor. I often play off jokes on you, it is true. But I don't know
how you will like this one to-morrow morning.

Evje. Then let me tell you that I solemnly refuse! I will not break off
the engagement! Put me in your paper, if you like; I am a free man.

The Editor. Bah! nobody is that. Then you refuse? Good-bye! (Walks away
from EVJE.)

Evje (going after him). No, no--where are you going?

The Editor (stopping). Nowhere--or rather, I am going home.

Evje. But you won't really do what you said?

The Editor. Ha! ha! ha! (Moves away.)

Evje (following him). No, listen! Listen to me for a minute.

The Editor (turning back). Do you think I have time to stop at all
the stations your vanity or your fright will invent on the way? (Moves
away.)

Evje. You mad creature--listen to me! (The EDITOR stops.) Tell me
exactly what you mean to do?

The Editor. Fiddlesticks! (Moves on.)

Evje (following him). Do you mean to put in the paper that I have broken
off this match?

The Editor (stopping). Better than that--I shall spread the news in the
town; then it will get about, and all the journalists will get a hold of
it.

Evje. Give me a day or two to think it over!

The Editor. Oh, no--you are not going to catch me like that! It is
election time, and the other side must be made to feel that all decent
people have deserted them.

Evje. But it is a lie, you know!

The Editor. What is lying, and what is truth? But your resignation from
the Stock Exchange Committee and your subsequent failure to be elected
to any public position will be no lies, I can assure you! Public opinion
is not to be trifled with, you know!

Evje. And this from you!

The Editor. Bah! Public opinion is a very faithless friend.

Evje. But who, after all, constitute public opinion?

The Editor. Oh, no--you are not going to lead me into a trap again!
Besides--it would be very difficult to say exactly who does constitute
it.

Evje. This is really--! Then you won't put that in the paper?

The Editor. The news of a broken engagement travels quickest by
foot-post--ha, ha, ha! (Coughs; then adds seriously:) But won't you,
of your own accord, break off what are really absolutely inadmissible
relations with a man who scandalises all your acquaintances?

Evje. Lay the blame on me, of course! I know his credentials are no
longer first class; but my daughter--ah, you would not be able to
understand that. The circumstances are quite exceptional, and--. Look
here, shall we go up and talk it over with my wife?

The Editor. Ha, ha!--you turned me out of the house this morning!

Evje. Oh, forget all about that!

The Editor (looking at his watch). Half past! Now, without any more
evasions--will you, or will you not?

Evje (with a struggle). No! I repeat, no! (The EDITOR moves away.) Yes,
yes!--It nearly kills me to do it!

The Editor. "The Capitalist, secure in his position, who needs pay no
regard to," etc., etc.--that is the "common form," isn't it, you man of
first-class credentials? Ha, ha! Good-bye. I am going home to send the
boy to the printers; he has waited long enough. (Moves away.)

Evje (following him). You are the cruellest, hardest, most reckless--

The Editor (who has been laughing, suddenly becomes serious). Hush! Do
you see?

Evje (turning round). What? Where?

The Editor. Over there!

Evje. Those two?

The Editor. Yes--your daughter and Mr. Harald Rejn.

Evje. But he swore this morning that he would never set foot in my house
again!

The Editor. But he will stay _outside_ your house, as you see! These
gentlemen of the Opposition, when they give any assurance, always do it
with a mental reservation! You can't trust the beggars! Come round the
corner. (They do so.)

Evje. An assignation in the street in the fog! To think my daughter
would let herself be induced to do such a thing!

The Editor. Evil communications corrupt good manners! You are a mere
bungler in delicate matters, Evje. You made a bad choice in that
quarter!

Evje. But he seemed to be--

The Editor. Yes, yes, I know! A real gentleman would have guessed what
he would develop into. He has a brother, you know! (HARALD and GERTRUD
come in slowly, arm-in-arm.)

Gertrud. While your brother has been ill you have received many
gratifying proofs of the good feeling and goodwill that there is in this
town-haven't you?

Harald. Yes, I have. I have found no ill-will against him, nothing but
kindness on all sides--with the exception of one person, of course.

Gertrud. But even he has a heart! It has often seemed to me as if I
heard a cry of yearning and disappointment from it--and that just when
he spoke most bitterly.

Harald. Yes, it needs no very sharp sight to see that he, who makes so
many unhappy, is himself the unhappiest of all.

The Editor. What the deuce are they talking about?

Evje. We cannot hear from here. And the fog deadens their voices.

The Editor. Go a bit nearer, then!

Evje. Not before they separate. You only understand _him_!

Harald (to GERTRUD). What are you holding there?

Gertrud (who has taken off her glove and then a ring from her finger).
The ring they gave me when I was confirmed. Give me your hand! No, take
your glove off!

Harald. Do you want me to try your ring on? I shall not be able to get
it on.

Gertrud. On the little finger of your left hand? Yes!

Harald (putting it on). So I can. Well?

Gertrud. You mustn't laugh at me. I have been beating up my courage
to do this all this time. It was really why I wanted to walk a little
farther with you first! I wanted to bring the conversation round to it,
you see! I am so convinced that your happiness, and consequently mine,
depends on your being able to be kind. You have got this meeting before
you to-night. It will be a decisive moment for you. If you, when you are
facing all this horrible persecution, can be a kind boy, you will win
all along the line! (Pulls at his buttons in an embarrassed way.) So I
wanted you to wear this ring to remind you. The diamonds in it sparkle;
they are like my tears when you are hard and forget us two. I know it
is stupid of me (wipes her eyes hastily), but now, when it comes to the
point, I can't say what I--. But do wear it!

Harald (kissing her). I will wear it! (Gently.) Its pure rays shall shed
a light on my life.

Gertrud. Thank you! (Throws her arms round him and kisses him.)

The Editor. What they are doing now is all right! Ha, ha, ha!

Evje. I won't stand it! (The EDITOR coughs loudly.) What are you doing?
(The EDITOR goes to the neighbouring house and rings the bell. The door
is opened and he goes in, laughing as he goes.)

Gertrud (who has started from HARALD'S arms at the sound of the cough).
That is--!

Harald. It sounds like him! (Turns, and sees Evje.)

Gertrud. Father! (Turns to run away, but stops.) No, it is cowardly to
run away. (Comes back, and stands at HARALD'S side. EVJE comes forward.)

Evje. I should not have expected my daughter, a well-brought-up girl, to
make an assignation in the street with--with--

Gertrud. With her fiancé.

Evje.--with a man who has made a mock of her father and mother, and of
his own doing has banished himself from our house.

Harald. From your house, certainly; but not from my future wife.

Evje. A nice explanation! Do you suppose we will consent to have as our
son-in-law a man who spurns her parents?

Gertrud. Father!

Evje. Be quiet, my child! You ought to have felt that yourself.

Gertrud. But, father, you surely do not expect him to submit to your
being abused and himself ill-treated in our house?

Evje. Are you going to teach your parents--?

Gertrud (putting her arm round his neck). I don't want to teach you
anything; because you know yourself, dear, that Harald is worth far
more--and far more to us--than the man who went away just now! (At this
moment the printer's boy, who has come out of the EDITOR'S house, runs
past them towards the town.)

Evje (seeing the boy, tries to get away). Go in now, Gertrud! I have
something I wish to talk to Mr. Rejn about.

Gertrud. You have nothing to talk to Harald about that I cannot hear.

Evje. Yes, I have.

Harald. But why may she not hear it? What you want is to break off our
engagement.

Gertrud. Father--! (Moves away from him.) Is that true?

Evje. Well-since it cannot be otherwise-it is true; that is to say, for
the moment. (Aside.) Good Lord, they can make it up right enough when
this is all over!

Gertrud (who is standing as if thunderstruck). I saw you with him!--Ah!
that is how it is! (Looks at her father, bursts into tears and rushes to
the door of their house, pulls the bell and disappears into the house.)

Evje. What is it? What is the matter with her?

Harald. I think I know. She realises that her life's happiness has been
bought and sold. (Bows to EVJE.) Good-bye! (Goes out to the right.)

Evje (after standing dumb for some moments). Bought and sold?
Some people take everything so dreadfully solemnly. It is only a
manoeuvre--to get out of this difficulty. Why is it that I cannot get
free of it! They both of them exaggerate matters so absurdly; first of
all this crazy fellow, and then Harald with his "Good-bye," spoken as if
the ground were giving way beneath his feet! I--I--feel as if every one
had deserted me. I will go in to my wife--my dear, good wife; she will
understand me. She is sitting up there, full of anxiety about me. (He
turns towards his house; but, on reaching the garden gate, sees JOHN
standing there.)

John (touching his hat respectfully). Excuse me, Mr. Evje--

Evje. You, John! Go away! I told you never to set foot in my house
again.

John (very respectfully). But won't you allow me to stand outside your
house either, sir?

Evje. No!

John (standing in EVJE'S way, but still with a show of great respect).
Not at the door here?

Evje. What are you standing in my way for, you scoundrel?

John. Shall I assist you to call for help, sir? (Calls out.) Help!

Evje. Be quiet, you drunken fool! Don't make a disturbance! What do you
want? Be quick!

John. I want, with all respect, to ask you, sir, why you have sent me
away.

Evje. Because you are a swine that gets drunk and then talks nonsense.
You don't know what a dilemma you have put me in.--Now go away from
here, quietly!

John. I know all about it! I was following you and the Editor all the
time, you know!

Evje. What?

John. These articles, that were to go in the paper--the printing was at
a standstill, waiting for them.

Evje. Hush, hush, John! So you overheard that, did you? You are too
clever; you ought never to have been a servant.--Now, be off with you!
Here is a shilling or two for you. Good-bye.

John. Thank you very much, sir.--This was how it was, sir. You see,
I thought of the number of times I had run over to the printer's with
messages when that nice Editor gentleman was spending an evening with
you--and so I thought I might just as well run over with this one.

Evje (starting back in alarm). What? What have you done?

John. Just to do you a good turn, sir, I ran along and told them they
might print those articles.

Evje. What articles?

John. The ones about you, sir. "Print away," I said--and they printed
away. By Jove, how they worked, and then off to the post with the
papers!

Evje. You had the impudence, you--! Ah, it's not true! I saw the
printer's boy myself, running to the office to countermand the
instructions.

John. I caught him up outside here and told him that a message had been
sent from Mr. Evje's house. And I gave him sixpence to go to the theatre
with; but he must have had to run for it, to be in time, because I am
sure it was after seven. Excuse me, sir, but it _is_ after seven now,
isn't it?

Evje. You scoundrel! You vindictive brute!

John. You can have a look at the paper, sir, if you like.

Evje. Have _you_ got a copy?

John. Yes, sir, the first copy struck off is always sent to the Editor,
so I volunteered to bring it to him. But you must be anxious to see it,
sir! (Holds it out to EVJE.)

Evje (snatching it from him). Give it to me! Let me see--. (Moves
towards his door, but stops.) No, my wife mustn't--. Here, under the
gas-lamp! This filthy fog! I can't--. (Feels in his pocket for his
glasses, and pasts them on.) Ah, that's better! (Holds the paper under
the light.) What a mischance! The blackguard--! Where is the article,
then? Oh, here--I can't see properly, my heart is beating so!

John. Shall I run for the doctor, sir?

Evje. Will you go away, you--! (Holds the paper first up, and then down,
in his attempts to see better.) Ah, here it is! "The Stock Exchange
Committee"--oh! (Lowers the paper.)

John (mimicking him). Oh!

Evje (trying to read). What a vile thing to do!

John. Oh, go on! go on!

Evje (as he reads). This beats everything I ever--Oh!

John. Oh! We _are_ in a bad way!

Evje (wiping his forehead). What a different thing it is to read
libellous attacks on others--and on one's self! (Goes on reading.) Oh!
Oh! What horrible, revolting rascality! What is it he says here? I must
read through it again! Oh, oh!

John. And often of a morning, when you have been reading the paper, I
have heard you laughing till the bed shook under you!

Evje. Yes, I who have so often laughed at others! (Reads.) No, this is
beyond belief! I can't read any more! This will ruin my position in the
town; I can hear every one laughing at me--he knows all my weaknesses,
and has managed to make it all so hideously ludicrous! (Tries to go on
reading.) Why, here is some more! (Reads.) It begins even worse than the
other! (Lowers the paper, panting, then tries to go on reading.) No, I
can't--I can't! I must wait! Everything seems going round and round--and
my heart is beating so violently that I know I shall have one of my
attacks! What a devil it is that I have been making a friend of! What a
creature to have broken bread with!--an unprincipled scoundrel! And the
disgrace of it!--the disgrace! What will they say at the Exchange? What
will--? I shall not dare to go out of my house, at least for some weeks!
And then people will only say I have taken to my bed! Oh, oh! I feel as
if it were the end of everything!

John (solicitously). Can I help you, sir?

Evje. Will you leave me alone--! No, I will have my revenge on him
immediately! I will go and ring his bell, and go into his house and call
him a scoundrel and spit in his face--! Did I bring my stick out with
me? Where is my stick? I will send my man for it, and then I will thrash
him round and round his own room!

John (eagerly). I will fetch it for you, sir!

Evje (without hearing him). No, it would only make more scandal!--How
can I take my revenge? I must do him some injury--some real injury that
will seem to poison his food for him and rob him of his rest. Scoundrels
like that don't deserve sleep! It must be something, too, that will
make his family every bit as unhappy as mine will be when they have
read this--something that will make them hide their heads for
shame--something that will make them terrified every time their
door-bell rings, out of shame for what their servants may hear! No, no,
I am getting as evil-minded as he is, now!--What a horrible trade--for
ever sowing the seeds of sin and reaping a crop of curses! Now I
understand what Harald Rejn meant by saying that no one ought to give
his help to such things!--Heavens, hear my vow: never again will I give
my help to such things!--What am I to say to my wife--my dear, good
wife, who has no suspicion how disgraced I am! And Gertrud, our good
Gertrud--ah, at all events I can give her some pleasure at once. I
cannot conceal it from them; but I will tell them myself, so that they
shall not read it.

John. Is there anything else I can do for you, sir?

Evje (almost screaming at him). Once for all, can't you let me alone!

Mrs. Evje (leaning out of a window she has opened). The sound must have
come from the street, all the same. Are you there, my dear?

Evje (drawing back in alarm). There she is! Shall I answer?

Mrs. Evje. Are you there, my dear?

Evje. Yes, dear, here I am!

Mrs. Evje. So you are! I heard your voice, and looked all over the
house. What is the matter, dear?

Evje. Oh, I am so unhappy!

Mrs. Evje. Good heavens, are you, dear? Come along in--or shall I come
down to you?

Evje. No, I will come in. Shut the window, or you will catch cold.

Mrs. Evje. Do you know, Gertrud is sitting up here, crying?

Evje. Good gracious, is she? I will come up--I will come up!

John. I will help him up, ma'am! (Pretends to be doing so.)

Mrs. Evje. Is that you, John?

Evje (in a low voice). Will you be off!

John. Yes, it is me, ma'am. He is so unwell.

Mrs. Evje. Is he! Heavens, it is one of his attacks! Help him, John!

Evje (as before). Don't you dare!

John (who has rung the bell loudly). I do hope you will moon be better,
sir! (Calls up to the window.) I can leave him now, ma'am! (To EVJE, as
he goes.) This has been a bit of luck, for me; but you shall have some
more of it! (Disappears into the fog as EVJE goes into his house. The
two Passers-by, that were seen at the beginning of the scene, are now
indistinctly seen returning along the street at the back.)

First Passer-by. Well, the land of Fogs used to be thought by the
ancients to lie in the north, where all confused ideas come from--

Second Passer-by (who does not seem to be able to get a word in). But,
listen to me for a moment-do you think it means--?

[Curtain]




ACT III

(SCENE.--A room in HALVDAN REJN's house. He is lying, supported on
pillows, on a sofa on the left-hand side of the room. There is a table
in the background, and another near the sofa. A lamp is hanging from the
ceiling, and another standing on the table at the back. HAAKON REJN, his
dress proclaiming him to be a well-to-do yeoman farmer, is sitting on a
chair by the sofa.)

Halvdan. So she couldn't come?

Haakon. No; there are the youngsters, you know--she finds it difficult
to get away.

Halvdan (after a moment's silence). Remember to thank her for all her
kindness to me. The happiest moments of my life have been those Sundays
and evenings that she and you and I spent together at your house. (A
pause.)

Haakon. She wanted very much to know how you were feeling--whether you,
who have suffered so much, are at peace now.

Halvdan. At peace? A man who has to die with all his work unfinished,
cannot easily root out all thoughts of that from his heart.

Haakon. You should try to lay in God's hands all that you have striven
for.

Halvdan. That is what I struggle daily to do. (A pause.)

Haakon. A sister of my wife's, who was a widow and badly off, died
leaving three young children. But she was glad to die. "Their Heavenly
Father will help them better when I am out of the way," she said. "I
took up too much room," she said; "I know I have often stood in their
way." (A pause.)

Halvdan. You tell that just as your wife would; she told me that story
once.

Haakon. I was to tell you from her that she believes you are to die in
order that what you have worked for may come to its fullest fruit. She
thinks that when you are gone, people will appreciate better what your
aims were.

Halvdan. There is some comfort in the thought that I may be dying
in order that what I have loved may live. I have already given up
happiness-even honour-for it; I gladly give my life for it now. (A
pause.)

Haakon. Do you bear ill-will to any of those who have opposed you so
cruelly?

Halvdan. To no one.

Haakon. Not even to those whose doing it is that you are lying here?

Halvdan. No, to no one. (A pause.)

Haakon. Could you bear to read something hateful about yourself to-day?

Halvdan. I don't know.

Haakon. Then you have not done with it all yet.

Halvdan. No, I know I have not. It is only sometimes that the busy
world outside seems to me like a ship sailing idly before the wind. More
often, I am back in the midst of it again--planning, hoping, praying! I
am young, you know, and have had to suffer so much--there was so much I
wanted to do. (Lifts a handkerchief to his forehead. HAAKON helps him to
wipe his face with it. A pause.)

Haakon. But it must be a comfort to you, too, that Harald is taking up
what you are laying down. There is good stuff in him.

Halvdan. Yes.

Haakon. And he never says more than is necessary. The country folk will
understand him all the better for it.

Halvdan. I hope so. As soon as he comes into my room I feel as if the
atmosphere were charged with electricity--I feel as if I _must_ have
a part in what he is doing--and so I work, and tire myself out. Ah, it
often seems very hard to have to die, and leave undone a great work that
one has failed to accomplish!

Haakon. But you have made him what he is, you know--and many others.

Halvdan. I have started the fight, that is all. It is hard to have to
desert at the beginning of it!--But God is good, and will understand; He
will not be surprised at what my thoughts are full of, when I go to Him.
(A ring is heard at the bell.)

Haakon. I expect that is Harald.

Halvdan. No, he never rings. Besides, I expect he is taking a walk, to
think over what he is going to say to-night.

Haakon. Yes, I suppose it will be a big meeting. (The HOUSEKEEPER comes
in.)

The Housekeeper. Mr. Evje is here, sir, asking for Mr. Harald. I told
him we were expecting him every moment. Shall I ask him to come in?

Halvdan. Yes, show him in. (HAAKON gets up, as EVJE is shown in.)

Evje (to HALVDAN). Good evening! (Sees HAAKON.) Ah, good evening! So you
have come? That is splendid. Is your wife with you?

Haakon. No, she couldn't leave the children.

Evje. I see. (To HALVDAN.) And how are you? About the same? Of course,
yes.--Where is your brother?

Halvdan. He has his meeting to-night, you know.

Evje. His momentous meeting--I know! I am going to it myself!

Halvdan (turns his face towards him). You?

Evje. My object in coming here was to take him home with me, so that we
could all go together to the meeting. We mean to go on to the platform
with him; I mean people to see that we are with him!

Halvdan (turning his face away). Really!

Evje (to HAAKON). You never answered my letter, Mr. Rejn.

Haakon. No, I knew I was coming in to town.

Evje. Well--will you sell?

Haakon. No.

Evje. But, my dear Mr. Rejn, you have not sold a single potato to my
distillery for five years! And with a farm like yours! This year you had
the best crop in the whole valley.

Haakon. Oh, yes--it wasn't so bad.

Evje. Not so bad! It was an extraordinary crop; and, everywhere else
round about, the crops were very middling.

Haakon. Oh, yes--it might have been worse.

Evje (laughing). I should think so! But then why won't you sell? (Turns
to HALVDAN.) I hope you will excuse our talking business in a sick-room;
a business man has to seize every opportunity, you know! (To HAAKON.)
You have never got higher prices elsewhere than you have from me.

Haakon. No, so I believe; but I have my own reasons.

Evje. Your own reasons? What are they?

Haakon. I had a servant once--it is about five years ago now--a good,
capable fellow. He used to take potatoes for me to the distillery every
day, and every evening came back drunk. So I spoke to him seriously
about it; and his answer was: "How do you suppose our brandy-merchants
are to grow rich, if chaps like me don't drink pretty hard?" You know
the man; he went into your service afterwards. But from that day I have
never sold a potato to a distillery.

Evje. But, my dear Mr. Rejn, we cannot be held responsible for the use
to which such rascals put God's gifts!

Haakon. No--no--I suppose not; still, I am not going to have anything
more to do with it.

Evje (to HALVDAN). Do you think your brother will not be home before the
meeting?

Halvdan. I should think he would; there is plenty of time yet.

Evje. There is; but I should have liked to take him home with me first.
The fact is (laughs) I have promised my wife and daughter not to go home
without him. You know what women are! Shall I just go into his room and
wait for him? There is something I want to talk to him about, you know.

Halvdan. I don't think there is a fire in there.

Evje. Oh, well, never mind--I will sit here. I have got a newspaper to
read, and you two must go on with your talk just as if I were not here!
I shall hear nothing, because I have something to read that interests
me. (He pulls a chair up to the table on the right with its back to
HALVDAN. HAAKON brings the lamp from the table at the back.) Ah, thank
you very much! Now, just talk away as if I were not here! (Takes the
paper from his pocket and sits down.)

Haakon (sitting down again beside his brother). I should have liked to
go to the meeting, too.

Halvdan. Of course you must go! You will hear Harald tell them how each
nation has its own appointed task in the world; that is why it _is_ a
nation. But, as long as it does not realise the fact, its politics
will be nothing but wrangling between the various class-interests--a
haphazard struggle for power. Our nation has never got beyond that
point! I have shouted myself to death over what is a mere market.

Evje (to himself, striking the table with his fist). The whole
commercial community is insulted in this insult to me! I will stir them
up at the meeting, and insist on our taking our revenge in common!

Haakon. I don't think things will be any better until we are better
Christians. Men think of nothing nowadays but themselves and their
position.

Evje (to himself). No, no-that wouldn't do. What would people say? They
would only say I was badly hit by this.

Halvdan (half to himself). A Christian nation, thinking of nothing but
its own interests--that is to say, power! Equality and Liberty have no
meaning for it. Haakon, it surely will be bliss for a wounded soul to
be taken into the Everlasting Love, high above all this so-called
Christianity of the world! For my soul is sorely wounded!

Evje (to himself ). If only I could strike him dead!

Halvdan. But may they all be forgiven!--You asked just now whether I
could bear to read something hateful about myself to-day. I think I
could.

Haakon. Then I can tell you the other message she gave me for you.
I have been a little shy of telling you that. It was that you should
remember that you must do more than forgive; you must pray for them. (A
pause.)

Halvdan (with his hand over his eyes). I do.

Evje (crumpling up the paper and throwing it on the floor). No, I won't
stand it! If the blackguard--. (Gets up in alarm, as he realises what
he has done, and is just going to pick up the paper; but at that moment
turns round facing the others, and lets it lie.) No, I won't touch it
again--never, as long as I live! (To the others.) You must forgive me,
but I was reading something that upset me very much. Your brother will
tell you all about it in the morning, no doubt. Poof--it is very warm in
here! But, of course, that is natural in a sick-room. I don't think he
can be coming now. I think, too, that I will go on, so as not to be late
for the meeting; there is sure to be a difficulty in getting seats. I
will get him to go home with me after the meeting, instead. That will be
better, after all.

Haakon. I was thinking of going to the meeting. Would you mind if I went
with you?--for I do not know the way myself.

Evje. You will come with me, Mr. Rejn? (To himself.) That will be
splendid--to make my entrance in the company of one of our yeomen
farmers! (Aloud.) By all means let us go together! I feel flattered by
the opportunity, because I have always maintained that our yeomen are
the pick of the nation. Well, then--(to Halvdan) I hope you will soon be
feeling better, Mr. Rejn. God bless you!

Halvdan (raising himself on his elbow, and looking at him with a smile).
Something must have gone amiss with you to-day.

Evje. Why do you say that?

Halvdan. Because as a rule you appear so composed so aloof from all this
squabbling.

Evje (impetuously). But, do what I like, I am not allowed to keep aloof
from it! I have no greater wish in the world than to do so, I can assure
you. Oh, well, your excellent brother--my future son-in-law,
as I am proud to call him--he will tell you all about it.
Good-bye!--and--and--God bless you!

Haakon. Shall I tell your housekeeper to come to you?

Halvdan. Oh, no; but you might tell her to come in a little while.

Haakon. Good-bye for the present, then!

Halvdan. Thank you for coming! Good-bye. (Sinks back on to the sofa. The
others go out, HAAKON turning round once at the door.)

Halvdan. It is something in the paper that has disturbed his equanimity.
What can it be? The same thing that made Harald so gloomy to-day, I
wonder? (Gets half up.) It is lying there.--No! What interest have I in
all their petty spite now? (Sinks back again.) "Could you bear to read
something hateful about yourself to-day?" Haakon asked. Then I suppose
there is something about me in it to-day. (Puts his hand over his
heart.) My heart doesn't seem to be beating any the faster for my
knowing that. (Gets half up.) There it lies! (Sinks back again.) No, I
am only trying to tempt myself. All the same, I should like to know how
many stations I have passed on my journey to the great City of
Peace! Can their malice affect me still? Surely I have passed _that_
station?--It would be worth trying, to see. There it lies! (Takes up
a stick that is standing by the sofa.) Surely I can get over there by
myself? (Gets up from the sofa with the help of the stick, and smiles.)
I have not much strength left. (Takes a few steps.) Scarcely enough
to get across the floor. (A few more steps.) To think that I should
have--so much vanity--my weak point--. (His breath fails him, but he
gets as far as the chair on which EVJE was sitting, and sits down.) One
ought to have done with all that before the soul can get quite away from
the dust that--. (Begins to rake the paper towards him with his stick.)
And here am I, sitting here raking more of it towards me!--No, let the
thing lie! I won't soil my wings any more.--Poor Harald! He has to
take up the burden now! What a horrible bungle it is, that we should
be brought into the world to give each other as much pain as possible!
(Decidedly.) Well, I am going to see what legacy of unhappiness I
am leaving him! I want to have a vivid impression of the misery I am
escaping from. There is a certain comfort even in that. (Bends down and
picks up the paper, rests for a moment, and then unfolds the paper.) But
this is not to-day's paper; it is dated for to-morrow! How can Evje have
got hold of it? Yes, here is the date--Sunday. "Remember that thou keep
holy the Sabbath Day!" On that day men's souls should turn to God--and
they offer Him _this_! It is after reading _this_ that these fine ladies
and gentlemen go to church! (Pushes the paper away from him.) Suppose
these "Christians" were to be brought to judgment one day without
warning?--Let us think of ourselves and not of others! (Lets his eye
rest on the paper.) Does that mean me? (Reads.) "Not yet actually dead,
but already canonised by a calculating brother--." (Checks himself.)
God forgive them! (Reads on.) "His teachings will no doubt obtain him
a paean of praise, but this will be--or, at least, so it is to be
hoped--from within the closely locked doors of the state's prisons and
houses of correction"--(checks himself a little)--"for that is whither
he leads his followers."--Good God, to think that they can say such
things!--And yet, they said worse things of _Him_! Peace! (Reads.) "No
doubt he talks against Socialism; no doubt he coquets with Christianity;
but it is by these very means that he has become so expert a seducer of
men's opinions-which was his aim all along." (Puts his hands before his
face.) I should not have read it; forgive me! I am too weak still!--Ah!
I feel--what is it? (Puts his hands suddenly to his heart, still
unconsciously grasping the newspaper in them.) I must get into my
room--get to bed! (Gets up with the help of his stick.) If only I can
get there! Oh, I feel it coming on!--I must--. (Tries to hurry, but when
he is halfway across the floor he stumbles, throws out his hands but
finds no support, staggers on for a few steps, and falls full length on
the threshold of his bedroom, so that half his length lies within the
door and half without. A moment later, the HOUSEKEEPER comes in.)

The Housekeeper (not observing that he is not still on the sofa). Won't
you go to bed now, sir? You can't stand so much in one day. (Goes to the
sofa.) Where is he? Surely he has not tried to walk in alone? (Hurries
across to the bedroom door and almost falls over his body. She starts
back with a scream.) Where is--? (Catches up the lamp, hurries back, and
bends over him; then calls out, screaming:) Help! Help! (Rings the bell
wildly. A MAID appears.) Mr. Halvdan is lying here! Heaven knows whether
he is dead or alive! Run for the Doctor! Leave the door open behind you,
and beg the first man you meet in the street to come up here at once and
help me. Tell them it is a matter of life and death!

Maid. Yes!

The Housekeeper. Hurry!

Maid (going out). Yes, yes!

The Housekeeper (coming back into the room). Is he alive or dead? I
haven't the courage to find out. And both his brothers away! (Cries.)
God grant some one comes soon!--Poor man, alone in his death as he was
in his life! But what was he doing _there_? Why did he get up from the
sofa? (Sees the paper.) Surely that can't be--? (Puts the lamp on the
floor and unfolds the paper.) Yes, it is the paper, right enough! Who
can have given it him? I can't look at it now; but if it is like the
number I read the other day (lets the paper fall, and gets up with the
lamp) then I understand everything--and may God requite those that do
such things! (The EDITOR rushes in.)

The Editor. Is it here?

The Housekeeper (holds the lamp to him, then starts back). What do _you_
want here?

The Editor. Where am I? A girl came running down the street and told me
I must come up here and help some one that was dying. What do you want
me to do?--or is it not here?

The Housekeeper. And it was _you_ she met? It is the hand of God!

The Editor. What are you babbling about? If it is not here, say so at
once.

The Housekeeper. Yes, it is here. There he lies!

The Editor. Then oughtn't we to get him into bed?

The Housekeeper. Yes. But do you know who it is you are helping?

The Editor (to himself). She is not very polite. (Aloud.) No; but what
does that matter?

The Housekeeper. This much--that it is you that have killed him.

The Editor. I--? She is mad.

The Housekeeper. The man lying there is Halvdan Rejn. And he had been
reading about himself in your paper.--Come, now, and carry him in. (She
goes into the bedroom with the lamp. Her voice is heard from inside the
room.) Now, take hold of him and lift him. You can think afterwards.

The Editor (stoops to lift the body, but gets up again). I don't think
he is dead yet.

The Housekeeper. All the more reason to make haste.

The Editor (stoops down again, but gets up once more.) Let me take his
head.

The Housekeeper. Why?

The Editor. So that--if he should open his eyes

The Housekeeper.--he won't see you. (Comes out of the bedroom). Go in
there, then, and take his head. (He goes in.) What was that?

The Editor (from inside the room). I slipped. There is something wet
here.

The Housekeeper. Yes, he has had a hemorrhage. Carefully, now. (They
carry him in. The stage remains empty for a moment. Then the EDITOR
comes back, wiping his forehead. He walks backwards and forwards,
treading on the paper as he goes, but without noticing it.)

The Editor. What a horrible thing to happen!--Newspapers are not meant
for dying people.--It is not my fault.--Is this blood on my hand? It
is! (Wipes it with his handkerchief.) And now it is on my handkerchief!
(Throws it away.) No, it has my name on it. (Picks it up again.) No one
can say it is my fault. (Sits down, then gets up, wiping his forehead
with his handkerchief without noticing what he is doing.) Ah, I hope I
haven't put blood on my forehead? I seem to feel it there! (Feels
with his hand to see if his brow is wet.) No. (Sits down, then gets up
again.) Let me get away from here. (Stops.) To think that I should be
the one to come up! that it should just happen to-night that I did not
receive my paper, and so went out! It almost seems more than accident.
Indeed, I often had a foreboding that it would happen. (Stands opposite
the bedroom door.) But is he dead? I think I will go and fetch the
Doctor. Oh no, of course the maid has gone for him. He hasn't long
to live, anyway; I could see that. (Walks forward, pointing with
his finger.) "There goes the man that killed Halvdan Rejn! And his
punishment was that he had to lift up his bloodstained body himself."
That is what they will say; and they will look at me as if--. (Sits
down.) No, let me get away! (Takes a few steps, then stops suddenly.)
That article in to-morrow's paper! It is worse than the others! (Pulls
out his watch.) Too late--the post has gone! I would have given--.
(Checks himself.) I have nothing worth giving. In the morning It will
be known all over the town just as everyone is reading my fresh article.
There will be a riot; I shall be hunted like a wild beast. What shall I
do? I might sneak out of the town? Then they will gloat over me! I won't
allow them that pleasure! No, I cannot stay my hand utter a failure;
only after a victory. That is the cursed part of it-never, never to be
able to end it. Oh, for some one that could end it--end it, end it! Oh,
for one day of real peace! Shall _I_ ever get that? (Sits down.) No,
no, I must get away! (Gets up.) To-morrow must take care of itself.
(Starts.) There is the paper he was reading! (Steps over it.) I will
take it away--and burn it. (Takes it up.) I cannot burn it here; some
one might come. (Is just going to put it into his pocket, as it is, but
takes it out again to fold it better.) A Sunday's paper, apparently!
Then it is _not_ to-day's? An old number, I suppose. Then the whole
thing is a mistake! (Sighs with relief.) Let me look again! (Opens the
paper, tremblingly.) I don't deserve it, but--. (Reads.) Sunday, the--.
_To-morrow's_ paper? _Here_? How in all the world did it get here?
(Appears horrified.) Here are the articles about Evje! How on earth did
they get in? Didn't I send a message? Didn't I write? This on the top of
everything else! Are even my printers conspiring against me? Well, even
if it ruins me, I shall go on! They shall find out what I can do. How on
earth can I be expected to help it if a weak-minded fellow dies, or if
my printers are drunk or my manager has delirium tremens! I shall pursue
my end through all chances and in spite of all their tricks, and I shall
crush them, crush them--I shall--. (Gives way to a paroxysm of rage.
At this moment the MAID comes in with the DOCTOR'S ASSISTANT. The MAID
rushes into the bedroom. The EDITOR starts up.) Who is that? What do you
want?

The Doctor's Assistant (coldly). What do _you_ want here?

The Editor. I? Oh, I was called up to help the sick man into his bed.

The Doctor's Assistant (as before). Ah!--so it was _you_! (A pause.)

The Editor. Have you ever seen me before?

The Doctor's Assistant. Yes. I have heard you grind your teeth before
this. (Goes into the bedroom.)

The Editor (after standing for a moment looking after him). They will
all look at me to-morrow like that-with those cold eyes. "Every man's
hand against him, and his hand against every man;" there can only be one
end to that. To-night, the meeting--and Harald Rejn will take them
by storm. To-morrow, his brother's death--and my new article in the
paper--and, in addition to that, those about Evje, who at present is
only angry. And the election in two days! Oh, yes, he will be elected
now. So I may as well give it all up at once. I would change places with
any wolf that has a lair to hide in. Those cold eyes of his! (Shudders.)
That is how every one will look at me to-morrow! They have pierced
through my armour! (The DOCTOR'S ASSISTANT comes back, and the EDITOR
makes an effort to resume his former confident manner.)

The Doctor's Assistant. I don't know whether you will be glad to hear
that it is all over.

The Editor (under his breath). You brute!

The Doctor's Assistant. His old housekeeper does not feel equal to
coming here to tell you what his last words were. They were: "Forgive
him!" (Goes out.)

The Editor (sitting down, then getting up again). No, I mustn't be found
here. (Walks about the room on tiptoe, as if he were afraid of waking
some one. When he comes opposite to the bedroom door, he turns towards
it, stretches out his arms and says:) Give me your forgiveness too!




ACT IV

(SCENE.--A large and handsomely furnished sitting-room at the EVJE'S.
The room is brightly lit and the fire burning. The entrance door is on
the right, and beyond it a door leading to the dining-room. INGEBORG
is busy taking the covers off the chairs, folding them carefully as she
does so. After a little, the bell rings. She goes to open the door, and
returns, showing in the DOCTOR.)

The Doctor. Oho! Is it to be in here to-night?

Ingeborg (who has resumed her work of making the room ready). Yes, sir.

The Doctor. Where are they all?

Ingeborg. At the meeting, sir.

The Doctor. All of them?

Ingeborg. Yes, all of them. Miss Gertrud went first--

The Doctor. Yes, I saw her well enough!

Ingeborg. And then the master, and a farmer gentleman with him, came in
to fetch the mistress.

The Doctor (to himself). Something has happened here, then. (Aloud.)
Tell me, Ingeborg--has _he_ been here again? You know who I mean.
(Coughs in imitation of the EDITOR'S cough.)

Ingeborg. Oh, the Editor; no, sir.

The Doctor (to himself). I wonder what has happened. (Aloud.) Well,
evidently there is to be a festivity here to-night; and, as I see the
chairs are getting their covers taken off, I may as well take mine off
too. (Takes off his coat and gives it to INGEBORG, who carries it out.)
I don't blame Evje for wanting to celebrate Harald's success after a
meeting like that! He is not exactly eloquent in the ordinary sense
of the word--doesn't bother about his antitheses and climaxes and
paradoxes, and all that sort of nonsense; but he is a _man_! He goes
bail for what he says, and he says what he likes--ha, ha! And that dear
Gertrud, too! Follows him into the hall, and, as there isn't a single
seat left there, goes up on to the platform among the committee, and
sits there looking at him with those trustful blue eyes of hers, as if
there was no one else in the room! And _we_ were all looking at _her_!
She helped him more than ten good speakers would have done, I am sure.
Her faith in him bred it in others, whether they liked it or no. She
is one who would die for her faith! Yes, yes! The man that gets her--.
(INGEBORG comes back.) Well! (Rubs his hands together.) Look here,
Ingeborg. (Very politely.) Do you know what is meant by the Rights of
Man?

Ingeborg (going on with her work). No, sir. Something we have earned, I
suppose.

The Doctor. Yes, you earn them every day.

Ingeborg. Our meals, perhaps?

The Doctor (laughing). No, it isn't something to eat, unfortunately.
(Politely.) Do you ever read papers, Ingeborg?

Ingeborg. Papers? Oh, you mean the price-lists they leave at the kitchen
door. Yes, sir; every day, before we go to market, I--

The Doctor. No, I don't mean papers of that sort. I mean--

Ingeborg. Oh, you mean the newspaper I take in to master's room every
morning. No, Sir, I don't read that. I am told there are such horrors in
it.

The Doctor. Quite so. Don't you care to read about horrors, then?

Ingeborg. Oh, we poor folk see enough of them in our everyday lives,
without reading about them!--But perhaps the gentry enjoy it.

The Doctor. You are a very wise woman. Let me tell you, though, that
there is a fight going on, about--oh, well, never mind what it is about.
And the Editor and Mr. Rejn, who both come to this house, are the two
chief fighters. Don't you want to know what they are fighting about?

Ingeborg (going on unconcernedly with her work). Oh, so they are
fighting, are they? No, I don't care the least bit, sir!

The Doctor (to himself). Ha, ha--the difference between Ingeborg and
me is that I am interested in the fight merely as a student of human
nature, and she is not interested in it at all. I wonder which is
farthest from any genuine belief in politics?--from our "duty as a
citizen," as they call it? (To INGEBORG.) Ingeborg, do you know what
your "duty as a citizen" means?

Ingeborg. My "duty as a citizen"? That mean; paying fines, doesn't it,
sir?

The Doctor. Yes; and a very heavy fine, into the bargain!

Ingeborg. The master was fined because the pavement was not swept. John
was ill.

The Doctor. Quite right, that was one of his duties as a citizen.--Tell
me, Ingeborg, are they expecting a lot of people here to-night?

Ingeborg. No, sir, I have only laid table for quite a few.

The Doctor. And what are they going to have?

Ingeborg. Oh, one or two dishes and one or two sorts of wine--.

The Doctor. Aha! (A ring is heard at the bell. INGEBORG goes to the
door.) There they are! Now we shall have a fine time!

Ingeborg (coming back with a letter). It is a note for you, sir.

The Doctor. Oh, bother I

Ingeborg. The man who brought it was not sure whether you would be at
the meeting or here.

The Doctor. How could he know--? (Putting on his glasses.) Oh, from my
assistant--that is quite another thing. Of course he wants my help or my
advice. Well, he shan't have it! I have run about quite enough to-day.
Tell the messenger that I haven't time! I have my Duties as a Citizen
to attend to! (Calls after her.) And my Manhood's Rights too! (Opens the
envelope.) No, I won't read it; if I do, the matter will worry me all
the evening. I know what I am. (Puts the note in his pocket.) I mean to
enjoy this evening! (Suddenly.) I wonder how our friend the Editor is
enjoying this evening! Was he at the meeting, I wonder? A remarkable
personality--but malignity itself! Lion-hearted, though! He would fight
till the last drop of his blood! But what is it, really, that he is
fighting for? That question has always interested me, for I can't make
it out. (To INGEBORG, who has comeback.) Well?

Ingeborg. The messenger has gone.--Yes, sir, I told him everything you
told me to.

The Doctor. Of course. You would! Why the deuce does any one pay any
attention to what I say! (The bell rings.) Here they are at last! Now
we shall have a delightful evening! (EVJE and MRS. EVJE come in.) I am
first, you see!

Evje and Mrs. Evje. Were you at the meeting, too?

The Doctor. Where else should I be?

Evje. Did you see me?

Mrs. Evje. There were so many people there, dear.

Evje. But I was standing on a seat.

Mrs. Evje. Yes, he was standing on a seat!

The Doctor. There were plenty of people doing that.

Evje. I wanted to be seen!--There _have_ been goings on here to-day, my
friend!

Mrs. Evje. You will never guess what has happened!

The Doctor. Anyway I can see that something has happened.

Evje and Mrs. Evje. Oh--!

The Doctor. What is it, then?

Evje. Those articles will be in to-morrow's paper.

The Doctor. In the paper?--Yes, I didn't find him.

Evje. But I found him!

The Doctor (impatiently). Well?

Evje. I will tell you all about it another time. But I have read them--

Mrs. Evje. And he has told me all about them!

The Doctor. Are they very bad?

Evje. Oh--oh!

Mrs. Evje. Oh--oh--oh!

The Doctor (with a look of pleased curiosity.) As bad as all that?

Evje and Mrs. Evje. Oh--oh--oh--oh!

The Doctor. And _that_ was why you went to the meeting!

Evje. Of course--tit for tat! It was my wife's idea.

Mrs. Evje. It was the obvious thing to do, dear.

Evje. Our whole family at the meeting!--So that all the town should know
that it was nothing but the meanest political persecution because I had
joined my son-in-law's party.

Mrs. Evje. We are party people now, you know!

Evje. Do you know, there is something exciting about being mixed up with
such things--something invigorating, something--

The Doctor (stepping back). Are _you_ bitten with it, too?

Evje. Yes, if I can't be left in peace, I shall become a party man.

The Doctor (enthusiastically). Did you see Gertrud?

Evje and Mrs. Evje (with emotion). Our Gertrud! Yes, indeed we did!

The Doctor. Did you see her coming in with him!

Evje and Mrs. Evje (as before). Yes, we saw her coming in with him!

The Doctor. I suppose you did not know she was going?

Evje and Mrs. Evje. Oh, yes!

Mrs. Evje. She had said she would go with us--

Evje. But when we went to fetch her, the bird had flown!

The Doctor. How pretty she looked, too! All the men were looking at her.
And how she looked at him!

Mrs. Evje. It made me want to cry. I had quite a job to prevent myself.

Evje. You need not have minded, dear! God has given us great happiness.
Her faith in him and her love shone to from her eyes that it went to my
heart. I felt quite upset! (Wipes his eyes.)

The Doctor. And what about _him_--eh? I don't fancy any one will think
about stopping his career. We have been a pack of fools.

Evje. That we have!

The Doctor. He is not exactly eloquent, but--

Evje. That is precisely what I was saying to my wife! He is not exactly
eloquent, but he is--

The Doctor.--a man!

Evje. A man! My very words, weren't they, my dear?

Mrs. Evje. Yes.--And I say he is so strong a man that he can afford to
be tender-hearted. For he certainly has been that.

Evje. Yes, he has been that!

The Doctor (laughing). In spite of his strength!

Evje. Oh, you may make the most of your--. Aha! (Loud ringing at the
bell is heard.) Here they are!

Mrs. Evje. Let us go and meet them!

The Doctor. No; look here--let us wait for them at the other side of the
room, so that they may make a triumphal progress up to us!

Evje and Mrs. Evje, Yes! (They go to the opposite end of the room, while
HARALD comes in rather quickly, with GERTRUD on his arm. As they cross
the room, the others cry out: "Bravo! Bravo!" and clap their hands.)

Gertrud (still holding to HARALD's arm). And he is my man! My man!
(Throws her arms round his neck, crying with happiness, and kisses him;
then does the same to her mother, and then to her father, to whom she
whispers: Thank you!)

The Doctor. Oh--me too!

Gertrud (after a moment's hesitation). Yes--you too!

(The DOCTOR helps her to take off her cloak, and talks to her,
whispering and laughing.)

Harald (shaking EVJE's hand). Good evening!

Evje. Forgive me!

Harald. With all my heart!

Mrs. Evje. And now everything is all right!

Harald. For good!

Evje and Mrs. Evje. For good!

Harald. And, thank you for coming to the meeting.

Evje. It was no more than our duty! Look here--did you see me?

Harald. The whole time! But, tell me, was it a delusion, or was it my
brother Haakon that was standing on the floor beside you, rather in the
shadow?

Evje and Mrs. Evje. It _was_ he!

Evje. I fetched him from your brother Halvdan's.

Harald. I am so glad! It must have pleased Haakon. Gertrud and I at
first thought of going in to see Halvdan before we came on here; but we
saw all his lights were out. He must be asleep.

Evje. I can give you news of him. He is all right.

Harald. And Haakon?

Evje. Very well, too. A fine fellow! I wanted him to come home with us
now; but he said he was tired after his journey.

Mrs. Evje (to INGEBORG, who has come in from the dining room). Is it
ready?

Ingeborg. Yes, ma'am.

Mrs. Evje. Then come along. (INGEBORG opens the dining-room door.)

The Doctor and Evje. Yes, come along!

The Doctor. But we must go ceremoniously! Let us make a little festivity
of it to-night! You must head the procession, Evje--and then the two
young people Gertrud (taking HARALD's arm). Yes!

The Doctor. And Mrs. Evje and I will bring up the rear! (Offers her his
arm.)

Evje. Forward!(The bell rings. He stops.) Who can it be--as late as
this?

The Doctor. Probably some friends on their way back from the meeting.

Mrs. Evje. We must wait a moment!(To INGEBORG, who is going to open the
door.)Put a leaf in the table, and lay places for as many as come.

Ingeborg. Yes, ma'am. (The bell rings again, as she goes to open the
door.)

The Doctor. They are impatient! So much the better--it shows they are in
a good humour after the meeting! (A knock is heard at the door.)

All. Come in!(The EDITOR comes in, with no overcoat on, but wearing his
hat, which he forgets to take of till he is well into the room. He goes
straight up to EVJE, who has crossed over to the left-hand side of the
room.)

All (when they see him in the doorway). You! (GERTRUD clings closer to
HARALD.)

The Editor. I wanted once more, as in the old days, not to go to bed
without--this time it is not a question of thanking you for the happy
time we have had together but without begging your pardon!(He speaks
quietly, but with suppressed emotion.)There has been some unfortunate
misunderstanding. Those articles have been printed, in spite of my
express instructions to the contrary--I do not know how.

Evje. I have read them.

The Editor. You have read them?

Evje. Yes, the copy of the paper that was meant for you came into my
hands.

The Editor. So that was it!--Forgive me, old friend! Won't you give me
your hand?

Mrs. Evje (coming forward). That he shall never do!

The Editor (glancing over his shoulder at her). Let no one come between
us at a moment like this! You don't know--. A hundred times in my life
I would have done what I am doing now, had I not been afraid that people
would call it affectation on my part and repulse me. Don't _you_ do
that!--least of all now! Give me your hand, Evje! I beg you, in the
sight and hearing of you all--. (EVJE seems to vacillate.)

Mrs. Evje. No, you shan't!--not while he has anything to do with a
newspaper. Otherwise it will all begin over again to-morrow. He is not
his own master, you know.

The Editor. I have done with it all.

Mrs. Evje. Oh, you have said that so often! Nobody believes it. No; when
a man can push political hatred so far as to write about an old friend,
in whose house he has been a daily guest, as if he were a criminal--and
all because he doesn't like his son-in-law, or his servant--one doesn't
shake hands with him the very day his attacks appear in the paper.

The Editor (who, all the tinge, has kept his back turned to MRS. EVJE,
and has not looked at her). Evje, you are a good-hearted fellow, I know.
Don't listen to what others say, now. This is a very bitter hour for me.
You would be doing a good deed! Give me your hand--or a word! I am
in such a state now that I must have visible signs of _some one's_
forgiveness, or I shall--!

Mrs. Evje (emphatically). Yes, a little repentance will do you good!
But it will do you no good if you obtain forgiveness easily! You want
to learn, just for once, what it is to be wounded at heart. You are only
accustomed to deal with people whom you can flog one day and have at
your feet--either from fear or from vanity--the next. And have we--God
forgive us!--ever thought seriously the worse of you for it? No; because
we never understood what it was till we were hit by it ourselves. But
that is all the more reason why we should do our duty now! Hatred shall
be met with hatred!

The Doctor (at the back of the room, to GERTRUD and HARALD). She is her
father's daughter, after all, when it comes to the point!

The Editor (turns upon MRS. EVJE, with his fist clenched, but restrains
himself from answering her). Then you won't shake hands, Evje? Not a
word of forgiveness?

Evje. I think my wife is right.

The Editor (controlling himself with difficulty). You are a weak man, I
know--

Evje. What do you mean?

The Editor.--but do not be weak this time! If you knew everything,
you would know you _must_ not refuse me what I ask. There are others
concerned--and for that reason--

The Doctor. Let us go!

Mrs. Evje. No, stay! He shall not have his way again.

The Editor. Well, of all--! It is certainly true that those who are
hardest on sinners are those who have never been tempted themselves--and
the most merciless creature in the world is an injured woman.

Mrs. Evje. Now he is coming out in his true colours!

The Doctor (not without glee). Yes, that he is!

The Editor (controlling himself once more). Evje--you, who know me, know
what it must cost me to do this--and you can form some idea of the need
I am in. I have never--

Evje. I believe you; but I never can feel sure what your next move will
be. You have so many.

The Editor. My next move is to have done with it all, as sure as--

Mrs. Evje. Don't believe him! A man who can ask for your sympathy
one moment and abuse you the next is not fit to promise anything--and
certainly not fit to be forgiven, either.

The Editor (with an outburst of passion). Then may everything evil
overtake me if I ever ask you or any one else for sympathy again! You
have succeeded in teaching me that I can do without it! I can rise
above your cowardly cruelty. (To EVJE.) You are a miserable, weak
creature--and have always been, for all your apparent good-natured
shrewdness! (To MRS. EVJE.) And as for you, who have often laughed so
heartily at my so-called malice, and now all at once have become so
severely virtuous--why, you are both like part-proprietors of my paper!
You have taken all the profit you could from me, as long as it served
your purpose--I have seen that for a long time! And all my pretended
friends are like you--secret holders of shares in me, so as to secure
their own safety and the persecution of others!--every bit as guilty as
I am, only more prudent, more timid, more cowardly--!

Evje. Once more--leave this house, which you have outraged!

Mrs. Evje. And how dare you set foot in here again?

The Editor. No, I am not going until all the anger that is in my heart
has turned into fear in yours! Because now I will _not_ have done with
it all! No--it is just through _his_ death that respect for me will
revive--it will be like a rampart of bayonets round me! "There goes
one who can kill a man with a word, if he likes!" _That_ will make them
treat me respectfully!

Harald and the Doctor. What does he mean?

The Editor (as he hears HARALD'S voice). And you--you mountebank, who
can stand up in public and seek applause before your brother's corpse
is cold--don't come talking rant to me! You are more contemptible than I
am! I couldn't have done that; I couldn't stand there, as you are doing
now, impatient to get to your champagne and pretty speeches!--Oh, how I
despise all such lying and heartlessness! (They all look at him and at
each other with a questioning expression.)

Harald. Is my brother dead?

Mrs. Evje. Is his brother dead?

Gertrud. Good God, is Halvdan dead?

Evje. Is he dead? Impossible!

The Doctor. Is Rejn dead--and I--?

Evje. I saw him only a couple of hours ago, looking quite well.

The Editor (in a broken voice). Didn't you know?

All (except the DOCTOR). No!

The Doctor. Ah, that letter, that letter! (Looks in his pocket for it
and his glasses.)

The Editor. I am the wretchedest man alive! (Sinks into a chair.)

The Doctor. I had a letter from my assistant, but I have not read it!

Mrs. Evje. Read it, read it!

The Doctor (reading). "I am writing in great haste. As I expect you will
be going to your old friends' after the meeting, and will meet Harald
Rejn there, the task will probably fall to you of telling him--(the
EDITOR gets up to go, but stands still)--that Halvdan Rejn died about
eight o'clock of a fresh attack of hemorrhage! (HARALD leaves GERTRUD'S
side and comes forward, with a cry. The EDITOR steadies himself by
holding on to the table.) No one was with him; he was found lying across
the threshold of his bedroom. A copy of the newspaper was lying on the
floor behind him." (HARALD, with a groan, advance threateningly towards
the EDITOR.)

Gertrud. Harald, my ring!--my ring! (HARALD Stops, collects himself,
buries his face in his hands and bursts into uncontrollable tears.
GERTRUD puts her arms round him and holds him folded in them.)

The Doctor (laying a hand on HARALD's arm). "The housekeeper told me he
had only spoken two words, and they were 'Forgive him!'" (HARALD bursts
into tears.)

The Doctor (after waiting for a little). "Apparently chance--or perhaps
something else--decreed that the maid who ran for help, should meet the
very man, who hats caused the tragedy, and that it should be _he_ who
helped the housekeeper to lay him on his deathbed." (All look at the
EDITOR.)

Evje. That was why he came! (A pause.)

Gertrud. Harald! (HARALD, who has turned away from her to struggle with
his emotion, does not turn round.) If _he_ could forgive--

The Editor (with a gesture of refusal). No!

Gertrud (quietly, to the EDITOR). If you want to deserve it, make an end
of all this!

The Editor. It is all at an end! (To MRS. EVJE.) You were right. I knew
it myself, too. My armour is pierces pierced through. A child might
conquer me now--and this child has done so; for she has begged for mercy
for me, and no one has ever done that before. (Puts his hand over his
eyes, turns away, and goes out. As he is going out the bell rings. A
moment later, INGEBORG Shows in HAAKON REJN.)

Gertrud (who has put her arms round HARALD, whispers). Who is it?

Harald. My brother. (Goes to meet HAAKON and throws himself into his
arms.) You had a talk with him this afternoon, then?

Haakon. Yes.

Mrs. Evje. Let us all go to him.

Evje and Gertrud. Yes.

Mrs. Evje (to INGEBORG). Bring in our cloaks and hats again, and
afterwards clear the table. (INGEBORG does so.)

Harald (unable to control his emotion). Haakon, this is my future wife.
(Goes away from them.)

Haakon. Well, my dear, your engagement has begun seriously; take all the
future seriously, too.

The Doctor. You need not say that to _her_. What she needs is to take
life more lightly.

Haakon. Oh, yes--if she lays everything in God's hands she can always
take life lightly.

Mrs. Evje. It is our own fault, I expect, when we take it too lightly.

Evje. But sometimes we learn a lesson by that.

Haakon. Oh, yes. Well, we must stand by one another, we who take life in
the same way.

Mrs. Evje. Shall we go, children?

Harald (to HAAKON). Will you bring Gertrud, Haakon? I would rather go
alone. (They go out. The curtain falls.)
