                               FRITZCHEN

                           A DRAMA IN ONE ACT





                                PERSONS

      Herr von Drosse, Major (retired), Lord of the Manor.
      Helene, his wife.
      Fritz, their son.
      Agnes, niece of Frau von Drosse.
      Von Hallerpfort, lieutenant.
      Stephan, overseer.
      Wilhelm, servant.





                               FRITZCHEN

_The action takes place on Herr von Drosse's estate. Time, the
present_.

_The scene represents a drawing-room on the ground floor. In the rear
are wide glass doors which stand open, and permit a view of the terrace
and splendid park lying beyond. Windows to the right and left. On the
right side, a sofa with table and chairs; on the left, a secretary with
writing materials. Handsome old-fashioned decorations, pictures of
battles, portraits in oval frames, racing prints, etc. The terrace is
sheltered by a broad awning which slightly subdues the glare of the
bright summer afternoon._


                             _FIRST SCENE_.

Wilhelm (_servant over sixty, in half livery, is engaged in arranging
the samovar for the afternoon coffee_). Agnes (_extremely slender,
nervous, with traces of mental distress--twenty years of age--blonde
hair smoothed on the temples, light muslin gown, a garden hat in her
hand--enters from the terrace_).

                                 Agnes.

Wilhelm, has the postman been here?

                          Wilhelm (_sighing_).

Yes, yes, he was here.

                                 Agnes.

Where are the things?

                                Wilhelm.

They are on the table, Fräulein.

                                 Agnes.

(_Goes quickly to the table and with feverish haste looks through the
small pile of newspapers and letters lying there_.) Again, nothing!

                                Wilhelm.

Yes, indeed--and this is the seventh day. Ah, it is really
heart-breaking.

                                 Agnes.

Are your master and mistress still taking their afternoon nap?

                                Wilhelm.

I have just heard the Major. He will be here directly--there he is now!


                            _SECOND SCENE_.

THE SAME. MAJOR VON DROSSE (_about fifty, tall, broad-shouldered,
rather stout. Dark-grayish full beard parted in the middle, waving
right and left over his shoulders. In the full, well-browned face with
flashing eyes and bushy eyebrows, there are energy and abundant
vitality, controlled by the self-command and chivalric manner of an old
officer. Brief in speech, domineering, but never without a gleam of
inner kindness_).

                                 Major.

Afternoon, Agnes!

                                 Agnes.

Afternoon, uncle!

                                 Major.

(_Goes to the table, examines the letters, sits down and looks straight
before him for a little while_.) Wilhelm!

                                Wilhelm.

What does the Major wish?

                                 Major.

Stephan is to come at once to the castle.

                                Wilhelm.

Very well, Major. (_Exit_.)

                                 Major.

Agnes, my child, just listen to me ... You are a reasonable creature
... One that I can talk to.... So the rascal has again not written.
He should have come to us, day before yesterday. Has made no
excuses--doesn't write--nothing. That has not happened during the six
years that he has been away from home. I ordered him most strictly to
send a letter, or at least a card, every day--for with her illness,
your aunt must be guarded against the slightest anxiety or excitement.
He knows that, and moreover has always observed it conscientiously. I
can't any longer be responsible for your aunt and her weakened heart.
Unless we use every means to keep her in her--visionary life, she will
go to pieces.

                                 Agnes.

Uncle!

                                 Major.

We must make up our minds to that, Agnes. Really, I do what I can.
Yesterday I even forged a telegram to her--you know that, eh! I did
intend to write to his intimate friend Hallerpfort, but thought better
of it. I shall drive into town directly after dark. Without your aunt
knowing it, of course--for now, during the harvest, that would upset
her still more. So you will stay all night with her, and er--well, the
rest I will arrange with Stephan.

                                 Agnes.

Very well, dear uncle.

                                 Major.

Just come here, girl, look me in the face ... We two know each other
and ... Eh?

                     (Agnes _casts down her eyes_.)

                                 Major.

Now see, I know very well that for two years you have been secretly
corresponding with Fritz.

                                 Agnes.

Uncle! (_Presses her hands to her face_.)

                                 Major.

There, that will do, that will do, that will do.... You can well
believe, if I had been opposed to it on principle, I should have
long since put an end to the business, shouldn't I?... But there are
things--well, in short, that you don't understand. Well, I should not
have begun about the matter to-day, but necessity knows no law, eh? And
if I go to see him this evening, I don't wish to grope altogether in
the dark.... So--on the basis of what has just been said--have you,
perhaps, by any chance had a letter from him?

                                 Agnes.

No, uncle!

                                 Major.

Hm!

                   Agnes (_hesitating, embarrassed_).

For some time we have not corresponded.

                                 Major.

So?--Ho, ho ...! Who is to blame for that?

                                 Agnes.

Ah, let us not talk about that, uncle. But from another quarter, I have
had news of him.

                                 Major.

When?

                                 Agnes.

Yesterday.

                                 Major.

And that you have----?

                                 Agnes.

(_Taking a letter from her pocket_.) Please read--and I think you will
not reproach me.

                    Major (_unfolding the letter_).

Ah, from the little Frohn! Now then, what does the little Frohn write?
(_Reads, muttering_.) Lanskis--Steinhof--met cousin--danced (_aloud_).
Indeed, then he could dance, but not write, that is a nice business--I
should not have believed it of him at all.... (_Reads further,
muttering_.) Eyes for the so-called beautiful Frau von Lanski ... The
whole regiment is talking of it.... Hm! eh, what! Such a goose! What
things such a goose does cackle!... Regiment has other things to bother
itself about.... But such a regulation goose ... If a young lieutenant
like that isn't all the time trotting after them. And when he once
shows attention to a lady who doesn't belong to the regiment ...
Besides, the Lanski is nearly forty ... Such idiocy! Then he might at
least--hm--hm--eh, pardon! Now then, what is it?... My poor old girl
... Yes, yes, jealousy ... You have borne up disgracefully since
yesterday.

                                 Agnes.

I think I have controlled myself, uncle?

                                 Major.

Yes, very true, girl, no one has noticed anything.


                             _THIRD SCENE_.

        THE SAME. WILHELM. _Afterward_ STEPHAN, _the overseer_.

                  Wilhelm (_entering from the right_).

Herr Stephan is there, Major.

                                 Major.

Come in!

                           (_Enter_ Stephan.)

Very well, my dear Stephen, I must drive into town directly after
dark. Unless I should be detained, I shall be here early to-morrow
morning--four and a half and four and a half more miles--nine miles....
The coach horses have been exercised to-day?

                                Stephan.

Yes, indeed, Major.

                                 Major.

Which are in better condition now, the browns or the whites?

                                Stephan.

That I don't permit myself to decide, Major. They have all had it
severely!

                                 Major.

Well, I will just go and have a look myself. Wilhelm--cap!

                                Wilhelm.

Very well, Major. (_Exit to the right_.)

                                 Major.

And at half after nine this evening, send a message to my wife and have
her told that I must stay all night at the brick kilns--eh, you
remember (_softly, looking around at_ Agnes) how we managed it the
other times when I was out at night.

                                Stephan.

All right, Major.

                                 Major.

Where is that fellow stopping with my cap? (_Enter_ Wilhelm.) Where
were you hiding, man? (Wilhelm _hands him the cap_.) And he is
tottering on his old legs! What are you tottering so for?

                                Wilhelm.

Indeed I am not tottering, Major.

                                 Major.

Well, come on, Stephan! (_Exeunt_ Major, Stephan, _through the garden
door_.)


                            _FOURTH SCENE_.

        AGNES. WILHELM. _Afterward_ LIEUTENANT VON HALLERPFORT.

                          Wilhelm (_softly_).

Fräulein, just now as I went out, Lieutenant von Hallerpfort was
standing there and wished to speak with Fräulein, privately. Neither
the master nor the mistress is to know anything of it ... God, Fräulein
is deadly pale!

                                 Agnes.

Ask the lieutenant to come in, and keep a lookout, if my aunt comes.

(Wilhelm _opens the door on the right, and disappears through the door
on the left hand_.)

                                 Agnes.

(_Meeting the lieutenant as he enters_.) Herr von Hallerpfort, what has
happened to Fritz?

                              Hallerpfort.

Nothing, Fräulein, not the least thing.... I am surprised that he is
not yet here.

                       Agnes (_rising joyfully_).

Ah! (_With a sigh of relief_.) Ha!

                              Hallerpfort.

I beg pardon a thousand times if I startled you.

                                 Agnes.

Will you please take a seat.

                              Hallerpfort.

Thank you, most humbly! (_They are seated_.) Your uncle and aunt, I
hope, will not----

                                 Agnes.

Uncle has just gone to the stables, and aunt's coming will be announced
to us.

                              Hallerpfort.

How is your aunt?

                                 Agnes.

Oh, I thank you, much as usual.--Herr von Hallerpfort, be frank with
me: What is this all about?

                              Hallerpfort.

Oh, absolutely nothing of any consequence. A little surprise--nothing
further--nothing further!

                                 Agnes.

To be sure, if he is really on his way here--didn't you ride here
together?

                              Hallerpfort.

No, I came by the way of the levee, and thought to overtake him. He
will have ridden by the highway.

                                 Agnes.

Then what is the object of this secrecy?

                              Hallerpfort.

That will soon be cleared up, Fräulein.... At this moment, in Fritz's
interest, I have to ask a great favour of you.... It is now (_takes out
his watch_) three forty-five o'clock. At four o'clock let us say five
minutes after four--even if we take into account some unforeseen
delay--yes--he must be here.... How long does it take to go to the
village to Braun's inn?

                                 Agnes.

Ten minutes--that is, by a short cut through the park, about five.

                              Hallerpfort.

Thank you most humbly. Then will you have the great kindness to reckon
by your watch a half hour from the moment when he comes in here, and
then send me a message to Braun's where I am stopping?

                                 Agnes.

At Braun's? I think you know, Herr von Hallerpfort, that this house----

                              Hallerpfort.

Oh, certainly that I know!... I only made the mistake of putting my
horse at the entrance to Braun's, and as he doesn't belong to me, it is
my duty to look after him.

                                 Agnes.

And all that is the truth?

                              Hallerpfort.

Absolutely.

                                 Agnes.

I should not be so persistent--forgive me for it--but here we have all
been so distressed about him. For nearly a week, we have sat and waited
for news.... Tell me truly.

                   Wilhelm (_entering at the left_).

Fräulein, your aunt.

                     Hallerpfort (_springing up_).

Good-bye, then! And be reassured, it is all about a joke--about----

                                 Agnes.

If only your face were not so serious.

                              Hallerpfort.

Oh, that--that is deceptive. (_Exit quickly to the right_.)


                             _FIFTH SCENE_.

AGNES. FRAU VON DROSSE (_extremely delicate in appearance, forty,
suffering--with girlish complexion--gay, absent smile--dreamy, gentle
expression--gliding, careful walk--breathing deeply_).

                                 Agnes.

(_Hastens to meet her, to support her_.) Forgive me, aunt, that I did
not go to fetch you.

                            Frau von Drosse.

No matter, darling ... I could manage.... Is there any news?

                       (Agnes _shakes her head_.)

                      Frau von Drosse (_sighing_).

Ah, yes.

                                 Agnes.

Do you know, aunt, I have a sort of presentiment that he will soon be
here himself.

                            Frau von Drosse.

Yes, if things happened according to presentiments!


                             _SIXTH SCENE_.

                       THE SAME. MAJOR. WILHELM.

                                 Major.

Well, darling, are you in good spirits?... No!... Well, what is it
then? What is it then?

                            Frau von Drosse.

Ah, Richard, you surely know.

                                 Major.

Oh, nonsense! Don't worry yourself uselessly.... A young badger like
that--service and casino and what not! I used not to do any better
myself ... Eh, Wilhelm, that you will have remembered even in your
booziness? Many a time I didn't write for four weeks.

                 Wilhelm (_who is handing the coffee_).

Yes, Major.

                                 Major.

And were you at all worried then?

                                Wilhelm.

Yes, Major.

                                 Major.

Old donkey.... Well, you see how it is ... The same old story.

                            Frau von Drosse.

Richard, do you know, last night a thought came to me. They all idolise
him--that boy.

                                 Major.

Yes?

                            Frau von Drosse.

Well, with the ladies of the regiment, it is no great wonder....

                                 Major.

So far as they wish to get married--no.

                            Frau von Drosse.

But there is another who takes a very special interest in
him--motherly, as one might say.... No, motherly is not just the right
word, but at any rate, purely human, purely spiritual--you know what I
mean. At the last ball in Wartenstein, she questioned me at length
about him, about his childhood, and everything possible. At the time I
was really rather indignant, but now it pleases me.... I shall write to
her to-day and ask her to keep an eye upon him. For you see, a woman's
influence--that is what he needs.

                                 Major.

Ah, the poor devil! And for that purpose, one of the kind.... Who then
is it?

                            Frau von Drosse.

Why! You surely know her ... Frau von Lanski of Steinhof.

                           (Agnes _winces_.)

                                 Major.

Ah, indeed--well, to be sure, hm--that is quite probable.

                            Frau von Drosse.

Their estate is quite close to the city ... There he could always go in
the evenings ... If only the husband were not so rude. I should be
afraid of him.

                                 Major.

Well, you are not a lieutenant of hussars, darling.

                                 Agnes.

Won't you drink your coffee, aunt? It will be quite cold.

                            Frau von Drosse.

Ah, the stupid fig-coffee. To be sure, your health is good, you don't
need anything of the kind! (_drinks_) Richard, do you know, last night
I saw a vision.

                                 Major.

Well, what did you see this time, darling?

                            Frau von Drosse.

There was a wide chamber with many mirrors and lights--perhaps it was
Versailles--perhaps the castle at Berlin. And hundreds of generals
stood there and waited.... (_Excitedly_.) And suddenly the door was
opened wide and at the side of the Emperor----

                                 Agnes.

Drink, aunt--tell about it later--it excites you.

                            Frau von Drosse.

Yes, my sweet one, yes. (_Drinks and leans back exhausted_.) You know,
Richard, perhaps they are to increase his pay.

                                 Major.

Surely he has enough, darling. Do you wish him to gamble it away?

                            Frau von Drosse.

Very well, then, let him gamble it away. I find that in general we pay
so little heed to him.... I am obliged to think all the time how he
acted in a roundabout way in the matter of Foxblaze. He didn't trust
himself even to tell it.

                          Major (_laughing_).

No, child--but just stop.... Besides the charger he already has two
others ... And one of them is Mohammed! Such a big stable--it is only a
nuisance to him.... Just consider!

                            Frau von Drosse.

Ah, it is surely only restlessness. Ah, I wish he were only----

                                Wilhelm.

(_Who had gone out, appears excitedly at the door on the right and
calls softly_.) Major, Major!

                        Major (_springing up_).

What is it?

                       Wilhelm (_in a whisper_).

The--the--young master!

              Frau von Drosse (_turning round suddenly_).

What is it about the young master?

               Major (_rushes out. His voice is heard_).

Boy, boy, boy!

          (Frau von Drosse _breaks out in ecstatic laughter_.)

                                 Agnes.

Quietly, aunt! Quietly! Don't excite yourself!


                            _SEVENTH SCENE_.

THE SAME. FRITZ VON DROSSE (_in hussar uniform, his mother's son,
slender, delicate, very youthful, blond to the roots of his closely
cropped hair, small curled moustache, erratic person. Uneasiness is
veiled beneath a noisy cheerfulness_).

                            Frau von Drosse.

(_Goes to meet him with outstretched arms_.) My God! there he really
is!

                                 Fritz.

I should think he was! (_Presses her to his heart and strokes her hair,
closes his eyes a moment, as if overcome with faintness_.) But be
seated, mamma, be seated. Confound it, but I have ridden! And on the
way, my horse lost another shoe.

                                 Major.

Mohammed?

                                 Fritz.

No, I am riding the Spy.

                                 Major.

Where did it happen?

                                 Fritz.

Thank God! just near Gehlsdorf.... I wasted twenty-five minutes at the
blacksmith's.... But then--when--you should have seen!... Yes, Wilhelm,
just see to it that the horse is well scraped and rubbed down. And
don't let him stand just now--first lead him about properly.... An
hour, feeding time--understand, old chap?... There, give me your
paw--so!--don't be so agitated.... And now, go on, out with you!

                           (_Exit_ Wilhelm.)

                            Frau von Drosse.

Come here, my Fritzchen, sit beside me!

                                 Fritz.

Very well, mamma, let us, very well!

                            Frau von Drosse.

You see, Agnes she had a presentiment about you.

                                 Fritz.

Ah! Good-day, Agnes!

                                 Agnes.

Good-day, Fritz!

                                 Fritz.

You are so formal!

                                 Agnes.

I?... Ah, no, dear Fritz.... Would you not like to drink something?

               (Fritz _stares at her, without replying_.)

                                 Major.

Fritz!

                         Fritz (_starting up_).

Yes, father!

                                 Major.

You are asked a question.

                                 Fritz.

To be sure, pardon me!... Pardon me, dear Agnes!... It is the heat ...
It makes one quite idiotic.... Please bring me anything you like....
No, bring me rather some Rhine wine.... Bring some of the '64.

                          Major (_laughing_).

You go eagerly at the stuff, my son....

                                 Fritz.

Forgive me, father, if I was too bold. I don't know how I came to do
it.

                          Major (_to_ Agnes).

Just bring it, bring it.

(Agnes _takes the keys from the shelf and goes out to the right_.)

                            Frau von Drosse.

How long have you furlough, my boy?

                                 Fritz.

Furlough? Ha, ha, furlough ... No furlough at all. Sixty precious
minutes, I have spared for you (_stretching himself_) then it is over!
(_Throws himself into a chair standing near the place where his mother
is sitting_.)

                                 Major.

It is "over," what does that mean? Are you then on duty?

                                 Fritz.

On duty?... Well, yes indeed, I am on duty--to be sure--of course.

                                 Major.

What duty can that be?

                                 Fritz.

Well, a patrol ride, of course.

                                 Major.

When did you set out?

                                 Fritz.

At noon, father.

                                 Major.

Remarkable. In my time, the cavalry rode in patrol service rather about
midnight.

                                 Fritz.

Yes, the old man[2] does such things.... It is all one to him. If he
can give petty annoyance. Yes.

                                 Major.

How do you have time to stop in here?

                                 Fritz.

Well, I had to unsaddle, and anyhow have ridden four and a half miles.
It was only the question whether I should feed the horse at Braun's at
the entrance where one gets merely water or----

                                 Major.

Of course you are right about that.

                Frau von Drosse (_stroking his hands_).

See what brown hands the boy has got.... I wonder how they can be
burned through the gloves ... Just look, Richard, he has the white mark
on his forehead, there where it is shaded. The last time, it was not
there. My boy, my boy! (_Bends down her head and kisses him on the
forehead_.)

(Fritz _closes his eyes and utters a low whimpering exclamation of
pain_.)

                            Frau von Drosse.

What was it? Did I hurt you, my boy?

                  Fritz (_with embarrassed laughter_).

Oh, no--no!

                                 Major.

Control yourself, Fritz!

                                 Fritz.

Yes, father!

                            Frau von Drosse.

Let him alone, Richard! Remember he has to leave directly.

                 Fritz (_staring straight before him_).

Yes, I must go directly.

               Major (_shaking his head, examines him_).

Remarkable!

            Agnes (_who returns with a bottle and glasses_).

There is the wine, dear Fritz.

                                 Fritz.

Ah, if only the wine is there! (_Hurries to the table and pours the
wine_.) Does no one touch glasses with me?

                                 Major.

Just wait, I will touch glasses with you.

                                 Fritz.

Then long life to us, friends! May we live happily.... Long may we
live.... (_Musing_.) May we live as long as possible!

                                 Major.

But you are not drinking.

                                 Fritz.

Yes, yes. (_Tosses down a glass_.)

                                 Major.

Well, I should like to take this occasion to ask you just why you don't
write to us any more.

                            Frau von Drosse.

Please, Richard, please say nothing to him--he telegraphed.

                     Fritz (_starting anxiously_).

Telegraphed? What did I telegraph?

        (Major _makes signals to him behind his mother's back_.)

                                 Fritz.

Yes, of course. You see, father, I telegraphed.... And then, not long
ago, I fell from the trapeze and sprained my arm a bit.

                            Frau von Drosse.

You see, Richard, that is what hurt him just now; and yet you scolded
him.

                                 Fritz.

Mamma, father is right.... A soldier is not allowed to show signs of
pain--he has no pain. That is something which doesn't happen, it is
something which doesn't happen at all, does it, Agnes?

                                 Agnes.

Why do you ask _me_, Fritz?

                                 Major.

Remarkable!... You know, darling, the boy would like something to eat.
In such cases, you always see to it yourself--eh?

                                 Fritz.

No, indeed, mother--stay here, mother. (_He grasps her hands_.)

                    Frau von Drosse (_imploringly_).

Richard, the time is just now so short.

                                 Major.

Won't do, child! I have to speak to him about something.

                                 Fritz.

What is it, father? There is indeed no question of ...

              Frau von Drosse (_standing up and sighing_).

Don't be too long, Richard. Remember I wish to have something more of
him. (_Goes with_ Agnes _to the door on the left, where she turns
again_.) My boy, don't you look at me any more?

                                 Fritz.

(_Who has been standing with averted face, biting his lips, turns
suddenly_.) At your service, mother!

                            Frau von Drosse.

Now he is on his "at your service" footing, even with me.

                 (_Exit_ Frau von Drosse _with_ Agnes.)


                            _EIGHTH SCENE_.

                             MAJOR. FRITZ.

                                 Major.

Well, Fritz, my boy, here we are now alone, just out with what you have
to say ... Exactly what is the matter?

                                 Fritz.

Nothing, father, absolutely nothing ... What should be the matter?

                                 Major.

You know, this story about the sprained arm and the patrol ride, that
is simply a lie!

                                 Fritz.

How so?

                                 Major.

Will you smoke a cigar with me?

                                 Fritz.

If you please ... That is, I should like a glass of water. (_Tosses
down two glasses of water_.)

                      Major (_lights his cigar_).

Just see, Fritz, in your rage you fail to notice that I am insulting
you here.

                                 Fritz.

How can a father be said to insult his son? If you don't believe me,
then you just don't believe me.

                                 Major.

But we are both officers, my son.... Well, let us set that
aside--besides that, we are a couple of good friends from time
immemorial.... Isn't that the case--are we not?

                                 Fritz.

Oh, to be sure.

                                 Major.

And when I see you running about here--in ecstasy or despair--I can
make nothing out of it. Yes, I should like to advise you to put a
little more confidence in me.... The affair is surely not so bad that a
man of experience cannot put it in order again.... So just sit down
here a while.... Have you gambled?

                                 Fritz.

Yes, I have gambled too.

                                 Major.

Have you lost?

                                 Fritz.

No, I have won.

                                 Major.

Then, as to women--how is it about women?

                    Fritz (_shrugs his shoulders_).

Ah!

                                 Major.

Boy, don't be so hard in the mouth.... Do you think I don't know you
are in love?...

                                 Fritz.

In love? Ah, good God!

                                 Major.

Just think, my boy, only a year and a half ago, you came to me one fine
day and explained to me that you wished to engage yourself to Agnes....
You know that I have not the slightest objection to Agnes. She will
make an excellent Frau von Drosse.

                                 Fritz.

Indeed? Do you believe it?

                                 Major.

But your twenty-one years and, ah, good God!... You still carry about
with you most merrily the eggshells on your back--as the infantry
carries the knapsack. You hadn't the slightest idea of what are
commonly called "women"--of course, I don't count barmaids and such
people.... So I said to you: "My boy, let this interview be buried--and
above all, so far as Agnes is concerned.... Do as your father and your
grandfather did! Get some experience and--then come again." Don't you
remember that?

                                 Fritz.

I should think I did remember it.

                           Major (_smiling_).

And now, it seems to me, you have had some experience.

                                 Fritz.

Oh, yes, there is no denying that.

                        Major (_still smiling_).

You have in the end had a so-called "passion," or are stuck in the
middle of it; which of the two I don't know. Yet to judge from the
discontinuance of your letters, the latter is the case.... Since we are
here together as two men, I will not expostulate with you further....
You know perhaps the story of that abbé who, in society, once excused
the absence of his bishop with the words: "Monseigneur est en retard à
cause d'amour." To a certain extent, this holds good in every case....
But in spite of that, on your mother's account, don't do it again. That
is my advice to you.... There! And now we'll enter at once upon the
matter itself.... Just see, Frau von Lanski is, it will be admitted, a
very charming woman, but----

                         Fritz (_impetuously_).

Father, how do you come to refer to Frau von Lanski?

                                 Major.

There, there, there, only take it calmly, only take it calmly.... I
know just what there is to know about such affairs, and I don't by any
means wish to pry into your secrets ... But so far as the grand passion
is concerned, be calm.... I can cure you again ... Be quite calm.

                                 Fritz.

That I can well believe, father, if only you have the time necessary to
do it.

                           Major (_smiling_).

Well, why haven't I?

                                 Fritz.

Because, in twenty-four hours, I shall be a dead man.

                                 Major.

(_Springing up, and taking him by the shoulder_.) Boy!

                                 Fritz.

Father, I did not wish to tell anything. I came here only to take
farewell of you in silence. But you have drawn it out of me, father.

                    Major (_flying into a passion_).

So, there's a scandal.... You had to carry it to the point of making a
scandal--you damned fool! (_More calmly_.) Lanski has challenged you?

                         (Fritz _nods assent_.)

                                 Major.

Well, yes--and it is well known--Lanski is a dead shot. He is perhaps
the best shot anywhere hereabouts.... But still your wrist is in good
order. How can one throw the thing away like that? I have fought three
duels, and two of them under difficult conditions--eh--and--there, see
here! How can one say such a thing? How can one, man?

                                 Fritz.

Father, the affair at this moment is in such a state that, after all, I
don't know whether I shall be granted a duel!

                          Major (_hoarsely_).

I don't understand that, Fritz.

                                 Fritz.

Then don't ask me!... I can't say it, father.... I had rather bite off
my tongue. (_Pauses_.)

                                 Major.

(_Goes to the door on the left, opens it, looks out, and closes it
again_.) Now speak! (_Wildly_.) Speak or----

                                 Fritz.

For me, father, there is no more any "or." ... Whether you turn me out
or not, it is all the same.

                 Major (_softly, grinding his teeth_).

Do you wish to drive me mad, boy?

                         (Fritz _crying out_).

He whipped me--across the courtyard--out into the street--whipped me
like a beast!

                       Major (_after a silence_).

Where was your sabre? You could have run him through.

                 (Fritz _silent, with downcast eyes_.)

                                 Major.

Where was your sabre, I ask you?

                                 Fritz.

It was--not--at hand, father.

                                 Major.

It was not at hand.... Hm!... Now I understand it all. Surely there is
nothing left to wish! And this catastrophe occurred when?

                                 Fritz.

Yesterday evening, father!

                                 Major.

At what time?

                                 Fritz.

It was still--daylight!

                                 Major.

Ha, ha!

                                 Fritz.

Father, only don't laugh! Have pity on me!

                                 Major.

Have you had pity on me?... Or on your mother? or on--on.... Just look,
look about you ... All that was made for you!... All that was waiting
for you.... For two centuries we Drosses have struggled and scraped
together and fought with death and devil merely for you.... The house
of Drosse was resting on your two shoulders, my son.... And you have
let it fall into the mire, and now you would like to be pitied!

                                 Fritz.

Dear father, listen.... Since you have known it, I am quite calm....
What you say is all very true, but I cannot bear the responsibility
alone. Listen; when I came to you that time, on account of Agnes, my
whole heart was attached to her. So far as I was concerned, other men's
wives could go to the devil.

                                 Major.

Did I drive you, then, after other men's wives?

                                 Fritz.

Yes, father, otherwise what does that mean: "Get some experience,
ripen, do as your father and grandfather did"?... In the regiment, they
still call you the wild Drosse, and tales are still told of your former
love adventures.... They tell some such stories even of a late date....
For my part, I had not the least taste for such diversions. I used to
see in every woman who did not belong to me, a sort of holy thing....
That may have been a green way of looking at it, but you would have
allowed it; and with Agnes, I should have quietly----

                                 Major.

Stop! Have pity! Stop!

                                 Fritz.

See, now you say to me all at once, "have pity"--Father, I am a dying
man, I did not come here to make reproaches, but do you make none to
me!

                                 Major.

(_Embracing him, and stroking his hair_.) My son--my all--my boy--I
don't permit--I will not----

                                 Fritz.

Silence, silence, father! Mother should not hear that.

                                 Major.

Yes, forgive me for giving way. It shall not happen again.... So how
does the affair stand now?

                                 Fritz.

I reported myself to the old man, that very night.

                                 Major.

My God! Whatever did the old Frohn say?

                                 Fritz.

Spare me that, father.... Of course, I obtained the usual furlough at
once, until the discharge comes. Well, that doesn't matter now.... It
does not last long, thus.... This morning, the court of honor had a
sitting. After my hearing, I rode away at once, so as to lose no time.
I gave Mohammed to Hallerpfort in order to have him follow me as soon
as judgment was pronounced. He may be here at any moment.

                                 Major.

Why did you summon a court of honor?

                                 Fritz.

What was I to do, father, after Lanski declared to those who delivered
my challenge that I was no longer--capable of having satisfaction?

                                 Major.

Ah! I will shoot the dog dead for that.

                                 Fritz.

Well, I hope they will decide favourably to me.

                                 Major.

If not, the dev-- (_Softly_.) And then I will tell you a couple of
measures to take so as to have a steady hand. Sleep properly, and don't
eat a bite, and then tell the doctor----

                                 Fritz.

Enough, enough, father, that is of no further use.

                                 Major.

What does that mean? Is it possible that you will--to Lanski?----

                                 Fritz.

Lanski will hit me. Depend upon it....

                                 Major.

Man, are you--are you----?

                                 Fritz.

Lanski will hit me. Depend upon it....

                                 Major.

Man, yet have--yet consider----

                                 Fritz.

I will not, father! And if you had seen the spectacle which the people
of Wartenstein saw yesterday (_shudders_), you would demand nothing
more of life for me than a half-respectable death....

                          Major (_brokenly_).

Perhaps--they will not--grant you--the duel.

                                 Fritz.

Well, if we have got to that last hope, father, then we are indeed in
bad straits.... Shall I perhaps open a dram-shop in Chicago, or a
cattle business with my paternal capital? Yes? Would you have done it?

                          Major (_perplexed_).

I?

                                 Fritz.

Say then say!

                     Major (_drawing himself up_).

No! (_Sinks down in his chair_.)

                                 Fritz.

So you see, father--so or so--your Fritz is done for.

                   Major (_sunk in gloomy reverie_).

My fault!--my----


                             _NINTH SCENE_.

       THE SAME. WILHELM. _Afterward_ LIEUTENANT VON HALLERPFORT.

                                 Fritz.

What is it?

                                Wilhelm.

Lieutenant von Hallerpfort wishes to speak to the young master.

                                 Fritz.

(_Hurrying past him to the door_.) Well?

(Hallerpfort _shakes hands with him and the_ Major, _and casts a glance
at_ Wilhelm, _who forthwith disappears_.)

                                 Fritz.

Well?

                              Hallerpfort.

Does your father know?

                                 Major.

Yes, my dear Hallerpfort, I know.--Granted?

                              Hallerpfort.

To-morrow morning, half after four o'clock behind the large
drill-ground.

                                 Fritz.

Thank God!

                                 Major.

Thank God! (_They embrace_.)

                     Fritz (_disengaging himself_).

Conditions?

                              Hallerpfort.

Fifteen paces--advance--five paces barrier--exchange of shots----

                                 Fritz.

To a finish?

                              Hallerpfort.

To a finish.

                                 Fritz.

Very well!

(Major _turns toward the door, and presses his hands to his face_.)

                    Hallerpfort (_approaching him_).

Major, as your son's best friend----

                     Major (_grasping his hands_).

I thank you, my dear Hallerpfort, I thank you.... You will ride away at
once, will you not?

                              Hallerpfort.

Unfortunately we must, Major.

                                 Major.

Then just listen.... I will pass the hours until the duel, with my
son.... That you can understand, can't you?... My carriage is hitched
up but I cannot go away with you for fear of making my sick wife
uneasy. Wait for me at the end of half an hour in Schrander's inn....
Don't fear. We shall be on time....

                              Hallerpfort.

It will be as you order, Major.

                                 Major.

And now, courage, Fritz!

                                 Fritz.

That is understood, father!

                                 Major.

(_Holding open the door on the left, in a different tone_.) Now, boys,
just come quickly in! Only think, darling----


                             _TENTH SCENE_.

                       THE SAME. FRAU VON DROSSE.

                            Frau von Drosse.

Ah--Herr von Hallerpfort! (_He kisses her hand_.) How does this happen?
Two lieutenants in the house at the same time--if that doesn't bring
luck!

                           Fritz (_quickly_).

We have orders together, mamma.

                              Hallerpfort.

And alas, madam, we have to be off this very minute.

                            Frau von Drosse.

How is that? Then I don't have my full hour? And now everything is so
beautifully arranged.... Fritz, my dear Hallerpfort--just a bite, won't
you?... Richard, dear, come to my aid.

                                 Major.

But, dear child, service is service.

                     Fritz (_with quick decision_).

So, good-bye, mamma!

                   Frau von Drosse (_embracing him_).

My boy--you will soon have furlough, won't you?

                                 Fritz.

Yes indeed, mamma! After the man[oe]uvres. Then we are free. Then we
will be merry!

                            Frau von Drosse.

And Hallerpfort is coming with you, isn't he?

                              Hallerpfort.

With your permission, madam.

                      Major (_softly, to_ Agnes).

Take leave of him! You will never see him again!

                                 Fritz.

(_Stretching out his hand cheerfully to her_.) Dear Ag-- (_Looks into
her face, and understands that she knows. Softly, earnestly_.)
Farewell, then.

                                 Agnes.

Farewell, Fritz!

                                 Fritz.

I love you.

                                 Agnes.

I shall always love you, Fritz!

                                 Fritz.

Away then, Hallerpfort! Au revoir, papa! Au revoir! Revoir! (_Starts
for the door on the right_.)

                            Frau von Drosse.

Go by the park, boys--there I have you longer in sight.

                                 Fritz.

Very well, mamma, we will do it! (_Passes with_ Hallerpfort _through
the door at the centre; on the terrace, he turns with a cheerful
gesture, and calls once more_.) Au revoir! (_His voice is still
audible_.) Au revoir!

(Frau von Drosse _throws kisses after him, and waves her handkerchief,
then presses her hand wearily to her heart and sighs heavily_.)


                           _ELEVENTH SCENE_.

                     MAJOR. FRAU VON DROSSE. AGNES.

(Agnes _hurries to her, and leads her to a chair, then goes over to
the_ Major, _who, with heaving breast is lost in thought_.)

                            Frau von Drosse.

Thank you, my darling!--Already, I am quite well again!... God, the
boy! How handsome he looked! And so brown and so healthy.... You see, I
saw him exactly like that last night.... No, that is no illusion! And I
told you how the Emperor led him in among all the generals! And the
emperor said (_More softly, looking far away with a beatific smile_.)
And the Emperor said----



                                CURTAIN.
