THE EDITOR

A PLAY IN FOUR ACTS

DRAMATIS PERSONAE

     EVJE, a prosperous distiller.
     MRS. EVJE. GERTRUD, their daughter, engaged to
     HARALD REJN.
     The DOCTOR.
     The EDITOR.
     HAAKON REJN, a yeoman farmer.
     HALVDAN REJN and HARALD REJN, his brothers.
     The DOCTOR'S ASSISTANT.
     INGEBORG, maid to the Evjes.
     JOHN, coachman to the Evjes.
     HALVDAN REJN's HOUSEKEEPER.
     HALVDAN REJN's MAID.
     A Lamplighter.

The action takes place in a town in Norway.




ACT I

(SCENE.--The breakfast-room at the EVJES' house. A glass-cupboard, in
two partitions, stands against the left-hand wall, well forward. On the
top of it stand a variety of objects. Beyond it, a stove. At the back of
the room, a sideboard. In the middle of the room a small round folding
table, laid for four persons. There is an armchair by the stove; a sofa
on the right; chairs, etc. A door at the back of the room, and another
in the left-hand wall. There are paintings on the walls, and the general
impression of the room is one of snug comfort. EVJE, MRS. EVJE, and
GERTRUD are seated at the table. INGEBORG is standing by the sideboard.
Breakfast is proceeding in silence as the curtain rises. INGEBORG takes
away EVJE'S cup and re-fills it. As she brings it back to him, a ring is
heard at the bell. GERTRUD gets up.)

Evje. Sit still; John will go to the door. (GERTRUD sits down again.
Directly afterwards, another ring is heard.)

Mrs. Evje. What can John be doing?

Ingeborg. I will go. (Goes out. She comes back, showing in HARALD REJN,
who hangs up his hat and coat in the hall before coming in.)

Harald. Good morning!

Evje and Mrs. Evje. Good morning! (HARALD shakes hands with them.)

Harald (to GERTRUD, who is sitting on the right). Good morning, Gertrud!
Am I a bit late to-day? (GERTRUD, who has taken his hand, looks lovingly
at him but says nothing.)

Mrs. Evje. Yes, I suppose you have been for a long constitutional,
although the weather is none of the best.

Harald. It is not; I expect we shall have a thick fog by the afternoon.

Evje. Did you have breakfast before you went out?

Harald. I did, thanks. (To INGEBORG, who has come forward with a cup of
coffee.) No, thank you. I will sit down here while you are finishing.
(Sits down on the sofa behind GERTRUD.)

Mrs. Evje. How is your brother Halvdan?

Harald. A little better to-day, thanks--but of course we cannot build on
that.

Evje. Is your eldest brother coming to see him?

Harald. Yes, we expect him every day. Probably his wife has come with
him, and that has been the reason of the delay; she finds it difficult
to get away.

Mrs. Evje. Halvdan so often talks of her.

Harald. Yes, I believe she is the best friend he has.

Evje. No wonder, then, that she wants to come and say good-bye to him.
By the way, have you seen how the paper bids him good-bye to-day?

Harald. Yes, I have seen it.

Mrs. Evje (hurriedly). I hope Halvdan has not seen it?

Harald (smiling). No, it is a long time now since Halvdan read a
newspaper. (A pause.)

Evje. Then I suppose you have read what they say about you too?

Harald. Naturally.

Mrs. Evje. It is worse than anything they have said about you before.

Harald. Well--of course, you know, my election meeting comes on this
evening.

Evje. I can tell you it has upset _us_.

Mrs. Evje. Day after day we wake up to find our house invaded by these
abominations. That is a nice thought to begin your day's work with!

Harald. Is it so indispensable, then, to educated people to begin their
day by reading such things?

Mrs. Evje. Well--one must have a paper.

Evje. And most people read it. Besides, one can't deny that a lot of
what is in it is true, although its general tendency is to run everyone
down.

Harald (getting up). Quite so, yes. (Leans over GERTRUD'S shoulder.)
Gertrud, have you read it?

Gertrud (does not look at him, and hesitates for a moment; then says
gently): Yes.

Harald (under his breath). So that is it! (Walks away from her.)

Evje. We have had a little bit of a scene here, I must tell you.

Harald (walking up and down). Yes, I can understand that.

Evje. I will repeat what I have said already: they write about _you_,
and _we_ have to suffer for it.

Mrs. Evje. Yes, and Gertrud especially.

Gertrud. No--I don't want anyone to consider me in the matter at all.
Besides, it is not what they say of you in the paper that hurts me--.
(Stops abruptly.)

Harald (who has come up to her). But what your parents are feeling about
it? Is that it? (GERTRUD does not answer.)

Evje (pushing back his plate). There, I have finished! (They rise from
the table. MRS. EVJE helps INGEBORG to clear away the things, which
INGEBORG carries out of the room.)

Mrs. Evje. Couldn't you wash your hands of politics, Harald? (GERTRUD
goes out to the left.)

Evje (who has followed GERTRUD with his eyes). We cannot deny that it
pains us considerably that in our old age our peaceful home should be
invaded by all this squabbling and abomination.

Mrs. Evje (who rung for INGEBORG to move the table). You have no need
to do it, either, Harald! You are a grown man, and your own master.
(INGEBORG comes in. HARALD helps her to move the table.)

Evje (to his wife). Don't let Ingeborg hear. Come along, we will go into
my room.

Mrs. Evje. You forget, all the windows are open there. I have had the
fire lit here, so that we could stay here.

Evje. Very well--then we will sit here. (Sits down by the fire.) Will
you have a cigar?

Harald. No, thanks. (INGEBORG goes out.)

Evje (taking a cigar and lighting it). As my wife said just
now--couldn't you wash your hands of politics, Harald? You, who have
both talent and means, need not be at a loss for a vocation in life.

Harald (sitting down on the sofa). If I have any talent, it is for
politics--and so I intend to devote my means to that.

Evje. What do you propose to gain by it?

Harald. What any one who believes in a cause hopes to gain--that is to
say, to help it on.

Evje. And to become a cabinet minister?

Harald. I certainly can't do that any other way; well, I admit--that
_is_ my idea.

Evje. You will not be elected now.

Harald. That we shall see.

Evje. But suppose you are not re-elected to-morrow?

Harald. Then I must find some other way.

Evje. Always with the same object?

Harald. Always with the same object. (EVJE sighs.)

Mrs. Evje (who has taken her sewing and sat down by the fire). Oh, these
politics!

Harald. At any rate, they are the most prominent factors in life just
now.

Evje. We do not suppose we can exercise any influence over you. But
at any rate it is possible that you yourself have not considered the
position into which you have put the whole of us. (Both he and his wife
avoid looking at HARALD during this discussion.)

Mrs. Evje. Say what you really mean, dear--that he is making us all
thoroughly unhappy, and that is the truth!

Harald (getting up, and walking up and down). Well, look here--I have
a proposal to make. It is, that you should abandon all opposition to
Gertrud's marrying me at once. To-day again my brother has expressed the
wish that we should be married by his bedside; so that he should be able
to take part in it. I scarcely need add how happy it would make me.

Evje. But whether she is here at home or married to you, you know, her
parents' distress would be just as great every time their child was
persecuted.

Mrs. Evje. Surely you can appreciate that!

Harald. But what answer am I to give to my brother's request?--most
likely the last he will ever--. (Stops.)

Evje (after a pause). He is very kind to wish it, as he always is.
Nothing would make us happier; but we who are her parents do not
consider that you could make our daughter happy as long as you remain in
politics and on the lines on which you are now travelling.

Harald (after a pause, during which he has stood still). That is to say,
you contemplate breaking off our engagement?

Evje (looking at him quickly). Far from it!

Mrs. Evje (at the same time). How can you say such a thing?

Evje (turning towards the fire again). We have spoken about it to
Gertrud to-day--as to whether it would not be possible to induce you to
choose some other career.

Mrs. Evje. You understand now, why you found Gertrud upset. You must
listen to us now, as she did, in all friendliness.

Evje (getting up and standing with his back to the fire). The first
thing I do in the morning is to read my paper. You know what was in it
to-day--the same as is in it now every day.

Mrs. Evje. No; I am sure it has never been as bad as to-day.

Harald (walking up and down again). The election is just at hand!

Evje. Well--it is just as painful to us, her father and mother, whether
it is before or after the election. We are not accustomed to associate
with any one who has not first-class credentials--and now we have to
endure seeing doubt cast upon our own son-in-law's. Do not misunderstand
me; to my mind, for credentials to be first-class they must not only
actually be so, but must also be considered to be so by people in
general. (HARALD begins to walk up and down again.) The second thing I
do in the morning is to open my letters. Amongst to-day's were several
from friends we had invited to a party we thought of giving--if, that
is to say, your brother's illness took no sudden turn for the worse. No
fewer than ten of them refuse our invitation--most of them making some
excuse, and a few with a little more show of a real reason; but one of
them speaks straight out, and I have his letter here. (Takes it from his
pocket.) I have kept it for you. It is from my father's old friend,
the bishop. I haven't my spectacles--and for me to have mislaid my
spectacles will show you what a state of mind I am in. I don't think I
have done such a thing for--. Here, read it yourself! Read it aloud!

Harald (taking the letter). "My dear Mr. Evje. As you are my poor dear
friend's son, you must listen to the truth from me. I cannot willingly
come to your house while I might meet there a certain person who,
certainly, is one of you, but nevertheless is a person whom I cannot
hold in entire respect."

Mrs. Evje. Well, Harald, what do you think our feelings must be when we
read things like that?

Evje. Do not imagine that, in spite of that, _we_ do not hold you in
entire respect. We only ask you to ensure our daughter's happiness. You
can do that with a word.

Mrs. Evje. We know what you are, whatever people say--even if they are
bishops. But, in return, you ought to have confidence in our judgment;
and our advice to you is, have done with it! Marry Gertrud at once, and
go away for your honeymoon; by the time you come back, people will have
got something else to talk about--and you will have found something else
to occupy you as well.

Evje. You must not misunderstand us. We mean no coercion. We are
not insisting on this alternative. If you wish to be married, you
shall--without feeling yourself obliged to change your vocation for
_our_ sakes. We only want to make it clear that it would pain us--pain
us very deeply.

Mrs. Evje. If you want to take time to think it over, or want to talk it
over with Gertrud or with your brother, do! (GERTRUD comes in and goes
about the room looking for something.)

Evje. What are you looking for, dear?

Gertrud. Oh, for the--.

Mrs. Evje. I expect it is the newspaper; your grandfather has been
asking for it.

Evje. Surely there is no need for _him_ to read it?

Mrs. Evje. He asked me for it, too. He knows quite well what has made us
all unhappy.

Evje. Can't you tell him? No, that wouldn't do.

Mrs. Evje (to GERTRUD). I suppose you have had to confess to him what is
the matter?

Gertrud (trying to conceal an emotion that is almost too much for her).
Yes. (Finds the paper, and goes out.)

Mrs. Evje (when GERTRUD has gone). Poor child!

Evje. Does not what she is carrying to him, with all that it says about
you and about your brother, seem to you like an omen? I will tell you
how it strikes me. Your brother is a very much more gifted man than I
am; and although it is true, as that paper says, that nothing of all
that he has worked for has ever come to anything, still perhaps he may
nevertheless have accomplished more than either you or me, although we
have done a good deal between us to increase the prosperity of our town.
I feel that to be so, although I cannot express what I mean precisely.
But consider the reputation he will leave behind him. All educated
people will say just what that paper says to-day--and to-morrow he will
be forgotten. He will scarcely find a place in history, for history only
concerns itself with the great leaders of men. What does it all come
to, then? Neither present nor posthumous fame; but death--death all the
time. He is dying by inches now, dying of the most horrible persecution;
and the emotion that his end will cause among a few individuals cannot
be called posthumous fame. (HARALD begins to speak, but checks himself.)
Can _you_ hope to make a better fight of it? You think you are stronger?
Very well; perhaps you may have the strength to endure it until other
times come and other opinions with them. But there will be one by
your side who will not have the strength to endure it. Gertrud is not
strong--she could never stand it; indeed now--already--. (Is stopped by
his emotion.)

Mrs. Evje. She hides it from you, but she cannot hide it from us.
Besides, a friend of ours--our dear doctor--said only yesterday--.
(Breaks off in tears.)

Evje. We never told you, but he warned us some time ago; we had no
idea it was so serious, or that it had anything to do with this.
But yesterday he frightened us; he said she--. Well, you can ask him
yourself. He will be here directly. (HARALD fills a glass of water and
raises it to his lips, but sets it down again untasted.)

Mrs. Evje (going to him). I am so sorry for you, Harald! To have this
come on you just now--when your splendid brother is at the point of
death, and you yourself are being persecuted! (A ring is heard at the
bell.)

Evje. But it should be a warning to you! Sometimes a single movement
will change the course of a whole life.

Mrs. Evje. And do have a little confidence in us! (A ring is heard
again.)

Evje. What on earth has become of John to-day? That is the second time
the bell has rung.

Mrs. Evje. One of the maids is opening the door, I can hear.

Evje. I expect it is the doctor.

Mrs. Evje. Yes, it is he--I know his ring. (A knock is heard at the
door.)

Evje. Come in! (The DOCTOR comes in.)

The Doctor. Good morning! (Lays down his hat and stick.) Well, so I hear
John has been up to his pranks again? The rascal is in bed.

Evje and Mrs. Evje. In bed?

The Doctor. Came home at four o'clock in the morning, drunk. Ill to-day,
naturally. Ingeborg asked me to go in and see him.

Evje. Well!--I am determined to put an end to it!

Mrs. Evje. Yes, I have never been able to understand why you were so
lenient with John.

Evje. He has been with us five years; and, besides, it makes people talk
so, if you have to send your servants away.

Mrs. Evje. But surely this sort of thing makes them talk much worse!

Evje. Well--he shall leave this very day.

The Doctor (to HARALD). How are you, Rejn?--Oho! I understand. I have
come at an inopportune moment with my complaints of John? You have all
got something more serious on your minds?

Mrs. Evje. Yes, we have had it out, as we agreed yesterday.

The Doctor. You must forgive me, my dear Rejn, for having told my old
friends the whole truth yesterday. She (pointing to MRS. EVJE) was an
old playfellow of mine, and her husband and I have been friends from
boyhood; so we have no secrets from each other. And Gertrud's condition
makes me very uneasy.

Harald. Why have you never told me that before?

The Doctor. Goodness knows I have often enough given her parents hints
that she was not well; but they have only made up their minds that her
happiness in her engagement would quite cure her. They are a considerate
couple, these two dear people, you know; they didn't want to seem
interfering.

Harald. Their consideration--which I appreciate and have lately had
constant reason to be grateful for--has all at once become a more
powerful weapon than open opposition. It makes a duty of what I should
otherwise have felt to be unfair coercion. But now the situation is such
that I can neither go forward nor back. After what I have gone through,
you must see that I cannot withdraw on the very eve of the election--and
after the election it will be too late. On the other hand--(with
emotion)--I cannot, I dare not, go on with it if it is to cost me--.
(Breaks off.)

Evje (standing in front of the fire). There, there! Take time to think
it over, my dear boy; talk it over with her and with your brother.

The Doctor (who has sat down on a chair to the left, a little away from
the others). I have just been to see your brother. A remarkable man! But
do you know what occurred to me as I sat there? He is dying because he
_is_ a man. The only people that are fit for political life nowadays are
those whose hearts have been turned to stone. (Picks up something from
the table and gets up.) Ah, just look here! Here is a fine specimen
of petrifaction. It is a fragment of palm leaf of some kind, found
impressed in a bit of rock from Spitzbergen. I sent it you myself, so
I know it. That is what you have to be like to withstand arctic
storms!--it will take to harm. But your brother--well, his life had been
like that of the original palm tree, with the air sighing through its
branches; the change of climate was too sudden for him. (Goes up to
HARALD.) You have still to try it. Shall you be able to kill all the
humanity that is in you? If you can make yourself as insensate a thing
as this stone, I daresay you will be able to stand the life. But are you
willing to venture upon political life at such a price? If you are--so
be it; but remember that in that case you must also kill all humanity
in Gertrud--in these two--in every one that is dear to you. Otherwise no
one will understand you or follow you. If you cannot do that, you will
never be more than a dabbler in politics--a quarter, an eighth part, of
a politician--and all your efforts, in what you consider your vocation,
will be pitiable!

Mrs. Evje (who has been occupied at the back of the room, but now sits
down by the fare). That is quite true! I know cases of petrifaction like
that--and God preserve anyone that I love from it!

Evje (coming forward towards HARALD). I don't want to say anything to
hurt your feelings--least of all just now. But I just want to add my
warning, because I believe I have discovered that there is a danger that
persecution may make you hard.

Harald. Yes!--but do you suppose it is only politics that offer that
dangerous prospect?

The Doctor. You are quite right! It is all the cry nowadays, "Harden
yourself!" It isn't only military men and doctors that have to be
hardened; commercial men have to be hardened, civil servants have to be
hardened, or dried up; and everybody else has to be hardened for life,
apparently. But what does it all mean? It means that we are to drive out
all warmth from our hearts, all desire from our imaginations. There is a
child's heart at the bottom of every one of our hearts-ever young, full
of laughter and tears; and that is what we shall have killed before we
are "fitted for the battle of life," as they put it. No, no--that is
what we ought to preserve; we were given it for that! (HARALD hides his
face in his hands, and sits so for some time.)

Mrs. Evje. Any mother or any wife knows that.

Evje (standing with his back to the fire). You want to bring back the
age of romance, doctor!

The Doctor (with a laugh). Not its errors--because in those days unclean
minds brought to birth a great deal that was unclean. (Seriously.) But
what is it, when all is said and done, but a violent protest on the
part of the Teutonic people against the Romanesque spirit and school--a
remarkable school, but not _ours_. To us it seems a barren, merely
intellectual school--a mere mass of formulas which led to a precocious
development of the mind. And that was the spirit it bred--critical and
barren. But these schools of thought are now all we have, and both of
them are bad for us! They have no use for the heart or the imagination;
they do not breed faith or a longing for high achievement. Look at _our_
life! Is our life really our own?

Mrs. Evje. No. You have only to think of our language, our tastes, our
society, our--

The Doctor (interrupting her). Those are the externals of our life,
merely the externals! No, look within--look at such a view of life as
we were talking about, clamouring for "hardening"--is that ours? Can we,
for all our diligence, make as much way in it as, for instance, a born
Parisian journalist?--become like a bar of steel with a point at each
end, a pen-point and a sword-point? _We_ can't do that; the Teutonic
temperament is not fitted for it.

Evje. Oh, we are well on the way towards it. Look at the heartless
intolerance in our politics; it will soon match what you were
describing.

Harald. Everyone that disagrees with you is either an ambitious
scoundrel, or half mad, or a blockhead.

The Doctor (laughing). Yes, and here in the north, in our small
communities, where a man meets all his enemies in the same barber's
shop, we feel it as keenly as if we were digging our knives into each
other! (Seriously.) We may laugh at it, but if we could add up the sum
of suffering that has been caused to families and to individuals--if we
could see the concrete total before us--we should be tempted to believe
that our liberty had been given to us as a curse! For it _is_ a cursed
thing to destroy the humanity that is in us, and make us cruel and hard
to one another.

Harald (getting up, but standing still). But, my good friends, if you
are of the same mind about that, and I with you--what is the next thing
to do?

The Doctor. The next thing to do?

Harald. Naturally, to unite in making an end of it.

Mrs. Evje (as she works). What can _we_ do?

Evje. I am no politician and do not wish to become one.

The Doctor (laughing, and sitting down). No, a politician is a
principle, swathed round with a printed set of directions for use. I
prefer to be allowed to be a human being.

Harald. No one can fairly insist on your taking up any vocation to which
you do not feel you have a calling.

The Doctor. Of course not.

Harald. But one certainly might insist on your not helping to maintain a
condition of affairs that you detest.

All. We?

Harald. This newspaper, which is the ultimate reason of all this
conversation we have had--you take it in.

Evje. Why, you take it in yourself!

Harald. No. Every time there is anything nasty in it about me or mine,
it is sent to me anonymously.

The Doctor (with a laugh). I don't take it in; I read my hall-porter's
copy.

Harald. I have heard you say that before. I took an opportunity to ask
your hall-porter. He said _he_ did not read it, and did not take it in
either.

The Doctor (as before). Then I should like to know who does pay for it!

Evje. A newspaper is indispensable to a business man.

Harald. An influential business man could by himself, or at any rate
with one or two others, start a paper that would be as useful again to
him as this one is.

Evje. That is true enough; but, after all, if we agree with its
politics?

Harald. I will accept help from any one whose opinions on public affairs
agree with my own. Who am I that I should pretend to judge him? But I
will not give him my help in anything that is malicious or wicked.

The Doctor. Pshaw!

Harald. Everyone who subscribes to, or contributes to, or gives any
information to a paper that is scurrilous, is giving his help to what
is wicked. And, moreover, every one who is on terms of friendship with a
man who is destroying public morality, is helping him to do it.

The Doctor (getting up). Does he still come here? (A silence.)

Evje. He and I are old schoolfellows--and I don't like breaking with old
acquaintances.

Mrs. Evje. He is a most amusing man, too--though I can't deny that he is
malicious. (The DOCTOR sits down again, humming to himself.)

Harald. But that is not all. Both you and the Doctor have--with some
eloquence--

The Doctor (with a laugh). Thank you!

Harald.--expressed your abhorrence of certain political tendencies with
which neither you nor I have any sympathy--which affront our ideas of
humane conduct. You do not feel called upon to enter actively into the
lists against them; but why do you try to prevent those who do feel so
called upon? You lament the existing state of things--and yet you help
to maintain it, and make a friend of the man who is its champion!

The Doctor (turning his head). Apparently we are on our defence, Evje!

Harald. No--I am. I was told a little while ago that I was in a fair way
to become hardened and callous, and that I must abandon my career--and
that I must do so for Gertrud's sake, too, because she would never be
able to share the fight with me. I was told this at one of the bitterest
moments in my life. And that made me hesitate for a moment. But now I
have turned my face forward again, because you have enlightened me! (A
short, sharp cough is heard in the hall.)

Mrs. Evje (getting up). That is he! (A knock is heard at the door; the
DOCTOR gets up and pushes his chair back. The EDITOR comes in.)

The Editor. Good morning, my children! How are you?

Mrs. Evje (sitting down). I did not hear the bell.

The Editor. I don't suppose you did--I came in by the back door. I took
you by surprise, eh? Discussing me, too--what? (Laughs.)

Evje. You have given us enough reason to, to-day, any way.

The Editor. Yes, haven't I? Such a thing for a man to do to his best
friends--eh?

Evje. That is true.

The Editor. To his old schoolfellows--his neighbours--eh? I expect it
has disturbed your natural moderation--eh?

Evje. I pride myself on my moderation.

The Editor. As much as on your brandy!

Evje. Are you going to begin your nonsense again?

The Editor. Good-morning, Doctor! Have you been making them a fine
speech this morning?--about my paper? or about humanity?--romanticism?
or catholicism?--eh? (Laughs.)

The Doctor (laughing). Certainly one of us two has made a fine speech
this morning!

The Editor. Not me; mine was made yesterday!--How is your hall-porter?

The Doctor (laughing). Quite well, I am ashamed to say.

The Editor. There's a faithful subscriber to my paper, if you like! (The
DOCTOR laughs.) Well, Mrs. Evje, I can give you news of your man, Master
John!

Mrs. Evje. Can you? It is more than I can.

The Editor. Yes--he is in bed still. That is why I came in the back
way--to enquire after his health.

Mrs. Evje. But how--?

The Editor. How is he after last night?

Mrs. Evje. Really, I believe you know everything. We had no idea he was
out last night.

The Editor. Oh, that is the very latest intelligence! He has been
figuring as a speaker--he was drunk, of course--before the Association
founded by his master's future son-in-law. And he made a most effective
speech--indeed, the speakers at that Association always make most
effective speeches! It was all about a Sliding Scale of Taxation,
Profit-Sharing for Workers, the necessity for a Labour majority in
Parliament, etc., etc., all the usual Socialist rhodomontade. You see
how infectious intellectual ideas are!

Evje. Well!--I shall turn him out of the house to-day!

The Editor. But that is not in accordance with your love of moderation,
Evje!

Evje. It is a scandal.

The Editor (to EVJE). But not the worst. Because, if you want to avoid
that sort of thing, there are others you must turn out of the house.
(Glances towards HARALD.)

Evje. You seem determined to quarrel to-day?

The Editor. Yes, with your "moderation."

Evje. You would be none the worse of a little of it.

The Editor. "Brandy and Moderation" is your watchword--eh?

Evje. Do stop talking such nonsense!--I know one thing, and that is that
you seem to find the brandy from my distillery remarkably to your taste!

The Doctor (interrupting them). When you are in these provoking moods
there is always some grievance lurking at the back of your mind. Out
with it! I am a doctor, you know; I want to get at the cause of your
complaint!

The Editor. You were not very successful in that, you know, when you
said my maid had cholera, and she really only was--. (Laughs.)

The Doctor (laughing). Are you going to bring that story up again? Every
one is liable to make mistakes, you know--even you, my boy!

The Editor. Certainly. But before making a mistake this time--ahem!--I
wanted first of all to enquire whether--

The Doctor. Ah! now it is coming!

The Editor--whether you have any objection to my mentioning John in my
paper?

Mrs. Evje. What has John to do with us?

The Editor. Just as much as the Association, where he delivered his
speech, has; it--ahem!--is one of the family institutions!

Evje. I have had no more to do with making John what he is than I have
had with making that Association what it is.

The Editor. Your future son-in-law made the Association what it is, and
the Association has made John what he is.

The Doctor. Or, to put it the other way round: John is Mr. Evje's
servant; John has become an active member of the Association; therefore
Mr. Evje is a patron of the Association.

The Editor. Or this way: John, being the well-known Mr. Evje's servant,
has for that reason become an active member of the Association which--as
he expressed it--his employer's future son-in-law "has had the honour to
found!"

Mrs. Evje. Surely you never mean to put that in the paper?

The Editor (laughing). They are John's own words.

Mr. Evje. Of course, he would never put a tipsy man's maunderings into
the paper. (To his wife.) Don't you understand that he is joking?

The Editor (clearing his throat). It is already in type.

The Doctor. Oh, nonsense!

The Editor. The scene afforded an opportunity for an extremely amusing
sketch, without mentioning any names.

Mr. Evje. I sincerely hope that

The Doctor (to EVJE). Oh, he is only teasing you! You know him.

The Editor. What do you think of this? "Those who indirectly support
so dangerous an institution will have to face exposure."--I quite agree
with it.

Mrs. Evje (getting up). What do you mean? Do you mean that my husband--?

The Editor. A little fright will be a good discipline for him!

Evje. Is what you quoted meant as an accusation against us--whether you
are serious or whether you are joking?

The Doctor. He is only trying to frighten you with a bogey; it is not
the first time, you know!

Evje. Yes, but what have _I_ to be frightened of? I don't belong to the
Association.

The Editor. But persons who do belong to it frequent your house. A man
is known by the company he keeps.

Mrs. Evje. I really begin to think he _does_ mean it seriously.

The Editor. It is too ugly a thing to jest about, you mean?

Evje. Is it possible that you seriously mean to allude to John as my
servant?

The Editor. Isn't he your servant?

Evje. And to put that in the paper for every one to read?

The Editor. No--only for those who read the paper.

Evje. And you have come here to tell us that?

The Editor. Do you suppose I would do it without telling you?

Mrs. Evje. It is perfectly shameless!

The Editor. It certainly is.

Evje. Is it your intention to quarrel with me?

The Editor. Of course!

Evje. With your own schoolfellow?--one who has been it true friend to
you in all your ups and downs? It is abominable!

The Editor. Perhaps it was to ensure my holding my tongue that you have
been my friend!

Mrs. Evje. You _couldn't_ behave in such a fashion to a friend!

The Editor (drily). To my own brother, if he stood in my way!

Harald (to himself). This is too much! (Comes forward.) Is your hatred
for me so bitter that on my account you must persecute even my future
parents-in-law, your own old friends?

The Editor (who, as soon as HARALD came forward, has turned away to
the DOCTOR). Have you heard how people are being beaten up to go to
the meeting of electors to-night? The last political speeches of the
campaign must be made with red fire burning at the wings! (Laughs.)

Mrs. Evje (coming up to him). No, you are not going to get out of it by
changing the subject. Is it really your intention to put my husband in
your paper?

The Editor. He is putting himself there.

Evje. I, who all my life have avoided being drawn into any political
party?

The Doctor. What has Evje to do with Harald Rein's politics?

The Editor. He endorses them!

Mrs. Evje. No!--a thousand times no!

Evje. Why, only to-day

The Doctor. I can bear witness to that!

The Editor. It is no use protesting!

Evje. But you must believe our protestations!

The Editor. Bah! You will see something more to-morrow--

Evje. Something more?

Mrs. Evje. Against my husband?

The Editor. That scandal about the Stock Exchange Committee. No
less than three Letters to the Editor about it have been lying in my
pigeon-holes for some time.

Evje (in bewilderment). Are you going to put nonsense of that sort in
your paper? The most respected men on the Exchange--?

Mrs. Evje. Members of the Committee--?

The Editor. They are only respected men so long as they respect
themselves. When their chairman enters into connections which offend
public opinion, the whole crew of them must be made to feel what sort of
a man it is they are associating with.

The Doctor. So on Mr. Rejn's account you are going to expose Evje, and
on Evje's account the Stock Exchange Committee? I suppose my turn will
come soon!

The Editor. It will come.

The Doctor. Indeed!

The Editor. The letters that have been sent to me are all from highly
respected men. That shows that public opinion has turned round; and
public opinion must be obeyed! (Throws out his hands.)

Evje (in a troubled voice). It is quite true that I have noticed in
several little ways that their temper--. (Looks round him, and checks
himself. Then speaks more confidently.) But it was just at such a time
that I looked for help from you, my friend. That is why I did not bother
myself much about it.

The Editor (to EVJE). But you know it is you that are attacking me now!

Evje. I?

Mrs. Evje. He?

The Editor. And, besides, I have no choice in the matter. You have made
your bed, and must lie on it.

Evje (growing angry again). But do you really mean that you don't feel
yourself how shocking such behaviour in an old friend is?

The Editor. "Old friend," "old schoolfellow," "neighbour,"--out with the
whole catalogue!

Mrs. Evje. I am sure you don't deserve to be either one or the other!
(The EDITOR laughs.) Think what you wrote to-day about Halvdan Rejn, who
is dying. A man could only write that who--who--

The Editor. Well?--who?

Mrs. Evje. Who has not an atom of heart.

The Editor. Ha, ha! "The natural affections!"--"family considerations!"
Truth, my dear lady, has no family ties; it has no respect even for a
"dying man."

Mrs. Evje. Yes, indeed--every decent man has some respect for suffering,
and even wicked men are silent in the presence of death!

The Editor. "Sufferer"--"dying man"--"martyr," I suppose! Oh, we know
all that old story!

Harald (coming forward). Let me tell you that you are a--person with
whom I will not condescend to argue. (Walks away from him.)

The Editor (who has at once crossed the room). This theatrical flaunting
of the "dying man" before people's eyes, that a calculating brother has
permitted himself, is of course what is really shocking in the whole
affair. But I will tear the mask off him.

The Doctor (following him). Listen to me, now; listen! We are
gentlefolk, you know! And even if Mr. Rejn has let himself be so carried
away as to mention his dying brother on a public occasion--well, I am
not going to say that I approve of it, but surely it is excusable and--

Harald (coming forward). I want none of your defence, thank you!

The Doctor. The one of you is just as mad as the other! (To the EDITOR.)
But what has all this to do with Evje, seeing that, after all, the whole
of this affair of the Rejns'--

Evje (to the EDITOR, eagerly). I give you my word of honour that I have
never approved of Harald's utterances about his brother, either. I am a
man of moderation, as you know; I do not approve of his politics. Only
to-day--

Mrs. Evje. And what on earth have politics to do with the Stock Exchange
Committee?

The Doctor. Or with Evje's coachman!

Evje. You might just as well take it into your head to write about my
clerks, or my workmen, or--

The Doctor. His carpenters, or his brewers--or his horses!

The Editor (stands suddenly still and says, drily): You may assure
yourselves that things are quite sufficient as they are! (Begins to
button up his coat.)

Evje. Is it so bad as all that!

Mrs. Evje. Good gracious!--what is it then?

The Editor (taking up his hat). You will be able to read it to-morrow,
together with some more about the "dying man." Good-bye!

Evje and Mrs. Evje (together.) But before you go--

The Doctor. Hush, hush! Let us remember we are gentlefolk! What will you
bet that the whole thing is not just a bogey to frighten you?

The Editor (holding out his hand towards the DOCTOR). I hold Mr. Evje's
position in the town in the hollow of my hand!

Evje (fuming). Is your object to ruin _that_, then?

Mrs. Evje. You will never succeed in that!

The Doctor. Hush, hush! let us remember we are gentlefolk!

Evje. In my own house--my old schoolfellow--that he should have the
audacity--!

The Editor. I have told you the truth openly. And, as far as that goes,
you have stood more than that from me in your own house, my boy. Because
the misfortune is that you are a coward.

Evje. _I_ a coward?

The Doctor (laughing). Hush, hush! Let us remember we are gentlefolk!

Evje. Yes, I have been weak enough to be afraid of scandal, especially
in the newspapers, it is true; that is why I have put up with you too
long! But now you shall see that I am not a coward. Leave my house!

Mrs. Evje. That's right!

The Doctor. But you must part like gentlefolk, you know.

The Editor. Pooh! You will be sending me a message directly, to call me
back!

Evje. You have the face to say that?

Mrs. Evje (to EVJE). Come, dear, don't provoke him any more!

The Editor (turning to go). You daren't do otherwise.

The Doctor. But part like gentlefolk--!

Evje (following the EDITOR). No, as sure as I live--

The Editor. You will be sending a message to call me back! Ha, ha, ha!

Evje. Never, never!

Mrs. Evje. My dear--!

The Editor. Yes, you will--directly--this very day! Ha, ha, ha!

The Doctor. Don't part like that! Part like gentle--

Evje. No, I tell you!

The Editor (laughing all the time). Yes!

Mrs. Evje. My dear-remember you may bring on one of your attacks!

The Editor (at the door). You are too much of a coward! Ha! ha! (Goes
out.)

Evje (in a rage). No!

The Editor (sticking his head in at the door). Yes! (Goes away.)

The Doctor. What a visit! I cannot help laughing, all the same! Ha, ha,
ha, ha!

Evje. Do you dare to laugh at that?

The Doctor. "Old schoolfellows"--ha, ha! "Moderation"--ha, ha! "The same
party"--ha, ha, ha!

Mrs. Evje. Oh, my husband is ill!

Evje (faintly). Yes--a little water!

Mrs. Evje. Water, water, Harald!

The Doctor. One of his attacks--that is another affair altogether. Here
(takes a bottle from his pocket)--smell this! That's it! Now, a little
water! (Gives him some.) No danger this time. Cheer up, old boy!

Evje. What a scandal!

Mrs. Evje. Yes, you will never be able to bear it, dear; I told you so.

Evje. To think of _my_ name appearing in the papers, when all my life I
have--

Mrs. Evje.--done everything you could to keep clear of such things! And
you such a dear, good, upright man!--Oh, these politics are the curse of
the world!

The Doctor (laughing). As I told you, you must go through a special
process of hardening before you can stand them.

Evje. And think of public opinion--my position--my connections! It is
more than I can bear!

Mrs. Evje (to the Doctor). I am sure the first time he reads something
about himself in the paper, it will make him really ill! He won't be
able to stand it, I know.

The Doctor. Oh, he will get over it.

Mrs. Evje. No, he won't. I am frightened at the mere thought of it. He
will never be able to bear it, never!

Evje. When all my life I have tried to keep clear of such things--!

Mrs. Evje. And now in your old age, though you deserve it no more than
a child does, to be dragged into it! If I could prevent that, I would
willingly take on my own shoulders whatever--

Evje. No, no--not you! Not you!

The Doctor. But the thing is not necessarily done because he threatened
he would do it.

Evje. Do you think--?

The Doctor. He is so dreadfully hot-headed, but I am sure he will think
twice--

Mrs. Evje.--before he attacks a lifelong friend! Yes, that is so, isn't
it!

Evje. Do you really think that there is any possibility then--?

The Doctor. I really can't say!

Mrs. Evje. Nothing in the world is impossible!

Evje. We were both so hot-headed.

The Doctor. Yes, it will have to be a more peaceable conversation than
that of a few minutes ago!

Evje. I don't know how it is--there is something so provoking about him.

Mrs. Evje. Yes, and you have not been very well lately, either. I have
often said so to you.

Evje. No, I haven't. It has been just one thing after another! And all
my life I have tried to keep clear of such things!

The Doctor. I will tell you what, old friend; I am sure the best thing
to do would be--

Evje. What?

The Doctor. I am sure you will not be easy in your mind until someone
has talked to him.

Mrs. Evje. Yes, couldn't that be done? Good gracious, that is not
sending a message to him!

Evje. But who would--? (A short silence.)

The Doctor. I don't know who would be best.

Mrs. Evje. All our old friends have deserted us; we shall soon have
none.

The Doctor. Well, at all events, you have me.

Evje. Would you really be willing to--? Do you mean it? (Grasps his
hand.)

The Doctor. Of course I will! He can't eat me!

Mrs. Evje. How good you are! Of course you only need tell him--what is
quite true--that my husband would never be able to bear it! He, who all
these years--

Evje.--have put up with an incredible amount for his sake, both from
himself and from others!

Mrs. Evje. Yes, that is true! And now you will go, dear friend--our only
friend!--and talk to him quite amicably and sensibly, won't you?

Evje. But don't delay! He is so hot-headed that we must find him
before--

The Doctor. Oh, I will find him; he is always about the town.

Evje. And tell him--ask him--

The Doctor. Oh, I know what to say to him.

Mrs. Evje. That is right!

Evje. Thank you! I shall never forget how, at a moment when everything
threatened to overwhelm me, you were the only one to stand by me! Ah, I
feel as if a load had fallen off my shoulders! I feel all at once quite
happy again!

The Doctor. That's right. You pull yourself together! I will see to
everything else.

Evje. Thanks, thanks! But make haste!

The Doctor. I am off! My hat? (Turns, and sees HARALD, and says to
himself.) A-ha! He looks as if he had had about enough of this. It would
have been a joke to--

Evje. Oh, do make haste, my friend!

The Doctor. Yes, yes--if only I could find my hat.

Mrs. Evje. It is on the table.

The Doctor. So it is!

Evje. Good luck to you!

Mrs. Evje. And do it very tactfully!

The Doctor (meaningly). And I hope you three will enjoy yourselves!
(Goes out.)

Evje. What a morning!

Mrs. Evje. We, who have always endeavoured to take everything quietly
and indulgently--

Evje. Yes, and to conduct our family affairs peaceably and
affectionately! (Jumps up and turns to HARALD.) The whole thing is
_your_ fault!

Mrs. Evje. Yes, it is Harald's fault! From the day this unfortunate
engagement came about, we have scarcely had a moment's peace here.

Evje. No, no, that is not the case! We must be reasonable. At first,
when Mr. Rejn had a fine future before him, when people vied with one
another to catch him, then the engagement was an honour to us as well
as to our daughter. But from the moment he took up these wretched
politics--that is to say, from the time his brother fell ill--well, he
can see for himself what the result has been to us!

Mrs. Evje. And he certainly must admit that it is not what we have
deserved; indeed it is more than a respected and well-bred family can
put up with.

Harald. I quite agree that it is more than a respected and well-bred
family _ought_ to put up with.

Mrs. Evje. Oh, so _you_ feel that too?

Harald. Certainly. And the only excuse I can see is that there are many
more in the same case. It is only in that way that such things become
possible.

Evje. I do not understand. Many more like--?--like whom?

Harald. Like you!

Mrs. Evje. In what respect?

Harald. I will explain. Most of the successful politicians nowadays have
not gained their position by means of any greatness of their own, but
by the pitiable weakness of others. Another age will form a different
estimate of them--see them in their proper perspective, and find them to
be much smaller men!

Evje. But what has that to do with us?

Harald. Well, just try to size up that man whom a little while ago you
turned out of your house and afterwards sent a message to--

Evje. We sent _no_ message to him!

Mrs. Evje. A friend of ours has gone to talk to him. That is quite a
different thing!

Harald. Well, take his measure by yours and yours by his! He went away,
and he will come back like a conquering hero. Will that be thanks to
his greatness, or his talent--to the loftiness of his opinions or his
feelings? No,--it will be thanks to your pitiable weakness.

Mrs. Evje. Upon my word!

Evje. Well, I--!

Harald. Do you think any one who has any pluck in his disposition would
consent to be a party to such a contemptible state of things? Think of
your own daughter, educated by that good old man who lies in there, but
an obedient child to you; think how she must be perpetually torn between
what she loves and respects and what she sees going on here! No wonder
she is ill! But remember this--she is not ill because she sticks to me;
she is ill because of your pitiable weakness!

Mrs. Evje. How can you dare to say such things! So you too--!

Evje. Such an absolute want of respect!

Harald. Listen to me, once for all. I intend, God helping me, to take
up the fight that has killed my brother, the noblest man I know! And
Gertrud is going to take up _her_ share in the fight, as I do mine. But
to come to this house as long as _he_ comes here--to go through what I
have gone through to-day--sullies my self-respect to such an extent,
and offends my better feelings so deeply, that either he never sets foot
here again, or I do not!

Evje and Mrs. Evje. But--!

Harald (quietly). When I came here to-day, I thought we should be able
to arrange matters without my speaking out; but there is nothing else
for it, so good-bye! (Goes out. A moment's silence follows.)

Mrs. Evje. Is _he_ giving _us_ our dismissal? Or does he not really mean
to break with us?--My dear, what is the matter? (Goes to her husband's
side.)

Evje (without moving). Tell me, my dear--am I a bad man?

Mrs. Evje. You, a bad man?

Evje. Because, if I were not a bad, wicked man, they could not behave in
such a way to me, one after the other.

Mrs. Evje. But, my dear, you are the best and dearest and most
considerate of men! And they are shameless traitors to you, my dear
husband!

Evje. But how on earth, then, could it come about that I, who all my
life have tried to keep clear of such things--for I have, haven't I?

Mrs. Evje. Every one knows that, that knows anything about you.

Evje. How could it come about that in my old age I should be despised
and forsaken by everybody? Surely it is no crime to want to live in
peace, apart from all that sort of thing?

Mrs. Evje. No, indeed; that is what all decent people want to do.

Evje. Yes, I thought so too. But now you see!

Mrs. Evje. But _you_ have been dreadfully unfortunate.

Evje. Why should I have been just the one to be dreadfully unfortunate?
Most people escape such things altogether.

Mrs. Evje (starting). Here is Gertrud.

Evje. Poor child!

Mrs. Evje. What on earth are we to say to her?

Evje. Be careful, my dear! be careful! (GERTRUD comes in quietly and
comes forward to them.)

Gertrud. Did I see Harald go away?

Mrs. Evje. Yes, my child, he--he went away.

Gertrud. Without saying good-bye to me?

Evje. That's true, he didn't say good-bye to you.

Mrs. Evje. Were you expecting him to come into grandfather's room to say
good-bye to you?

Gertrud. Yes. Tell me how things went here?

Evje. Why were you not here, dear?

Gertrud (in astonishment). I here? You said you did not want me to be
present--

Evje. I remember, yes; we thought it would not be advisable.

Gertrud (still speaking quietly, but in growing alarm). But how did
things go, then?

Evje. How did they go? Badly.

Mrs. Evje (hurriedly). That is to say, he did not behave at all well.
You must prepare yourself for the worst, my child!

Gertrud. Is it something very bad, then?

Evje. You know he is a little hasty just now, when he has so much on his
hands. He lacks a proper sense of moderation--but he will learn it, sure
enough.

Gertrud (almost inaudibly). But what does it mean? Is he never coming
back?

Evje. Never coming back? What an extraordinary question! Of course he
will come back. He was only a little over-hasty, you know--

Gertrud. And said he would never come back?

Mrs. Evje. Come, come, my dear--you mustn't be alarmed.

Evje. He talked such a lot, you know, that we must not attach any
particular importance to anything he said.

Gertrud. So that is how it is!

Mrs. Evje. We must make allowances for all that he is going through just
now--

Evje (suddenly). My child, you look so pale--

Mrs. Evje (going to her). Gertrud!

Gertrud (with a quiet movement of protest). I must give grandfather his
drink; that was really what I came for. And that was how I happened to
see Harald through the window. I will take grandfather his drink. (The
curtain falls as she goes out of the room.)




ACT II

(SCENE.--A street in the "villa quarter" of the town. Between it and
another street running parallel with it in the background, are two
houses standing in gardens, half of the facade of one of them projecting
into the stage on the right. On the left a third street runs at right
angles to the others, to the back of the stage. The left side of this
third street opens onto a well-wooded park. The house in the foreground
on the right is in two stories. There is a narrow strip of garden in
front of it, enclosed by an iron railing with a gate in it. The gate is
standing open. The entrance door to the house is immediately behind this
gate. There is light in a small window by the door; the ground floor
windows are in darkness; in those of the upper floor, light is visible
through heavy curtains. It is a wintry evening, and everything is
swathed in an unusually thick fog, in which the gas lamps in the streets
show dimmer and dimmer as they recede in the distance. As the curtain
goes up, a lamplighter is seen descending his ladder from a lamp-post,
where he has just lit the lamp at the corner of the house.)

The Lamplighter (as he reaches the ground). It's all one whether the
lamps are lit or not, in such a fog as this. (MRS. EVJE is seen drawing
back the curtain at a window on the first floor. She opens the window
and looks out.)

Mrs. Evje. The fog is so thick, my dear, that I can't see across the
street.

Evje (coming to the window, with fur coat and cap on). So it is!--Well,
so much the better, my dear! (They withdraw into the room; the window is
shut and the curtains drawn. Two passers-by come along the street from
the right, talking.)

First Passer-by. The Land of Fogs--the old idea of the land of Fogs was
that of a vision of confused and faint sensation, with the light of the
intelligence dimmed and blurred like these gas lamps in the fog.

Second Passer-by. It would be that, if our hearts did not often act as
guiding lights to our befogged intelligences. Look at this house behind
us--the brandy distiller's. The devilish workings of his intelligence
have befogged the whole country--befogged it with brandy--and some such
guiding light is much needed there.

First Passer-by. Ah, well,--the old idea of the Land of Fogs was that
fogs were--. (The sound of their conversation dies away as they pass
into the park on the left. GERTRUD, closely veiled and wrapped in furs,
comes slowly out of the park. She stops at the corner and looks down the
street, then passed slowly along to the right, looking up at the house
as she goes. She is scarcely out of sight when the house-door opens and
EVJE comes out.)

Evje. This is about the time he comes home--I daren't go to his house
and ask for him; I don't know if he would admit me. I daren't trust to
the Doctor alone.--This uncertainty is dreadful! (He starts at seeing
GERTRUD, whom he does not recognise in the fog, walking towards him. She
turns suddenly and walks back the way she came.) Who was that? She gave
me quite a fright in this fog! Her furs seemed rather like--no, no,
it couldn't be. I must not let any one recognise me. (Puts up the high
collar of his coat, so that only his nose is visible.) Both of them
called me a coward, but they are very much mistaken. It is not cowardice
for a man who is respected and honoured to try and avoid scandal. Hm!
Naturally those who trade in scandals think otherwise!--To act without
attaching weight to the opinion of others, to disregard one's own
predilections, to put up with being laughed at--all for the sake of
preventing a scandal--that is to be strong and courageous. And it _is_
admirable, too; for it is admirable to act fearlessly in the interest
of one's family, and of one's business, and of propriety. (Starts as he
hears his door opened. JOHN has come along the street and gone into the
house.) Is that some one coming out of my house? No, it is a man going
in. And then to think of Harald Rejn beginning that nonsense about my
being a coward, because I refused to become a party man! Every one
ought to take sides in politics--that is their cry. Hm! I should say it
required rather more courage nowadays to _refrain_ from taking sides.
(Starts again.) Who is that? Oh, only that woman again. She is waiting
for some one too. I expect we shall both catch bad colds. (Walks up and
down.) It is an odd sensation to be walking up and down on the watch
outside one's own house. Cowardice? Pshaw! To let one's self be abused
in a public street without stirring a finger to prevent it, _that_ would
be cowardice. I only hope he has not gone round the other way? There is
much more traffic in that street, and some one might easily--. I think I
will take a turn towards the town, and turn back when I am a little way
from here; it will look less suspicious. I must catch him, because his
paper will be going to press. (Looks up at his house.) My poor wife,
sitting up there dreadfully alarmed on my account! (Goes out to the
right. As soon as he has gone, the house-door opens and JOHN comes
warily out.)

JOHN. So he has gone out, has he! Oh, well, he is bound to come in
again! I will wait and catch him, that I will! Tra, la, la, la, la! I
can play about here in the fog till he comes back; I have nothing to
lose! And it will be best to catch him in the street; he will make less
fuss, and can't run away from me! Tra, la, la, la, la! (Lounges out to
the right. A moment later, HARALD comes out of the park. He is dressed
much as EVJE is, but has not his coat-collar turned up.)

Harald. There is a light in her window! Then she is alone in her room.
What am I going to do now? Twice already I have come to look at that
light; now I have seen it--and must go away! Good-bye, my darling! Be
patient, and wait! I know your thoughts are with me now; and I know you
feel that mine are with you! (As he turns away from the house he sees
the veiled figure of GERTRUD, who, as soon as she has come nearer,
rushes to him, throws up her veil, and falls into his arms in a glad
embrace.)

Gertrud. I was certain that, if you could not go into the house again,
you would be out here! I knew you would not go away from me, dear!

Harald. No--neither now nor ever.

Gertrud. And, while I was walking up and down here in the fog, I felt
that though there might be all this gloom tend cold around us outside,
there was the brightness and warmth of certainty in our hearts.

Harald. Yes, our love is the one certainty for me! Fog may obscure the
goal I aim at, the road I have to I read, the very ground I stand on;
doubts may even for a while attack my faith; but my love for you shines
clear through it all!

Gertrud. Thank you, my darling! If that is so, there is nothing that we
cannot overcome!

Harald. Of course, you know what took place to-day?

Gertrud. I can guess.

Harald. Is it true that you are ill? Why did you never tell me?

Gertrud. No, the doctor is not telling the truth; I am not ill! Even
if I were, what matter? I should go on living as long as I could--and
should have done my duty before I gave in!

Harald. That is the way to look at it!

Gertrud. But I am not ill! I suffer, it is true--and am likely to--every
time you are persecuted, or my parents on my account. Because _I_ have
drawn them into all this that, they are so unfitted for, and that is why
it pains me so to see how unprepared it finds them--most of all when,
out of tenderness for me, they try to conceal it. But I can't alter
things. We are fighting for a cause that you believe to be right, and
so do I; surely that is better than never to suffer at all in any good
cause. Try me! Let me share the fight with you! I am not weak; it is
only that my heart is sore for those I love.

Harald. You splendid, loyal creature!--and you are mine! (Embraces her.)

Gertrud. You should hear what grandfather says!

Harald. Yes, how is the dear old gentleman?

Gertrud. Pretty well, thanks, though he never gets out now. But he is
following your work, and he says that what you are aiming at is right,
if you ask for God's guidance on your way. Harald--you will always be
the same as you are now--good and genuine--won't you, dear? Not like
the rest of them--nothing but bitterness and malice, always talking of
principles and consequences and all the rest of it, and always attacking
others? If one were obliged to be like that, it would be a curse to be a
politician.

Harald. I will be what you make me! I think that behind every man's
public life you can see his private life--whether he has a real home,
and what it is like, or whether he only has a place he lives in--that is
to say, no real home.

Gertrud. With God's help I shall try to make a bright, snug and cosy
home for you! And this fog is delightful, because it only makes the
thought of such a home all the cosier and snugger! It makes us seem so
alone, too; no one is out driving or walking; and we can talk as loud as
we please, because the fog deadens the sound of our voices. Oh, I
feel so happy again now! Do you know, I think it is rather nice to be
persecuted a little; it makes our meetings so much more precious!

Harald. But, you know dear, to meet you like this--and just now--

Gertrud (as they walk up and down together). Yes, of course! I had
altogether forgotten how much you have to bear just now; I have been
chattering away--. Oh, I don't know how I could feel so happy, because
I am really dreadfully distressed. But, you know, I sit the whole
play beside grandfather, thinking, without even being able to talk.
I generally read aloud to him; now and then he makes a remark, but he
really lives more in the next world than in this one now. (They hear a
cough in the distance, and give a start, because they recognise it. The
EDITOR and EVJE, walking along together, EVJE apparently talking very
earnestly, are seen, indistinctly through the fog, in the street running
parallel with the one HARALD and GERTRUD are in. JOHN is seen following
them cautiously. They disappear into the park.)

Harald. I hear the enemy! I am sure I caught a glimpse of him over there
through the fog, talking to another man.

Gertrud. Is he always about the streets even in weather like this?

Harald. Well, we won't let him disturb us. (They begin walking up and
down again in front of the house.)

Gertrud. Do you know whom I met out here? Father!

Harald. Really? Then it is as I thought; the other man over there was
your father!

Gertrud. Do you think it was? Poor father!

Harald. Yes, he is weak.

Gertrud. But you must be good to him. He is so good himself. Think how
mother loves him; she is absolutely wrapped up in him, because he is so
good!

Harald. He is a good man, and an able man. But, but, but--

Gertrud. They have lived a very tranquil life. We of the younger
generation try to undertake heavier duties and greater responsibilities
than the older generation did. But we must not be angry with them.

Harald. I am afraid it is only too easy to feel angry with them.

Gertrud. No, do as grandfather does! If he thinks any one is going to
be amenable to it, he talks to them quietly; if not, he only behaves
affectionately to them. Do you understand, dear?--just affectionately.

Harald. Well, to-day--ought I to have put up with their allowing
themselves to be treated in such an unseemly way, and their treating me
in such an unseemly way?

Gertrud. Was it really as bad as that?

Harald. You would not believe what it was like, I assure you!

Gertrud (standing still). Poor father! Poor father! (Throws her arms
round HARALD'S neck.) Be good to them, Harald!--just because of
their faults, dear! We are their children, you know, and it is God's
commandment, even if we were not their children.

Harald. If only I could take you up in my arms and carry you off home
with me now! Your love takes possession of my heart and my will, and
purifies both of them. I am at a crisis in my life now--and now you
should be on my side!

Gertrud. Listen!--to begin with, I will go with you to your meeting
to-night!

Harald. Yes, yes,--I will come and fetch you!

Gertrud. Down at the door here!

Harald. Yes!

Gertrud. And, in the next place, I am going to walls into the town with
you now.

Harald. But then I shall have to see you home again.

Gertrud. Do you object?

Harald. No, no! And you shall teach me a lot of things on the way!

Gertrud. Yes, you will be so wise before we get back! (They go out to
the right.)

(The EDITOR and EVJE come out of the park. JOHN follows them, unseen by
them, and slips past them to the right when they stop for a moment. The
following conversation is carried on in hurried tones, and every time
the EDITOR raises his voice EVJE hushes him, and speaks himself in a
persistently lowered voice.)

Evje. But what concern of yours--or of the public's--are my private
affairs? I don't want to have anything to do with politics.

The Editor, Well, then, you ought not to have had anything to do with
_him_.

Evje. When I first made his acquaintance he was not a politician.

The Editor. Then you ought to have dropped him when he became one.

Evje. Ought I to have dropped you too, when you became one?

The Editor. Let me repeat, for the last time, that we are not talking
about me!

Evje. Hush, hush! What a fellow you are! You get into a rage if any one
chaffs you. But you want to hit out at everybody all round!

The Editor. Do you suppose I am myself?

Evje. Who the devil are you, if you are not yourself?

The Editor. I am merely the servant of the public.

Evje. The public executioner, that is to say?

The Editor. Well, yes, if you prefer it. But you shall pay for that word
some day.

Evje. There--you see! Always talking of paying for things!--of revenge!

The Editor. You shall pay for it, I tell you!

Evje. You are absolutely mad!--Poof! I am sweating as if it were the dog
days! (Changes his tone.) Think of the time when we used to go to school
together--when you never could go to bed without first coming to thank
me for the jolly times we were having together!

The Editor. None of that nonsense! I am accustomed to be hated,
despised, spit upon, scourged; if any one speaks kindly to me, I do not
trust them!

Evje. You must trust me!

The Editor. No--and, besides, I observed very clearly to-day that you
had counted on having me in reserve if ever you got into a scrape.

Evje. Well, who doesn't count on his friends? Doesn't every one take
them into his reckoning?

The Editor. I don't; I have no friends.

Evje. Haven't you me? Do you think I would leave you in the lurch?

The Editor. That is hypocrisy! At times when I have needed it, the very
last thing you have thought of has been to give me any help!

Evje. Have I not helped you?

The Editor. That is hypocrisy, too-to pretend you think I am speaking
of money. No; when I have been accused of being dishonourable--of
lying--you, the "old schoolfellow," the "old friend," the "neighbour,"
have never once had the courage to come forward on my behalf.

Evje. I never meddle with politics.

The Editor (with rising temper). More hypocrisy! Another of your damned
evasions!

Evje. Hush, hush, hush!

The Editor. You try to excuse yourself with a lie! You are doubly a
traitor!--And then you expect me to have compassion on you!

Evje. As sure as I stand here, I have never thought of deserting you,
however bad things were.

The Editor. And you have the face to take credit to yourself for that?
It is all calculation from beginning to end! You thought it would be the
best way of making me remember your loyalty, and reward you for it.

Evje. This is abominable!

The Editor. Oh, you are cunning enough! You represent wealth of another
kind, which at first was not entirely irreproachably come by--

Evje. There you go again!

The Editor.--and want to give it the cachet of good society; so you take
care to keep friends with a newspaper that may be able to give you a
helping hand in gaining what you want. Can you deny it?

Evje. There may be a slight tinge of calculation even in our highest
purposes. But the misfortune about you is that you can see nothing but
the calculation, though it may be only an infinitesimal part of the
whole thing.

The Editor. Oho--I have had experience of you!

Evje. Then you must have had experience of your party's loyalty, too.

The Editor. My party's loyalty!

Evje. Well, after all, it keeps you where you are to-day.

The Editor. _It_ keeps me there?

Evje. And you have friends in that party-myself amongst others--who
certainly would rather stand outside altogether, but nevertheless give
you their advice and support when you are in difficulties. You cannot
deny that.

The Editor. I have friends in the party? Oh yes; and if we lose a fight
these fine counsellors are the first to run away! They are always egging
me on and egging me on; but only let public opinion once get tired of
me, and they will throw me overboard without more ado! By that sort of
treachery they manage to fill the sails of the party craft with a new
breeze--and leave me to shift the best way I can!--they, for whom I
have fought with all my might and main! I despise my opponents--they are
either scoundrels and thieves, or they are blockheads and braggarts.
But my supporters are lick-spittles, fools, cravens. I despise the whole
pack of them, from first to last! If any one would give me the assurance
that if, as a pledge that I would never use a pen again, I were to chop
off my right hand I should thereby gain the prospect of a peaceful life
a thousand miles away from here, I believe I would do it!--I despise the
whole pack of them--oh, how I despise them!

Evje. But this is horrible! Do you find no comfort in religion? Or, at
all events, you have your paper!

The Editor. My paper, yes--but what good do you suppose that is to me?
And do you think I give the impression of being a religious man?

Evje. Then what do you work for?

The Editor. Perhaps you think I work for your sake?--or for the sake of
prosperity, or order, or whatever it is you cowards or self-seekers like
to imagine it is that you personify? No, the whole human race is not
worth the powder and shot that they are holding at each other's heads.

Evje. Then why do you come and almost threaten my life, if the whole
thing seems so worthless to you?

The Editor. Do you seriously suppose that I would give in, so as to
spare you or some other shopkeeper?--so that you should be able to
say triumphantly, "You see he didn't dare! He didn't dare quarrel with
Capital!"--or, "You see he has given in--he has turned tail!" No; what
I should like to do would be to lay a mine underground, and blow myself
and the whole lot of you sky high!

Evje. And I and all the happiness of my family life are to be sacrificed
in order that you shall not have to give in on a side issue of no
importance!--Oh, I am chilled to the bone!

The Editor. Ha, ha! It is good to hear you speaking like yourself again,
because it reminds me that it is time to put an end to this solemn
nonsense! (Looks at his watch.) A quarter past! You must be quick!

Evje. Are you really in earnest?

The Editor. I often play off jokes on you, it is true. But I don't know
how you will like this one to-morrow morning.

Evje. Then let me tell you that I solemnly refuse! I will not break off
the engagement! Put me in your paper, if you like; I am a free man.

The Editor. Bah! nobody is that. Then you refuse? Good-bye! (Walks away
from EVJE.)

Evje (going after him). No, no--where are you going?

The Editor (stopping). Nowhere--or rather, I am going home.

Evje. But you won't really do what you said?

The Editor. Ha! ha! ha! (Moves away.)

Evje (following him). No, listen! Listen to me for a minute.

The Editor (turning back). Do you think I have time to stop at all
the stations your vanity or your fright will invent on the way? (Moves
away.)

Evje. You mad creature--listen to me! (The EDITOR stops.) Tell me
exactly what you mean to do?

The Editor. Fiddlesticks! (Moves on.)

Evje (following him). Do you mean to put in the paper that I have broken
off this match?

The Editor (stopping). Better than that--I shall spread the news in the
town; then it will get about, and all the journalists will get a hold of
it.

Evje. Give me a day or two to think it over!

The Editor. Oh, no--you are not going to catch me like that! It is
election time, and the other side must be made to feel that all decent
people have deserted them.

Evje. But it is a lie, you know!

The Editor. What is lying, and what is truth? But your resignation from
the Stock Exchange Committee and your subsequent failure to be elected
to any public position will be no lies, I can assure you! Public opinion
is not to be trifled with, you know!

Evje. And this from you!

The Editor. Bah! Public opinion is a very faithless friend.

Evje. But who, after all, constitute public opinion?

The Editor. Oh, no--you are not going to lead me into a trap again!
Besides--it would be very difficult to say exactly who does constitute
it.

Evje. This is really--! Then you won't put that in the paper?

The Editor. The news of a broken engagement travels quickest by
foot-post--ha, ha, ha! (Coughs; then adds seriously:) But won't you,
of your own accord, break off what are really absolutely inadmissible
relations with a man who scandalises all your acquaintances?

Evje. Lay the blame on me, of course! I know his credentials are no
longer first class; but my daughter--ah, you would not be able to
understand that. The circumstances are quite exceptional, and--. Look
here, shall we go up and talk it over with my wife?

The Editor. Ha, ha!--you turned me out of the house this morning!

Evje. Oh, forget all about that!

The Editor (looking at his watch). Half past! Now, without any more
evasions--will you, or will you not?

Evje (with a struggle). No! I repeat, no! (The EDITOR moves away.) Yes,
yes!--It nearly kills me to do it!

The Editor. "The Capitalist, secure in his position, who needs pay no
regard to," etc., etc.--that is the "common form," isn't it, you man of
first-class credentials? Ha, ha! Good-bye. I am going home to send the
boy to the printers; he has waited long enough. (Moves away.)

Evje (following him). You are the cruellest, hardest, most reckless--

The Editor (who has been laughing, suddenly becomes serious). Hush! Do
you see?

Evje (turning round). What? Where?

The Editor. Over there!

Evje. Those two?

The Editor. Yes--your daughter and Mr. Harald Rejn.

Evje. But he swore this morning that he would never set foot in my house
again!

The Editor. But he will stay _outside_ your house, as you see! These
gentlemen of the Opposition, when they give any assurance, always do it
with a mental reservation! You can't trust the beggars! Come round the
corner. (They do so.)

Evje. An assignation in the street in the fog! To think my daughter
would let herself be induced to do such a thing!

The Editor. Evil communications corrupt good manners! You are a mere
bungler in delicate matters, Evje. You made a bad choice in that
quarter!

Evje. But he seemed to be--

The Editor. Yes, yes, I know! A real gentleman would have guessed what
he would develop into. He has a brother, you know! (HARALD and GERTRUD
come in slowly, arm-in-arm.)

Gertrud. While your brother has been ill you have received many
gratifying proofs of the good feeling and goodwill that there is in this
town-haven't you?

Harald. Yes, I have. I have found no ill-will against him, nothing but
kindness on all sides--with the exception of one person, of course.

Gertrud. But even he has a heart! It has often seemed to me as if I
heard a cry of yearning and disappointment from it--and that just when
he spoke most bitterly.

Harald. Yes, it needs no very sharp sight to see that he, who makes so
many unhappy, is himself the unhappiest of all.

The Editor. What the deuce are they talking about?

Evje. We cannot hear from here. And the fog deadens their voices.

The Editor. Go a bit nearer, then!

Evje. Not before they separate. You only understand _him_!

Harald (to GERTRUD). What are you holding there?

Gertrud (who has taken off her glove and then a ring from her finger).
The ring they gave me when I was confirmed. Give me your hand! No, take
your glove off!

Harald. Do you want me to try your ring on? I shall not be able to get
it on.

Gertrud. On the little finger of your left hand? Yes!

Harald (putting it on). So I can. Well?

Gertrud. You mustn't laugh at me. I have been beating up my courage
to do this all this time. It was really why I wanted to walk a little
farther with you first! I wanted to bring the conversation round to it,
you see! I am so convinced that your happiness, and consequently mine,
depends on your being able to be kind. You have got this meeting before
you to-night. It will be a decisive moment for you. If you, when you are
facing all this horrible persecution, can be a kind boy, you will win
all along the line! (Pulls at his buttons in an embarrassed way.) So I
wanted you to wear this ring to remind you. The diamonds in it sparkle;
they are like my tears when you are hard and forget us two. I know it
is stupid of me (wipes her eyes hastily), but now, when it comes to the
point, I can't say what I--. But do wear it!

Harald (kissing her). I will wear it! (Gently.) Its pure rays shall shed
a light on my life.

Gertrud. Thank you! (Throws her arms round him and kisses him.)

The Editor. What they are doing now is all right! Ha, ha, ha!

Evje. I won't stand it! (The EDITOR coughs loudly.) What are you doing?
(The EDITOR goes to the neighbouring house and rings the bell. The door
is opened and he goes in, laughing as he goes.)

Gertrud (who has started from HARALD'S arms at the sound of the cough).
That is--!

Harald. It sounds like him! (Turns, and sees Evje.)

Gertrud. Father! (Turns to run away, but stops.) No, it is cowardly to
run away. (Comes back, and stands at HARALD'S side. EVJE comes forward.)

Evje. I should not have expected my daughter, a well-brought-up girl, to
make an assignation in the street with--with--

Gertrud. With her fiancé.

Evje.--with a man who has made a mock of her father and mother, and of
his own doing has banished himself from our house.

Harald. From your house, certainly; but not from my future wife.

Evje. A nice explanation! Do you suppose we will consent to have as our
son-in-law a man who spurns her parents?

Gertrud. Father!

Evje. Be quiet, my child! You ought to have felt that yourself.

Gertrud. But, father, you surely do not expect him to submit to your
being abused and himself ill-treated in our house?

Evje. Are you going to teach your parents--?

Gertrud (putting her arm round his neck). I don't want to teach you
anything; because you know yourself, dear, that Harald is worth far
more--and far more to us--than the man who went away just now! (At this
moment the printer's boy, who has come out of the EDITOR'S house, runs
past them towards the town.)

Evje (seeing the boy, tries to get away). Go in now, Gertrud! I have
something I wish to talk to Mr. Rejn about.

Gertrud. You have nothing to talk to Harald about that I cannot hear.

Evje. Yes, I have.

Harald. But why may she not hear it? What you want is to break off our
engagement.

Gertrud. Father--! (Moves away from him.) Is that true?

Evje. Well-since it cannot be otherwise-it is true; that is to say, for
the moment. (Aside.) Good Lord, they can make it up right enough when
this is all over!

Gertrud (who is standing as if thunderstruck). I saw you with him!--Ah!
that is how it is! (Looks at her father, bursts into tears and rushes to
the door of their house, pulls the bell and disappears into the house.)

Evje. What is it? What is the matter with her?

Harald. I think I know. She realises that her life's happiness has been
bought and sold. (Bows to EVJE.) Good-bye! (Goes out to the right.)

Evje (after standing dumb for some moments). Bought and sold?
Some people take everything so dreadfully solemnly. It is only a
manoeuvre--to get out of this difficulty. Why is it that I cannot get
free of it! They both of them exaggerate matters so absurdly; first of
all this crazy fellow, and then Harald with his "Good-bye," spoken as if
the ground were giving way beneath his feet! I--I--feel as if every one
had deserted me. I will go in to my wife--my dear, good wife; she will
understand me. She is sitting up there, full of anxiety about me. (He
turns towards his house; but, on reaching the garden gate, sees JOHN
standing there.)

John (touching his hat respectfully). Excuse me, Mr. Evje--

Evje. You, John! Go away! I told you never to set foot in my house
again.

John (very respectfully). But won't you allow me to stand outside your
house either, sir?

Evje. No!

John (standing in EVJE'S way, but still with a show of great respect).
Not at the door here?

Evje. What are you standing in my way for, you scoundrel?

John. Shall I assist you to call for help, sir? (Calls out.) Help!

Evje. Be quiet, you drunken fool! Don't make a disturbance! What do you
want? Be quick!

John. I want, with all respect, to ask you, sir, why you have sent me
away.

Evje. Because you are a swine that gets drunk and then talks nonsense.
You don't know what a dilemma you have put me in.--Now go away from
here, quietly!

John. I know all about it! I was following you and the Editor all the
time, you know!

Evje. What?

John. These articles, that were to go in the paper--the printing was at
a standstill, waiting for them.

Evje. Hush, hush, John! So you overheard that, did you? You are too
clever; you ought never to have been a servant.--Now, be off with you!
Here is a shilling or two for you. Good-bye.

John. Thank you very much, sir.--This was how it was, sir. You see,
I thought of the number of times I had run over to the printer's with
messages when that nice Editor gentleman was spending an evening with
you--and so I thought I might just as well run over with this one.

Evje (starting back in alarm). What? What have you done?

John. Just to do you a good turn, sir, I ran along and told them they
might print those articles.

Evje. What articles?

John. The ones about you, sir. "Print away," I said--and they printed
away. By Jove, how they worked, and then off to the post with the
papers!

Evje. You had the impudence, you--! Ah, it's not true! I saw the
printer's boy myself, running to the office to countermand the
instructions.

John. I caught him up outside here and told him that a message had been
sent from Mr. Evje's house. And I gave him sixpence to go to the theatre
with; but he must have had to run for it, to be in time, because I am
sure it was after seven. Excuse me, sir, but it _is_ after seven now,
isn't it?

Evje. You scoundrel! You vindictive brute!

John. You can have a look at the paper, sir, if you like.

Evje. Have _you_ got a copy?

John. Yes, sir, the first copy struck off is always sent to the Editor,
so I volunteered to bring it to him. But you must be anxious to see it,
sir! (Holds it out to EVJE.)

Evje (snatching it from him). Give it to me! Let me see--. (Moves
towards his door, but stops.) No, my wife mustn't--. Here, under the
gas-lamp! This filthy fog! I can't--. (Feels in his pocket for his
glasses, and pasts them on.) Ah, that's better! (Holds the paper under
the light.) What a mischance! The blackguard--! Where is the article,
then? Oh, here--I can't see properly, my heart is beating so!

John. Shall I run for the doctor, sir?

Evje. Will you go away, you--! (Holds the paper first up, and then down,
in his attempts to see better.) Ah, here it is! "The Stock Exchange
Committee"--oh! (Lowers the paper.)

John (mimicking him). Oh!

Evje (trying to read). What a vile thing to do!

John. Oh, go on! go on!

Evje (as he reads). This beats everything I ever--Oh!

John. Oh! We _are_ in a bad way!

Evje (wiping his forehead). What a different thing it is to read
libellous attacks on others--and on one's self! (Goes on reading.) Oh!
Oh! What horrible, revolting rascality! What is it he says here? I must
read through it again! Oh, oh!

John. And often of a morning, when you have been reading the paper, I
have heard you laughing till the bed shook under you!

Evje. Yes, I who have so often laughed at others! (Reads.) No, this is
beyond belief! I can't read any more! This will ruin my position in the
town; I can hear every one laughing at me--he knows all my weaknesses,
and has managed to make it all so hideously ludicrous! (Tries to go on
reading.) Why, here is some more! (Reads.) It begins even worse than the
other! (Lowers the paper, panting, then tries to go on reading.) No, I
can't--I can't! I must wait! Everything seems going round and round--and
my heart is beating so violently that I know I shall have one of my
attacks! What a devil it is that I have been making a friend of! What a
creature to have broken bread with!--an unprincipled scoundrel! And the
disgrace of it!--the disgrace! What will they say at the Exchange? What
will--? I shall not dare to go out of my house, at least for some weeks!
And then people will only say I have taken to my bed! Oh, oh! I feel as
if it were the end of everything!

John (solicitously). Can I help you, sir?

Evje. Will you leave me alone--! No, I will have my revenge on him
immediately! I will go and ring his bell, and go into his house and call
him a scoundrel and spit in his face--! Did I bring my stick out with
me? Where is my stick? I will send my man for it, and then I will thrash
him round and round his own room!

John (eagerly). I will fetch it for you, sir!

Evje (without hearing him). No, it would only make more scandal!--How
can I take my revenge? I must do him some injury--some real injury that
will seem to poison his food for him and rob him of his rest. Scoundrels
like that don't deserve sleep! It must be something, too, that will
make his family every bit as unhappy as mine will be when they have
read this--something that will make them hide their heads for
shame--something that will make them terrified every time their
door-bell rings, out of shame for what their servants may hear! No, no,
I am getting as evil-minded as he is, now!--What a horrible trade--for
ever sowing the seeds of sin and reaping a crop of curses! Now I
understand what Harald Rejn meant by saying that no one ought to give
his help to such things!--Heavens, hear my vow: never again will I give
my help to such things!--What am I to say to my wife--my dear, good
wife, who has no suspicion how disgraced I am! And Gertrud, our good
Gertrud--ah, at all events I can give her some pleasure at once. I
cannot conceal it from them; but I will tell them myself, so that they
shall not read it.

John. Is there anything else I can do for you, sir?

Evje (almost screaming at him). Once for all, can't you let me alone!

Mrs. Evje (leaning out of a window she has opened). The sound must have
come from the street, all the same. Are you there, my dear?

Evje (drawing back in alarm). There she is! Shall I answer?

Mrs. Evje. Are you there, my dear?

Evje. Yes, dear, here I am!

Mrs. Evje. So you are! I heard your voice, and looked all over the
house. What is the matter, dear?

Evje. Oh, I am so unhappy!

Mrs. Evje. Good heavens, are you, dear? Come along in--or shall I come
down to you?

Evje. No, I will come in. Shut the window, or you will catch cold.

Mrs. Evje. Do you know, Gertrud is sitting up here, crying?

Evje. Good gracious, is she? I will come up--I will come up!

John. I will help him up, ma'am! (Pretends to be doing so.)

Mrs. Evje. Is that you, John?

Evje (in a low voice). Will you be off!

John. Yes, it is me, ma'am. He is so unwell.

Mrs. Evje. Is he! Heavens, it is one of his attacks! Help him, John!

Evje (as before). Don't you dare!

John (who has rung the bell loudly). I do hope you will moon be better,
sir! (Calls up to the window.) I can leave him now, ma'am! (To EVJE, as
he goes.) This has been a bit of luck, for me; but you shall have some
more of it! (Disappears into the fog as EVJE goes into his house. The
two Passers-by, that were seen at the beginning of the scene, are now
indistinctly seen returning along the street at the back.)

First Passer-by. Well, the land of Fogs used to be thought by the
ancients to lie in the north, where all confused ideas come from--

Second Passer-by (who does not seem to be able to get a word in). But,
listen to me for a moment-do you think it means--?

[Curtain]




ACT III

(SCENE.--A room in HALVDAN REJN's house. He is lying, supported on
pillows, on a sofa on the left-hand side of the room. There is a table
in the background, and another near the sofa. A lamp is hanging from the
ceiling, and another standing on the table at the back. HAAKON REJN, his
dress proclaiming him to be a well-to-do yeoman farmer, is sitting on a
chair by the sofa.)

Halvdan. So she couldn't come?

Haakon. No; there are the youngsters, you know--she finds it difficult
to get away.

Halvdan (after a moment's silence). Remember to thank her for all her
kindness to me. The happiest moments of my life have been those Sundays
and evenings that she and you and I spent together at your house. (A
pause.)

Haakon. She wanted very much to know how you were feeling--whether you,
who have suffered so much, are at peace now.

Halvdan. At peace? A man who has to die with all his work unfinished,
cannot easily root out all thoughts of that from his heart.

Haakon. You should try to lay in God's hands all that you have striven
for.

Halvdan. That is what I struggle daily to do. (A pause.)

Haakon. A sister of my wife's, who was a widow and badly off, died
leaving three young children. But she was glad to die. "Their Heavenly
Father will help them better when I am out of the way," she said. "I
took up too much room," she said; "I know I have often stood in their
way." (A pause.)

Halvdan. You tell that just as your wife would; she told me that story
once.

Haakon. I was to tell you from her that she believes you are to die in
order that what you have worked for may come to its fullest fruit. She
thinks that when you are gone, people will appreciate better what your
aims were.

Halvdan. There is some comfort in the thought that I may be dying
in order that what I have loved may live. I have already given up
happiness-even honour-for it; I gladly give my life for it now. (A
pause.)

Haakon. Do you bear ill-will to any of those who have opposed you so
cruelly?

Halvdan. To no one.

Haakon. Not even to those whose doing it is that you are lying here?

Halvdan. No, to no one. (A pause.)

Haakon. Could you bear to read something hateful about yourself to-day?

Halvdan. I don't know.

Haakon. Then you have not done with it all yet.

Halvdan. No, I know I have not. It is only sometimes that the busy
world outside seems to me like a ship sailing idly before the wind. More
often, I am back in the midst of it again--planning, hoping, praying! I
am young, you know, and have had to suffer so much--there was so much I
wanted to do. (Lifts a handkerchief to his forehead. HAAKON helps him to
wipe his face with it. A pause.)

Haakon. But it must be a comfort to you, too, that Harald is taking up
what you are laying down. There is good stuff in him.

Halvdan. Yes.

Haakon. And he never says more than is necessary. The country folk will
understand him all the better for it.

Halvdan. I hope so. As soon as he comes into my room I feel as if the
atmosphere were charged with electricity--I feel as if I _must_ have
a part in what he is doing--and so I work, and tire myself out. Ah, it
often seems very hard to have to die, and leave undone a great work that
one has failed to accomplish!

Haakon. But you have made him what he is, you know--and many others.

Halvdan. I have started the fight, that is all. It is hard to have to
desert at the beginning of it!--But God is good, and will understand; He
will not be surprised at what my thoughts are full of, when I go to Him.
(A ring is heard at the bell.)

Haakon. I expect that is Harald.

Halvdan. No, he never rings. Besides, I expect he is taking a walk, to
think over what he is going to say to-night.

Haakon. Yes, I suppose it will be a big meeting. (The HOUSEKEEPER comes
in.)

The Housekeeper. Mr. Evje is here, sir, asking for Mr. Harald. I told
him we were expecting him every moment. Shall I ask him to come in?

Halvdan. Yes, show him in. (HAAKON gets up, as EVJE is shown in.)

Evje (to HALVDAN). Good evening! (Sees HAAKON.) Ah, good evening! So you
have come? That is splendid. Is your wife with you?

Haakon. No, she couldn't leave the children.

Evje. I see. (To HALVDAN.) And how are you? About the same? Of course,
yes.--Where is your brother?

Halvdan. He has his meeting to-night, you know.

Evje. His momentous meeting--I know! I am going to it myself!

Halvdan (turns his face towards him). You?

Evje. My object in coming here was to take him home with me, so that we
could all go together to the meeting. We mean to go on to the platform
with him; I mean people to see that we are with him!

Halvdan (turning his face away). Really!

Evje (to HAAKON). You never answered my letter, Mr. Rejn.

Haakon. No, I knew I was coming in to town.

Evje. Well--will you sell?

Haakon. No.

Evje. But, my dear Mr. Rejn, you have not sold a single potato to my
distillery for five years! And with a farm like yours! This year you had
the best crop in the whole valley.

Haakon. Oh, yes--it wasn't so bad.

Evje. Not so bad! It was an extraordinary crop; and, everywhere else
round about, the crops were very middling.

Haakon. Oh, yes--it might have been worse.

Evje (laughing). I should think so! But then why won't you sell? (Turns
to HALVDAN.) I hope you will excuse our talking business in a sick-room;
a business man has to seize every opportunity, you know! (To HAAKON.)
You have never got higher prices elsewhere than you have from me.

Haakon. No, so I believe; but I have my own reasons.

Evje. Your own reasons? What are they?

Haakon. I had a servant once--it is about five years ago now--a good,
capable fellow. He used to take potatoes for me to the distillery every
day, and every evening came back drunk. So I spoke to him seriously
about it; and his answer was: "How do you suppose our brandy-merchants
are to grow rich, if chaps like me don't drink pretty hard?" You know
the man; he went into your service afterwards. But from that day I have
never sold a potato to a distillery.

Evje. But, my dear Mr. Rejn, we cannot be held responsible for the use
to which such rascals put God's gifts!

Haakon. No--no--I suppose not; still, I am not going to have anything
more to do with it.

Evje (to HALVDAN). Do you think your brother will not be home before the
meeting?

Halvdan. I should think he would; there is plenty of time yet.

Evje. There is; but I should have liked to take him home with me first.
The fact is (laughs) I have promised my wife and daughter not to go home
without him. You know what women are! Shall I just go into his room and
wait for him? There is something I want to talk to him about, you know.

Halvdan. I don't think there is a fire in there.

Evje. Oh, well, never mind--I will sit here. I have got a newspaper to
read, and you two must go on with your talk just as if I were not here!
I shall hear nothing, because I have something to read that interests
me. (He pulls a chair up to the table on the right with its back to
HALVDAN. HAAKON brings the lamp from the table at the back.) Ah, thank
you very much! Now, just talk away as if I were not here! (Takes the
paper from his pocket and sits down.)

Haakon (sitting down again beside his brother). I should have liked to
go to the meeting, too.

Halvdan. Of course you must go! You will hear Harald tell them how each
nation has its own appointed task in the world; that is why it _is_ a
nation. But, as long as it does not realise the fact, its politics
will be nothing but wrangling between the various class-interests--a
haphazard struggle for power. Our nation has never got beyond that
point! I have shouted myself to death over what is a mere market.

Evje (to himself, striking the table with his fist). The whole
commercial community is insulted in this insult to me! I will stir them
up at the meeting, and insist on our taking our revenge in common!

Haakon. I don't think things will be any better until we are better
Christians. Men think of nothing nowadays but themselves and their
position.

Evje (to himself). No, no-that wouldn't do. What would people say? They
would only say I was badly hit by this.

Halvdan (half to himself). A Christian nation, thinking of nothing but
its own interests--that is to say, power! Equality and Liberty have no
meaning for it. Haakon, it surely will be bliss for a wounded soul to
be taken into the Everlasting Love, high above all this so-called
Christianity of the world! For my soul is sorely wounded!

Evje (to himself ). If only I could strike him dead!

Halvdan. But may they all be forgiven!--You asked just now whether I
could bear to read something hateful about myself to-day. I think I
could.

Haakon. Then I can tell you the other message she gave me for you.
I have been a little shy of telling you that. It was that you should
remember that you must do more than forgive; you must pray for them. (A
pause.)

Halvdan (with his hand over his eyes). I do.

Evje (crumpling up the paper and throwing it on the floor). No, I won't
stand it! If the blackguard--. (Gets up in alarm, as he realises what
he has done, and is just going to pick up the paper; but at that moment
turns round facing the others, and lets it lie.) No, I won't touch it
again--never, as long as I live! (To the others.) You must forgive me,
but I was reading something that upset me very much. Your brother will
tell you all about it in the morning, no doubt. Poof--it is very warm in
here! But, of course, that is natural in a sick-room. I don't think he
can be coming now. I think, too, that I will go on, so as not to be late
for the meeting; there is sure to be a difficulty in getting seats. I
will get him to go home with me after the meeting, instead. That will be
better, after all.

Haakon. I was thinking of going to the meeting. Would you mind if I went
with you?--for I do not know the way myself.

Evje. You will come with me, Mr. Rejn? (To himself.) That will be
splendid--to make my entrance in the company of one of our yeomen
farmers! (Aloud.) By all means let us go together! I feel flattered by
the opportunity, because I have always maintained that our yeomen are
the pick of the nation. Well, then--(to Halvdan) I hope you will soon be
feeling better, Mr. Rejn. God bless you!

Halvdan (raising himself on his elbow, and looking at him with a smile).
Something must have gone amiss with you to-day.

Evje. Why do you say that?

Halvdan. Because as a rule you appear so composed so aloof from all this
squabbling.

Evje (impetuously). But, do what I like, I am not allowed to keep aloof
from it! I have no greater wish in the world than to do so, I can assure
you. Oh, well, your excellent brother--my future son-in-law,
as I am proud to call him--he will tell you all about it.
Good-bye!--and--and--God bless you!

Haakon. Shall I tell your housekeeper to come to you?

Halvdan. Oh, no; but you might tell her to come in a little while.

Haakon. Good-bye for the present, then!

Halvdan. Thank you for coming! Good-bye. (Sinks back on to the sofa. The
others go out, HAAKON turning round once at the door.)

Halvdan. It is something in the paper that has disturbed his equanimity.
What can it be? The same thing that made Harald so gloomy to-day, I
wonder? (Gets half up.) It is lying there.--No! What interest have I in
all their petty spite now? (Sinks back again.) "Could you bear to read
something hateful about yourself to-day?" Haakon asked. Then I suppose
there is something about me in it to-day. (Puts his hand over his
heart.) My heart doesn't seem to be beating any the faster for my
knowing that. (Gets half up.) There it lies! (Sinks back again.) No, I
am only trying to tempt myself. All the same, I should like to know how
many stations I have passed on my journey to the great City of
Peace! Can their malice affect me still? Surely I have passed _that_
station?--It would be worth trying, to see. There it lies! (Takes up
a stick that is standing by the sofa.) Surely I can get over there by
myself? (Gets up from the sofa with the help of the stick, and smiles.)
I have not much strength left. (Takes a few steps.) Scarcely enough
to get across the floor. (A few more steps.) To think that I should
have--so much vanity--my weak point--. (His breath fails him, but he
gets as far as the chair on which EVJE was sitting, and sits down.) One
ought to have done with all that before the soul can get quite away from
the dust that--. (Begins to rake the paper towards him with his stick.)
And here am I, sitting here raking more of it towards me!--No, let the
thing lie! I won't soil my wings any more.--Poor Harald! He has to
take up the burden now! What a horrible bungle it is, that we should
be brought into the world to give each other as much pain as possible!
(Decidedly.) Well, I am going to see what legacy of unhappiness I
am leaving him! I want to have a vivid impression of the misery I am
escaping from. There is a certain comfort even in that. (Bends down and
picks up the paper, rests for a moment, and then unfolds the paper.) But
this is not to-day's paper; it is dated for to-morrow! How can Evje have
got hold of it? Yes, here is the date--Sunday. "Remember that thou keep
holy the Sabbath Day!" On that day men's souls should turn to God--and
they offer Him _this_! It is after reading _this_ that these fine ladies
and gentlemen go to church! (Pushes the paper away from him.) Suppose
these "Christians" were to be brought to judgment one day without
warning?--Let us think of ourselves and not of others! (Lets his eye
rest on the paper.) Does that mean me? (Reads.) "Not yet actually dead,
but already canonised by a calculating brother--." (Checks himself.)
God forgive them! (Reads on.) "His teachings will no doubt obtain him
a paean of praise, but this will be--or, at least, so it is to be
hoped--from within the closely locked doors of the state's prisons and
houses of correction"--(checks himself a little)--"for that is whither
he leads his followers."--Good God, to think that they can say such
things!--And yet, they said worse things of _Him_! Peace! (Reads.) "No
doubt he talks against Socialism; no doubt he coquets with Christianity;
but it is by these very means that he has become so expert a seducer of
men's opinions-which was his aim all along." (Puts his hands before his
face.) I should not have read it; forgive me! I am too weak still!--Ah!
I feel--what is it? (Puts his hands suddenly to his heart, still
unconsciously grasping the newspaper in them.) I must get into my
room--get to bed! (Gets up with the help of his stick.) If only I can
get there! Oh, I feel it coming on!--I must--. (Tries to hurry, but when
he is halfway across the floor he stumbles, throws out his hands but
finds no support, staggers on for a few steps, and falls full length on
the threshold of his bedroom, so that half his length lies within the
door and half without. A moment later, the HOUSEKEEPER comes in.)

The Housekeeper (not observing that he is not still on the sofa). Won't
you go to bed now, sir? You can't stand so much in one day. (Goes to the
sofa.) Where is he? Surely he has not tried to walk in alone? (Hurries
across to the bedroom door and almost falls over his body. She starts
back with a scream.) Where is--? (Catches up the lamp, hurries back, and
bends over him; then calls out, screaming:) Help! Help! (Rings the bell
wildly. A MAID appears.) Mr. Halvdan is lying here! Heaven knows whether
he is dead or alive! Run for the Doctor! Leave the door open behind you,
and beg the first man you meet in the street to come up here at once and
help me. Tell them it is a matter of life and death!

Maid. Yes!

The Housekeeper. Hurry!

Maid (going out). Yes, yes!

The Housekeeper (coming back into the room). Is he alive or dead? I
haven't the courage to find out. And both his brothers away! (Cries.)
God grant some one comes soon!--Poor man, alone in his death as he was
in his life! But what was he doing _there_? Why did he get up from the
sofa? (Sees the paper.) Surely that can't be--? (Puts the lamp on the
floor and unfolds the paper.) Yes, it is the paper, right enough! Who
can have given it him? I can't look at it now; but if it is like the
number I read the other day (lets the paper fall, and gets up with the
lamp) then I understand everything--and may God requite those that do
such things! (The EDITOR rushes in.)

The Editor. Is it here?

The Housekeeper (holds the lamp to him, then starts back). What do _you_
want here?

The Editor. Where am I? A girl came running down the street and told me
I must come up here and help some one that was dying. What do you want
me to do?--or is it not here?

The Housekeeper. And it was _you_ she met? It is the hand of God!

The Editor. What are you babbling about? If it is not here, say so at
once.

The Housekeeper. Yes, it is here. There he lies!

The Editor. Then oughtn't we to get him into bed?

The Housekeeper. Yes. But do you know who it is you are helping?

The Editor (to himself). She is not very polite. (Aloud.) No; but what
does that matter?

The Housekeeper. This much--that it is you that have killed him.

The Editor. I--? She is mad.

The Housekeeper. The man lying there is Halvdan Rejn. And he had been
reading about himself in your paper.--Come, now, and carry him in. (She
goes into the bedroom with the lamp. Her voice is heard from inside the
room.) Now, take hold of him and lift him. You can think afterwards.

The Editor (stoops to lift the body, but gets up again). I don't think
he is dead yet.

The Housekeeper. All the more reason to make haste.

The Editor (stoops down again, but gets up once more.) Let me take his
head.

The Housekeeper. Why?

The Editor. So that--if he should open his eyes

The Housekeeper.--he won't see you. (Comes out of the bedroom). Go in
there, then, and take his head. (He goes in.) What was that?

The Editor (from inside the room). I slipped. There is something wet
here.

The Housekeeper. Yes, he has had a hemorrhage. Carefully, now. (They
carry him in. The stage remains empty for a moment. Then the EDITOR
comes back, wiping his forehead. He walks backwards and forwards,
treading on the paper as he goes, but without noticing it.)

The Editor. What a horrible thing to happen!--Newspapers are not meant
for dying people.--It is not my fault.--Is this blood on my hand? It
is! (Wipes it with his handkerchief.) And now it is on my handkerchief!
(Throws it away.) No, it has my name on it. (Picks it up again.) No one
can say it is my fault. (Sits down, then gets up, wiping his forehead
with his handkerchief without noticing what he is doing.) Ah, I hope I
haven't put blood on my forehead? I seem to feel it there! (Feels
with his hand to see if his brow is wet.) No. (Sits down, then gets up
again.) Let me get away from here. (Stops.) To think that I should be
the one to come up! that it should just happen to-night that I did not
receive my paper, and so went out! It almost seems more than accident.
Indeed, I often had a foreboding that it would happen. (Stands opposite
the bedroom door.) But is he dead? I think I will go and fetch the
Doctor. Oh no, of course the maid has gone for him. He hasn't long
to live, anyway; I could see that. (Walks forward, pointing with
his finger.) "There goes the man that killed Halvdan Rejn! And his
punishment was that he had to lift up his bloodstained body himself."
That is what they will say; and they will look at me as if--. (Sits
down.) No, let me get away! (Takes a few steps, then stops suddenly.)
That article in to-morrow's paper! It is worse than the others! (Pulls
out his watch.) Too late--the post has gone! I would have given--.
(Checks himself.) I have nothing worth giving. In the morning It will
be known all over the town just as everyone is reading my fresh article.
There will be a riot; I shall be hunted like a wild beast. What shall I
do? I might sneak out of the town? Then they will gloat over me! I won't
allow them that pleasure! No, I cannot stay my hand utter a failure;
only after a victory. That is the cursed part of it-never, never to be
able to end it. Oh, for some one that could end it--end it, end it! Oh,
for one day of real peace! Shall _I_ ever get that? (Sits down.) No,
no, I must get away! (Gets up.) To-morrow must take care of itself.
(Starts.) There is the paper he was reading! (Steps over it.) I will
take it away--and burn it. (Takes it up.) I cannot burn it here; some
one might come. (Is just going to put it into his pocket, as it is, but
takes it out again to fold it better.) A Sunday's paper, apparently!
Then it is _not_ to-day's? An old number, I suppose. Then the whole
thing is a mistake! (Sighs with relief.) Let me look again! (Opens the
paper, tremblingly.) I don't deserve it, but--. (Reads.) Sunday, the--.
_To-morrow's_ paper? _Here_? How in all the world did it get here?
(Appears horrified.) Here are the articles about Evje! How on earth did
they get in? Didn't I send a message? Didn't I write? This on the top of
everything else! Are even my printers conspiring against me? Well, even
if it ruins me, I shall go on! They shall find out what I can do. How on
earth can I be expected to help it if a weak-minded fellow dies, or if
my printers are drunk or my manager has delirium tremens! I shall pursue
my end through all chances and in spite of all their tricks, and I shall
crush them, crush them--I shall--. (Gives way to a paroxysm of rage.
At this moment the MAID comes in with the DOCTOR'S ASSISTANT. The MAID
rushes into the bedroom. The EDITOR starts up.) Who is that? What do you
want?

The Doctor's Assistant (coldly). What do _you_ want here?

The Editor. I? Oh, I was called up to help the sick man into his bed.

The Doctor's Assistant (as before). Ah!--so it was _you_! (A pause.)

The Editor. Have you ever seen me before?

The Doctor's Assistant. Yes. I have heard you grind your teeth before
this. (Goes into the bedroom.)

The Editor (after standing for a moment looking after him). They will
all look at me to-morrow like that-with those cold eyes. "Every man's
hand against him, and his hand against every man;" there can only be one
end to that. To-night, the meeting--and Harald Rejn will take them
by storm. To-morrow, his brother's death--and my new article in the
paper--and, in addition to that, those about Evje, who at present is
only angry. And the election in two days! Oh, yes, he will be elected
now. So I may as well give it all up at once. I would change places with
any wolf that has a lair to hide in. Those cold eyes of his! (Shudders.)
That is how every one will look at me to-morrow! They have pierced
through my armour! (The DOCTOR'S ASSISTANT comes back, and the EDITOR
makes an effort to resume his former confident manner.)

The Doctor's Assistant. I don't know whether you will be glad to hear
that it is all over.

The Editor (under his breath). You brute!

The Doctor's Assistant. His old housekeeper does not feel equal to
coming here to tell you what his last words were. They were: "Forgive
him!" (Goes out.)

The Editor (sitting down, then getting up again). No, I mustn't be found
here. (Walks about the room on tiptoe, as if he were afraid of waking
some one. When he comes opposite to the bedroom door, he turns towards
it, stretches out his arms and says:) Give me your forgiveness too!




ACT IV

(SCENE.--A large and handsomely furnished sitting-room at the EVJE'S.
The room is brightly lit and the fire burning. The entrance door is on
the right, and beyond it a door leading to the dining-room. INGEBORG
is busy taking the covers off the chairs, folding them carefully as she
does so. After a little, the bell rings. She goes to open the door, and
returns, showing in the DOCTOR.)

The Doctor. Oho! Is it to be in here to-night?

Ingeborg (who has resumed her work of making the room ready). Yes, sir.

The Doctor. Where are they all?

Ingeborg. At the meeting, sir.

The Doctor. All of them?

Ingeborg. Yes, all of them. Miss Gertrud went first--

The Doctor. Yes, I saw her well enough!

Ingeborg. And then the master, and a farmer gentleman with him, came in
to fetch the mistress.

The Doctor (to himself). Something has happened here, then. (Aloud.)
Tell me, Ingeborg--has _he_ been here again? You know who I mean.
(Coughs in imitation of the EDITOR'S cough.)

Ingeborg. Oh, the Editor; no, sir.

The Doctor (to himself). I wonder what has happened. (Aloud.) Well,
evidently there is to be a festivity here to-night; and, as I see the
chairs are getting their covers taken off, I may as well take mine off
too. (Takes off his coat and gives it to INGEBORG, who carries it out.)
I don't blame Evje for wanting to celebrate Harald's success after a
meeting like that! He is not exactly eloquent in the ordinary sense
of the word--doesn't bother about his antitheses and climaxes and
paradoxes, and all that sort of nonsense; but he is a _man_! He goes
bail for what he says, and he says what he likes--ha, ha! And that dear
Gertrud, too! Follows him into the hall, and, as there isn't a single
seat left there, goes up on to the platform among the committee, and
sits there looking at him with those trustful blue eyes of hers, as if
there was no one else in the room! And _we_ were all looking at _her_!
She helped him more than ten good speakers would have done, I am sure.
Her faith in him bred it in others, whether they liked it or no. She
is one who would die for her faith! Yes, yes! The man that gets her--.
(INGEBORG comes back.) Well! (Rubs his hands together.) Look here,
Ingeborg. (Very politely.) Do you know what is meant by the Rights of
Man?

Ingeborg (going on with her work). No, sir. Something we have earned, I
suppose.

The Doctor. Yes, you earn them every day.

Ingeborg. Our meals, perhaps?

The Doctor (laughing). No, it isn't something to eat, unfortunately.
(Politely.) Do you ever read papers, Ingeborg?

Ingeborg. Papers? Oh, you mean the price-lists they leave at the kitchen
door. Yes, sir; every day, before we go to market, I--

The Doctor. No, I don't mean papers of that sort. I mean--

Ingeborg. Oh, you mean the newspaper I take in to master's room every
morning. No, Sir, I don't read that. I am told there are such horrors in
it.

The Doctor. Quite so. Don't you care to read about horrors, then?

Ingeborg. Oh, we poor folk see enough of them in our everyday lives,
without reading about them!--But perhaps the gentry enjoy it.

The Doctor. You are a very wise woman. Let me tell you, though, that
there is a fight going on, about--oh, well, never mind what it is about.
And the Editor and Mr. Rejn, who both come to this house, are the two
chief fighters. Don't you want to know what they are fighting about?

Ingeborg (going on unconcernedly with her work). Oh, so they are
fighting, are they? No, I don't care the least bit, sir!

The Doctor (to himself). Ha, ha--the difference between Ingeborg and
me is that I am interested in the fight merely as a student of human
nature, and she is not interested in it at all. I wonder which is
farthest from any genuine belief in politics?--from our "duty as a
citizen," as they call it? (To INGEBORG.) Ingeborg, do you know what
your "duty as a citizen" means?

Ingeborg. My "duty as a citizen"? That mean; paying fines, doesn't it,
sir?

The Doctor. Yes; and a very heavy fine, into the bargain!

Ingeborg. The master was fined because the pavement was not swept. John
was ill.

The Doctor. Quite right, that was one of his duties as a citizen.--Tell
me, Ingeborg, are they expecting a lot of people here to-night?

Ingeborg. No, sir, I have only laid table for quite a few.

The Doctor. And what are they going to have?

Ingeborg. Oh, one or two dishes and one or two sorts of wine--.

The Doctor. Aha! (A ring is heard at the bell. INGEBORG goes to the
door.) There they are! Now we shall have a fine time!

Ingeborg (coming back with a letter). It is a note for you, sir.

The Doctor. Oh, bother I

Ingeborg. The man who brought it was not sure whether you would be at
the meeting or here.

The Doctor. How could he know--? (Putting on his glasses.) Oh, from my
assistant--that is quite another thing. Of course he wants my help or my
advice. Well, he shan't have it! I have run about quite enough to-day.
Tell the messenger that I haven't time! I have my Duties as a Citizen
to attend to! (Calls after her.) And my Manhood's Rights too! (Opens the
envelope.) No, I won't read it; if I do, the matter will worry me all
the evening. I know what I am. (Puts the note in his pocket.) I mean to
enjoy this evening! (Suddenly.) I wonder how our friend the Editor is
enjoying this evening! Was he at the meeting, I wonder? A remarkable
personality--but malignity itself! Lion-hearted, though! He would fight
till the last drop of his blood! But what is it, really, that he is
fighting for? That question has always interested me, for I can't make
it out. (To INGEBORG, who has comeback.) Well?

Ingeborg. The messenger has gone.--Yes, sir, I told him everything you
told me to.

The Doctor. Of course. You would! Why the deuce does any one pay any
attention to what I say! (The bell rings.) Here they are at last! Now
we shall have a delightful evening! (EVJE and MRS. EVJE come in.) I am
first, you see!

Evje and Mrs. Evje. Were you at the meeting, too?

The Doctor. Where else should I be?

Evje. Did you see me?

Mrs. Evje. There were so many people there, dear.

Evje. But I was standing on a seat.

Mrs. Evje. Yes, he was standing on a seat!

The Doctor. There were plenty of people doing that.

Evje. I wanted to be seen!--There _have_ been goings on here to-day, my
friend!

Mrs. Evje. You will never guess what has happened!

The Doctor. Anyway I can see that something has happened.

Evje and Mrs. Evje. Oh--!

The Doctor. What is it, then?

Evje. Those articles will be in to-morrow's paper.

The Doctor. In the paper?--Yes, I didn't find him.

Evje. But I found him!

The Doctor (impatiently). Well?

Evje. I will tell you all about it another time. But I have read them--

Mrs. Evje. And he has told me all about them!

The Doctor. Are they very bad?

Evje. Oh--oh!

Mrs. Evje. Oh--oh--oh!

The Doctor (with a look of pleased curiosity.) As bad as all that?

Evje and Mrs. Evje. Oh--oh--oh--oh!

The Doctor. And _that_ was why you went to the meeting!

Evje. Of course--tit for tat! It was my wife's idea.

Mrs. Evje. It was the obvious thing to do, dear.

Evje. Our whole family at the meeting!--So that all the town should know
that it was nothing but the meanest political persecution because I had
joined my son-in-law's party.

Mrs. Evje. We are party people now, you know!

Evje. Do you know, there is something exciting about being mixed up with
such things--something invigorating, something--

The Doctor (stepping back). Are _you_ bitten with it, too?

Evje. Yes, if I can't be left in peace, I shall become a party man.

The Doctor (enthusiastically). Did you see Gertrud?

Evje and Mrs. Evje (with emotion). Our Gertrud! Yes, indeed we did!

The Doctor. Did you see her coming in with him!

Evje and Mrs. Evje (as before). Yes, we saw her coming in with him!

The Doctor. I suppose you did not know she was going?

Evje and Mrs. Evje. Oh, yes!

Mrs. Evje. She had said she would go with us--

Evje. But when we went to fetch her, the bird had flown!

The Doctor. How pretty she looked, too! All the men were looking at her.
And how she looked at him!

Mrs. Evje. It made me want to cry. I had quite a job to prevent myself.

Evje. You need not have minded, dear! God has given us great happiness.
Her faith in him and her love shone to from her eyes that it went to my
heart. I felt quite upset! (Wipes his eyes.)

The Doctor. And what about _him_--eh? I don't fancy any one will think
about stopping his career. We have been a pack of fools.

Evje. That we have!

The Doctor. He is not exactly eloquent, but--

Evje. That is precisely what I was saying to my wife! He is not exactly
eloquent, but he is--

The Doctor.--a man!

Evje. A man! My very words, weren't they, my dear?

Mrs. Evje. Yes.--And I say he is so strong a man that he can afford to
be tender-hearted. For he certainly has been that.

Evje. Yes, he has been that!

The Doctor (laughing). In spite of his strength!

Evje. Oh, you may make the most of your--. Aha! (Loud ringing at the
bell is heard.) Here they are!

Mrs. Evje. Let us go and meet them!

The Doctor. No; look here--let us wait for them at the other side of the
room, so that they may make a triumphal progress up to us!

Evje and Mrs. Evje, Yes! (They go to the opposite end of the room, while
HARALD comes in rather quickly, with GERTRUD on his arm. As they cross
the room, the others cry out: "Bravo! Bravo!" and clap their hands.)

Gertrud (still holding to HARALD's arm). And he is my man! My man!
(Throws her arms round his neck, crying with happiness, and kisses him;
then does the same to her mother, and then to her father, to whom she
whispers: Thank you!)

The Doctor. Oh--me too!

Gertrud (after a moment's hesitation). Yes--you too!

(The DOCTOR helps her to take off her cloak, and talks to her,
whispering and laughing.)

Harald (shaking EVJE's hand). Good evening!

Evje. Forgive me!

Harald. With all my heart!

Mrs. Evje. And now everything is all right!

Harald. For good!

Evje and Mrs. Evje. For good!

Harald. And, thank you for coming to the meeting.

Evje. It was no more than our duty! Look here--did you see me?

Harald. The whole time! But, tell me, was it a delusion, or was it my
brother Haakon that was standing on the floor beside you, rather in the
shadow?

Evje and Mrs. Evje. It _was_ he!

Evje. I fetched him from your brother Halvdan's.

Harald. I am so glad! It must have pleased Haakon. Gertrud and I at
first thought of going in to see Halvdan before we came on here; but we
saw all his lights were out. He must be asleep.

Evje. I can give you news of him. He is all right.

Harald. And Haakon?

Evje. Very well, too. A fine fellow! I wanted him to come home with us
now; but he said he was tired after his journey.

Mrs. Evje (to INGEBORG, who has come in from the dining room). Is it
ready?

Ingeborg. Yes, ma'am.

Mrs. Evje. Then come along. (INGEBORG opens the dining-room door.)

The Doctor and Evje. Yes, come along!

The Doctor. But we must go ceremoniously! Let us make a little festivity
of it to-night! You must head the procession, Evje--and then the two
young people Gertrud (taking HARALD's arm). Yes!

The Doctor. And Mrs. Evje and I will bring up the rear! (Offers her his
arm.)

Evje. Forward!(The bell rings. He stops.) Who can it be--as late as
this?

The Doctor. Probably some friends on their way back from the meeting.

Mrs. Evje. We must wait a moment!(To INGEBORG, who is going to open the
door.)Put a leaf in the table, and lay places for as many as come.

Ingeborg. Yes, ma'am. (The bell rings again, as she goes to open the
door.)

The Doctor. They are impatient! So much the better--it shows they are in
a good humour after the meeting! (A knock is heard at the door.)

All. Come in!(The EDITOR comes in, with no overcoat on, but wearing his
hat, which he forgets to take of till he is well into the room. He goes
straight up to EVJE, who has crossed over to the left-hand side of the
room.)

All (when they see him in the doorway). You! (GERTRUD clings closer to
HARALD.)

The Editor. I wanted once more, as in the old days, not to go to bed
without--this time it is not a question of thanking you for the happy
time we have had together but without begging your pardon!(He speaks
quietly, but with suppressed emotion.)There has been some unfortunate
misunderstanding. Those articles have been printed, in spite of my
express instructions to the contrary--I do not know how.

Evje. I have read them.

The Editor. You have read them?

Evje. Yes, the copy of the paper that was meant for you came into my
hands.

The Editor. So that was it!--Forgive me, old friend! Won't you give me
your hand?

Mrs. Evje (coming forward). That he shall never do!

The Editor (glancing over his shoulder at her). Let no one come between
us at a moment like this! You don't know--. A hundred times in my life
I would have done what I am doing now, had I not been afraid that people
would call it affectation on my part and repulse me. Don't _you_ do
that!--least of all now! Give me your hand, Evje! I beg you, in the
sight and hearing of you all--. (EVJE seems to vacillate.)

Mrs. Evje. No, you shan't!--not while he has anything to do with a
newspaper. Otherwise it will all begin over again to-morrow. He is not
his own master, you know.

The Editor. I have done with it all.

Mrs. Evje. Oh, you have said that so often! Nobody believes it. No; when
a man can push political hatred so far as to write about an old friend,
in whose house he has been a daily guest, as if he were a criminal--and
all because he doesn't like his son-in-law, or his servant--one doesn't
shake hands with him the very day his attacks appear in the paper.

The Editor (who, all the tinge, has kept his back turned to MRS. EVJE,
and has not looked at her). Evje, you are a good-hearted fellow, I know.
Don't listen to what others say, now. This is a very bitter hour for me.
You would be doing a good deed! Give me your hand--or a word! I am
in such a state now that I must have visible signs of _some one's_
forgiveness, or I shall--!

Mrs. Evje (emphatically). Yes, a little repentance will do you good!
But it will do you no good if you obtain forgiveness easily! You want
to learn, just for once, what it is to be wounded at heart. You are only
accustomed to deal with people whom you can flog one day and have at
your feet--either from fear or from vanity--the next. And have we--God
forgive us!--ever thought seriously the worse of you for it? No; because
we never understood what it was till we were hit by it ourselves. But
that is all the more reason why we should do our duty now! Hatred shall
be met with hatred!

The Doctor (at the back of the room, to GERTRUD and HARALD). She is her
father's daughter, after all, when it comes to the point!

The Editor (turns upon MRS. EVJE, with his fist clenched, but restrains
himself from answering her). Then you won't shake hands, Evje? Not a
word of forgiveness?

Evje. I think my wife is right.

The Editor (controlling himself with difficulty). You are a weak man, I
know--

Evje. What do you mean?

The Editor.--but do not be weak this time! If you knew everything,
you would know you _must_ not refuse me what I ask. There are others
concerned--and for that reason--

The Doctor. Let us go!

Mrs. Evje. No, stay! He shall not have his way again.

The Editor. Well, of all--! It is certainly true that those who are
hardest on sinners are those who have never been tempted themselves--and
the most merciless creature in the world is an injured woman.

Mrs. Evje. Now he is coming out in his true colours!

The Doctor (not without glee). Yes, that he is!

The Editor (controlling himself once more). Evje--you, who know me, know
what it must cost me to do this--and you can form some idea of the need
I am in. I have never--

Evje. I believe you; but I never can feel sure what your next move will
be. You have so many.

The Editor. My next move is to have done with it all, as sure as--

Mrs. Evje. Don't believe him! A man who can ask for your sympathy
one moment and abuse you the next is not fit to promise anything--and
certainly not fit to be forgiven, either.

The Editor (with an outburst of passion). Then may everything evil
overtake me if I ever ask you or any one else for sympathy again! You
have succeeded in teaching me that I can do without it! I can rise
above your cowardly cruelty. (To EVJE.) You are a miserable, weak
creature--and have always been, for all your apparent good-natured
shrewdness! (To MRS. EVJE.) And as for you, who have often laughed so
heartily at my so-called malice, and now all at once have become so
severely virtuous--why, you are both like part-proprietors of my paper!
You have taken all the profit you could from me, as long as it served
your purpose--I have seen that for a long time! And all my pretended
friends are like you--secret holders of shares in me, so as to secure
their own safety and the persecution of others!--every bit as guilty as
I am, only more prudent, more timid, more cowardly--!

Evje. Once more--leave this house, which you have outraged!

Mrs. Evje. And how dare you set foot in here again?

The Editor. No, I am not going until all the anger that is in my heart
has turned into fear in yours! Because now I will _not_ have done with
it all! No--it is just through _his_ death that respect for me will
revive--it will be like a rampart of bayonets round me! "There goes
one who can kill a man with a word, if he likes!" _That_ will make them
treat me respectfully!

Harald and the Doctor. What does he mean?

The Editor (as he hears HARALD'S voice). And you--you mountebank, who
can stand up in public and seek applause before your brother's corpse
is cold--don't come talking rant to me! You are more contemptible than I
am! I couldn't have done that; I couldn't stand there, as you are doing
now, impatient to get to your champagne and pretty speeches!--Oh, how I
despise all such lying and heartlessness! (They all look at him and at
each other with a questioning expression.)

Harald. Is my brother dead?

Mrs. Evje. Is his brother dead?

Gertrud. Good God, is Halvdan dead?

Evje. Is he dead? Impossible!

The Doctor. Is Rejn dead--and I--?

Evje. I saw him only a couple of hours ago, looking quite well.

The Editor (in a broken voice). Didn't you know?

All (except the DOCTOR). No!

The Doctor. Ah, that letter, that letter! (Looks in his pocket for it
and his glasses.)

The Editor. I am the wretchedest man alive! (Sinks into a chair.)

The Doctor. I had a letter from my assistant, but I have not read it!

Mrs. Evje. Read it, read it!

The Doctor (reading). "I am writing in great haste. As I expect you will
be going to your old friends' after the meeting, and will meet Harald
Rejn there, the task will probably fall to you of telling him--(the
EDITOR gets up to go, but stands still)--that Halvdan Rejn died about
eight o'clock of a fresh attack of hemorrhage! (HARALD leaves GERTRUD'S
side and comes forward, with a cry. The EDITOR steadies himself by
holding on to the table.) No one was with him; he was found lying across
the threshold of his bedroom. A copy of the newspaper was lying on the
floor behind him." (HARALD, with a groan, advance threateningly towards
the EDITOR.)

Gertrud. Harald, my ring!--my ring! (HARALD Stops, collects himself,
buries his face in his hands and bursts into uncontrollable tears.
GERTRUD puts her arms round him and holds him folded in them.)

The Doctor (laying a hand on HARALD's arm). "The housekeeper told me he
had only spoken two words, and they were 'Forgive him!'" (HARALD bursts
into tears.)

The Doctor (after waiting for a little). "Apparently chance--or perhaps
something else--decreed that the maid who ran for help, should meet the
very man, who hats caused the tragedy, and that it should be _he_ who
helped the housekeeper to lay him on his deathbed." (All look at the
EDITOR.)

Evje. That was why he came! (A pause.)

Gertrud. Harald! (HARALD, who has turned away from her to struggle with
his emotion, does not turn round.) If _he_ could forgive--

The Editor (with a gesture of refusal). No!

Gertrud (quietly, to the EDITOR). If you want to deserve it, make an end
of all this!

The Editor. It is all at an end! (To MRS. EVJE.) You were right. I knew
it myself, too. My armour is pierces pierced through. A child might
conquer me now--and this child has done so; for she has begged for mercy
for me, and no one has ever done that before. (Puts his hand over his
eyes, turns away, and goes out. As he is going out the bell rings. A
moment later, INGEBORG Shows in HAAKON REJN.)

Gertrud (who has put her arms round HARALD, whispers). Who is it?

Harald. My brother. (Goes to meet HAAKON and throws himself into his
arms.) You had a talk with him this afternoon, then?

Haakon. Yes.

Mrs. Evje. Let us all go to him.

Evje and Gertrud. Yes.

Mrs. Evje (to INGEBORG). Bring in our cloaks and hats again, and
afterwards clear the table. (INGEBORG does so.)

Harald (unable to control his emotion). Haakon, this is my future wife.
(Goes away from them.)

Haakon. Well, my dear, your engagement has begun seriously; take all the
future seriously, too.

The Doctor. You need not say that to _her_. What she needs is to take
life more lightly.

Haakon. Oh, yes--if she lays everything in God's hands she can always
take life lightly.

Mrs. Evje. It is our own fault, I expect, when we take it too lightly.

Evje. But sometimes we learn a lesson by that.

Haakon. Oh, yes. Well, we must stand by one another, we who take life in
the same way.

Mrs. Evje. Shall we go, children?

Harald (to HAAKON). Will you bring Gertrud, Haakon? I would rather go
alone. (They go out. The curtain falls.)
﻿THE BANKRUPT

A PLAY IN FOUR ACTS


DRAMATIS PERSONAE

     HENNING TJAELDE, merchant and brewer.
     MRS. TJAELDE, his wife.
     VALBORG and SIGNE, their daughters.
     LIEUTENANT HAMAR, engaged to Signe.
     SANNAES, Tjaelde's confidential clerk.
     JAKOSSEN, manager of Tjaelde's brewery.
     BERENT, a lawyer.
     PRAM, a custom-house official.
     An Agent.
     The VICAR.
     LIND, a guest.
     FINNE, a guest.
     RING, a guest.
     HOLM, a guest.
     KNUTZON, a guest.
     KNUDSEN, a guest.
     FALBE, a guest.




ACT I

(SCENE.--A sitting-room in the TJAELDES' house, opening on a verandah
that is decorated with flowers. It is a hot summer's day. There is a
view of the sea beyond the verandah, and boats are visible among the
islands that fringe the coast. A good-sized yacht, with sails spread, is
lying close up under the verandah on the right. The room is luxuriously
furnished and full of flowers. There are two French windows in the
left-hand wall; two doors in the right-hand. A table in the middle of
the room; arm-chairs and rocking-chairs scattered about. A sofa in the
foreground on the right. LIEUTENANT HAMAR is lying on the sofa, and
SIGNE sitting in a rocking-chair.)

Hamar. What shall we do with ourselves to-day?

Signe (rocking herself). Hm! (A pause.)

Hamar. That was a delicious sail we had last night. (Yawns.) But I am
sleepy to-day. Shall we go for a ride?

Signe. Hm! (A pause.)

Hamar. I am too hot on this sofa. I think I will move. (Gets up. SIGNE
begins to hum an air as she rocks herself.) Play me something, Signe!

Signe (singing her words to the air she has been humming). The piano is
out of tune.

Hamar. Read to me, then!

Signe (as before, looking out of the window). They are swimming the
horses. They are swimming the horses. They are swimming the horses.

Hamar. I think I will go and have a swim too. Or perhaps I will wait
till nearer lunch-time.

Signe (as before). So as to have a better appetite--appetite--appetite.

(MRS. TJAELDE comes in from the right, walking slowly.)

Hamar. You look very thoughtful!

Mrs. Tjaelde. Yes, I don't know what to order.

Signe (as before). For dinner, I suppose you mean?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Yes.

Hamar. Do you expect any one?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Yes, your father writes to me that Mr. Finne is coming.

Signe (speaking). The most tiresome person possible, of course.

Mrs. Tjaelde. How would boiled salmon and roast chicken do?

Signe. We had that the other day.

Mrs. Tjaelde. (With a sigh). There is nothing that we didn't. There is
so little choice in the market just now.

Signe. Then we ought to send to town.

Mrs. Tjaelde. Oh, these meals, these meals!

Hamar (yawning). They are the best thing in life, anyway.

Signe. To eat, yes--but not to cook; I never will cook a dinner.

Mrs. Tjaelde (sitting down at the table). One could put up with the
cooking. It's the having always to think of something fresh!

Hamar. Why don't you get a chef from one of the hotels, as I have so
often advised you?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Oh, we have tried that, but he was more trouble than it
was worth.

Hamar. Yes, because he had no invention. Get a French chef!

Mrs. Tjaelde. Yes, and have to be always beside him to interpret!--But I
am no nearer this dinner. And lately I have been finding such difficulty
in getting about.

Hamar. I have never in my life heard so much talk about meals as I have
in this house.

Mrs. Tjaelde. You see, you have never been in a prosperous
business-man's house before. Our friends are mostly business-men, of
course--and most of them have no greater pleasures than those of the
table.

Signe. That's true.

Mrs. Tjaelde. Are you wearing _that_ dress to-day?

Signe. Yes.

Mrs. Tjaelde. You have worn a different one every day.

Signe. Well, if Hamar is tired of both the blue one and the grey one,
what can I do?

Hamar. And I don't like this one any better than the others.

Signe. Indeed!--Then I really think you had better order me one
yourself.

Hamar. Come to town with me, and I will!

Signe. Yes, mother--Hamar and I have made up our minds that we must go
back to town. [Note: There would be nothing contrary to Norwegian ideas
of propriety in Signe's proposal. In Norway an engaged couple could
travel alone; and the fiancée would go to stay in the house of her
future husband's relations.]

Mrs. Tjaelde. But you were there only a fortnight ago!

Hamar. And it is exactly a fortnight too long since we were there!

Mrs. Tjaelde. (thoughtfully). Now, what _can_ I order for dinner?

(VALBORG comes into sight on the verandah.)

Signe (turning round and seeing VALBORG). Enter Her Highness!

Hamar (turning round). Carrying a bouquet! Oho! I have seen it before!

Signe. Have you? Did _you_ give it her?

Hamar. No; I was coming through the garden--and saw it on the table in
Valborg's summerhouse. Is it your birthday, Valborg?

Valborg. No.

Hamar. I thought not. Perhaps there is some other festivity to-day?

Valborg. No. (SIGNE suddenly bursts out laughing.)

Hamar. Why do you laugh?

Signe. Because I understand! Ha, ha, ha, ha!

Hamar. What do you understand?

Signe. Whose hands it is that have decked the altar! Ha, ha, ha!

Hamar. I suppose you think they were mine?

Signe. No, they were redder hands than yours! Ha, ha, ha, ha! (VALBORG
throws the bouquet down.) Oh, dear me, it doesn't do to laugh so much in
this heat. But it is delightful! To think he should have hit upon that
idea! Ha, ha, ha!

Hamar (laughing). Do you mean--?

Signe (laughing). Yes! You must know that Valborg--

Valborg. Signe!

Signe.--who has sent so many distinguished suitors about their business,
cannot escape from the attentions of a certain red pair of hands--ha,
ha, ha, ha!

Hamar. Do you mean Sannaes?

Signe. Yes! (Points out of the window.) There is the culprit! He is
waiting, Valborg, for you to come, in maiden meditation, with the
bouquet in your hands--as you came just now--

Mrs. Tjaelde. (getting up). No, it is your father he is waiting for. Ah,
he sees him now. (Goes out by the verandah.)

Signe. Yes, it really is father--riding a bay horse!

Hamar (getting up). On a bay horse! Let us go and say "how do you do" to
the bay horse!

Signe. N--o, no!

Hamar. You won't come and say "how do you do" to the bay horse? A
cavalry officer's wife must love horses next best to her husband.

Signe. And he his wife next best to his horses.

Hamar. What? Are you jealous of a horse?

Signe. Oh, I know very well you have never been so fond of me as you are
of horses.

Hamar. Come along! (Pulls her up out of her chair.)

Signe. But I don't feel the least interested in the bay horse.

Hamar. Very well, then, I will go alone!

Signe. No, I will come.

Hamar (to VALBORG). Won't you come and welcome the bay horse too?

Valborg. No, but I will go and welcome my father!

Signe (looking back, as she goes). Yes, of course--father as well. (She
and HAMAR go out.)

(VALBORG goes to the farthest window and stands looking out of it. Her
dress is the same colour as the long curtain, and a piece of statuary
and some flowers conceal her from any one entering the room. SANNAES
comes in, carrying a small saddle-bag and a cloak, which he puts down
on a chair behind the door. As he turns round he sees the bouquet on the
door.)

Sannaes. There it is! Has she dropped it by accident, or did she throw
it down? Never mind--she has had it in her hands. (Picks it up, kisses
it, and is going to take it away.)

Valborg (coming forward). Leave it alone!

Sannaes (dropping the bouquet). You here, Miss Valborg--? I didn't see
you--

Valborg. But I can see what you are after. How dare you presume to think
of persecuting me with your flowers and your--your red hands? (He puts
his hands behind his back.) How dare you make me a laughing-stock to
every one in the house, and I suppose to every one in the town?

Sannaes. I--I--I--

Valborg. And what about me? Don't you think I deserve a little
consideration? You will be turned out of the house before long, if you
do not take care--! Now be quick and get away before the others come in.
(SANNAES turns away, holding his hands in front of him, and goes out by
the verandah to the right. At the same moment TJAELDE is seen coming at
the other end of the verandah, followed by HAMAR and SIGNE.)

Tjaelde. Yes, it is a fine horse.

Hamar. Fine? I don't believe there is its equal in the country.

Tjaelde. I dare say. Did you notice that he hadn't turned a hair?

Hamar. What glorious lungs! And such a beauty, too--his head, his legs,
his neck--! I never saw such a beauty!

Tjaelde. Yes, he is a handsome beast. (Looks out of the verandah at the
yacht.) Have you been out for a sail?

Hamar. I was sailing among the islands last night, and came back this
morning with the fishing-boats--a delightful sail!

Tjaelde. I wish I had time to do that.

Hamar. But surely it is only imagination on your part, to think that you
never have time?

Tjaelde. Oh, well, perhaps I have time but not inclination.

Signe. And how do things stand where you have been?

Tjaelde. Badly.

Valborg (coming forward). Welcome home, father!

Tjaelde. Thank you, dear!

Hamar. Is it not possible to save anything?

Tjaelde. Not at present; that is why I took the horse.

Hamar. Then the bay horse is the only thing you get out of the smash?

Tjaelde. Do you know that I might say that horse has cost me three or
four thousand pounds?

Hamar. Well, that is its only defect, anyway! Still, if the worst comes
to the worst, and you can afford it--the horse is priceless! (TJAELDE
turns away, puts down his hat and coat and takes off his gloves.)

Signe. It is beautiful to see your enthusiasm when you talk about
horses. I rather think it is the only enthusiasm you have.

Hamar. Yes, if I were not a cavalry officer I should like to be a horse!

Signe. Thank you! And what should I be?

Valborg. "Oh, were I but the saddle on thy back! Oh, were I but the whip
about thy loins!"

Hamar. "Oh, were I but the flowers in thy--." No, "hand" doesn't rhyme!

Tjaelde. (coming forward, meets MRS. TJAELDE, who has come in from the
right.) Well, my dear, how are you?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Oh, I find it more and more difficult to get about.

Tjaelde. There is always something the matter with you, my dear! Can I
have something to eat?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Yes, it has been standing waiting for you. Here it comes.
(A maid brings in a tray which she lays on the table.)

Tjaelde. Good!

Mrs. Tjaelde. Will you have a cup of tea?

Tjaelde. No, thank you.

Mrs. Tjaelde. (sitting down beside him and pouring him out a glass of
wine). And how have things gone with the Möllers?

Tjaelde. Badly. I told you so already.

Mrs. Tjaelde. I didn't hear you.

Valborg. I had a letter to-day from Nanna Möller. She tells me all about
it--how none of the family knew anything about it till the officers of
the courts came.

Tjaelde. Yes, there must have been a dreadful scene.

Mrs. Tjaelde. Did he tell you anything about it?

Tjaelde (as he eats). I didn't speak to him.

Mrs. Tjaelde. My dear! Why, you are old friends!

Tjaelde. Bah! Old friends! He sat looking as if he had taken leave of
his senses. Besides, I have had enough of that family. I didn't go there
to hear them talk about their troubles.

Signe. I suppose it was all very sad?

Tjaelde (still eating). Shocking!

Mrs. Tjaelde. What will they have to live on?

Tjaelde. What is allowed them by their creditors, of course.

Signe. But all the things they had?

Tjaelde. Sold.

Signe. All those pretty things--their furniture, their carriages,
their--?

Tjaelde. All sold.

Hamar. And his watch? It is the most beautiful watch I have ever
seen--next to yours.

Tjaelde. It had to go, of course, being jewellery. Give me some wine; I
am hot and thirsty.

Signe. Poor things!

Mrs. Tjaelde. Where are they going to live now?

Tjaelde. In the house of one of the skippers of what was their fleet.
Two small rooms and a kitchen.

Signe. Two small rooms and a kitchen! (A pause.)

Mrs. Tjaelde. What do they intend to do?

Tjaelde. There was a subscription started to enable Mrs. Möller to get
the job of catering for the Club.

Mrs. Tjaelde. Is the poor woman going to have more cooking to do!

Signe. Did they send no messages to us?

Tjaelde. Of course they did; but I didn't pay any attention to them.

Hamar (who has been standing on the verandah). But Möller--what did he
say? What did he do?

Tjaelde. I don't know, I tell you.

Valborg (who has been walking up and down the room during the preceding
conversation). He has said and done quite enough already.

Tjaelde (who has at last finished eating and drinking, is struck by her
words). What do you mean by that, Valborg?

Valborg. That if I were his daughter I would never forgive him.

Mrs. Tjaelde. My dear Valborg, don't say such things!

Valborg. I mean it! A man who would bring such shame and misery upon his
family does not deserve any mercy from them.

Mrs. Tjaelde. We are all in need of mercy.

Valborg. In one sense, yes. But what I mean is that I could never give
him my respect or my affection again. He would have wronged me too
cruelly.

Tjaelde (getting up). Wronged you?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Have you finished already, dear?

Tjaelde. Yes.

Mrs. Tjaelde. No more wine?

Tjaelde. I said I had finished. Wronged you? How?

Valborg. Well, I cannot imagine how one could be more cruelly wronged
than to be allowed to assume a position that was nothing but a lie,
to live up to means that had no real existence but were merely a
sham--one's clothes a lie, one's very existence a lie! Suppose I were
the sort of girl that found a certain delight in making use of her
position as a rich man's daughter--in using it to the fullest possible
extent; well, when I discovered that all that my father had given me was
stolen-that all he had made me believe in was a lie--I am sure that then
my anger and my shame would be beyond all bounds!

Mrs. Tjaelde. My child, you have never been tried. You don't know how
such things may happen. You don't really know what you are saying!

Hamar. Well it might do Möller good if he heard what she says!

Valborg. He has heard it. His daughter said that to him.

Mrs. Tjaelde. His own daughter! Child, child, is that what you write to
each other about? God forgive you both!

Valborg. Oh, He will forgive us, because we speak the truth.

Mrs. Tialde. Child, child!

Tjaelde. You evidently don't understand what business is--success one
day and failure the next.

Valborg. No one will ever persuade me that business is a lottery.

Tjaelde. No, a sound business is not.

Valborg. Exactly. It is the unsound sort that I condemn.

Tjaelde. Still, even the soundest have their anxious moments.

Valborg. If the anxious moments really foreshadow a crisis, no man of
honour would keep his family o: his creditors in ignorance of the fact.
My God, how Mr. Möller has deceived his!

Signe. Valborg is always talking about business!

Valborg. Yes, it has had an attraction for me ever since I was a child.
I am not ashamed of that.

Signe. You think you know all about it, anyway.

Valborg. Oh, no; but you can easily get to know a little about anything
you are fond of.

Hamar. And one would need no great knowledge of business to condemn the
way Möller went on. It was obvious to every one. And the way his family
went on, too! Who went the pace as much as the Möllers? Think of his
daughter's toilettes!

Valborg. His daughter is my best friend. I don't want to hear her
abused.

Hamar. Your Highness will admit that it is possible to be the daughter
of a _very_ rich man without being as proud and as vain as--as the lady
I am not allowed to mention!

Valborg. Nanna is neither proud nor vain. She is absolutely genuine.
She had the aptitude for being exactly what she thought she was--a rich
man's daughter.

Hamar. Has she the "aptitude" for being a bankrupt's daughter now?

Valborg. Certainly. She has sold all her trinkets, her dresses--every
single thing she had. What she wears, she has either paid for herself or
obtained by promising future payment.

Hamar. May I ask if she kept her stockings?

Valborg. She sent everything to a sale.

Hamar. If I had known that I would certainly have attended it!

Valborg. Yes, I daresay there was plenty to make fun of, and plenty of
idle loafers, too, who were not ashamed to do so.

Mrs. Tjaelde. Children, children!

Hamar. May I ask if Miss Nanna sent her own idleness to the sale with
her other effects?--because I have never known any one with a finer
supply of it!

Valborg. She never thought she would need to work.

Tjaelde (coming forward to VALBORG). To take up the thread of what we
were saying: you don't understand what a business-man's hope is from one
day to the other--always a renewed hope. That fact does not make him a
swindler. He may be unduly sanguine, perhaps--a poet, if you like, who
lives in a world of dreams--or he may be a real genius, who sees land
ahead when no one else suspects it.

Valborg. I don't think I misunderstand the real state of affairs. But
perhaps you do, father. Because is not what you call hope, poetry,
genius, merely speculating with what belongs to others, when a man knows
that he owes more than he has got?

Tjaelde. It may be very difficult to be certain even whether he does
that or not.

Valborg. Really? I should have thought his books would tell him--

Tjaelde. About his assets and his liabilities, certainly. But values are
fluctuating things; and he may always have in hand some venture which,
though it cannot be specified, may alter the whole situation.

Valborg. If he undeniably owes more than he possesses, any venture he
undertakes must be a speculation with other people's money.

Tjaelde. Well--perhaps that is so; but that does not mean that he steals
the money--he only uses it in trust for them.

Valborg. Entrusted to him on the false supposition that he is solvent.

Tjaelde. But possibly that money may save the whole situation.

Valborg. That does not alter the fact that he has got the use of it by a
lie.

Tjaelde. You use very harsh terms. (MRS. TJAELDE has once or twice been
making signs to VALBORG, which the latter sees but pays no attention
to.)

Valborg. In that case the lie consists in the concealment.

Tjaelde. But what do you want him to do? To lay all his cards on the
table, and so ruin both himself and the others?

Valborg. Yes, he ought to take every one concerned into his confidence.

Tjaelde. Bah! In that case we should see a thousand failures every year,
and fortunes lost one after the other everywhere! No, you have a level
head, Valborg, but your ideas are narrow. Look here, where are the
newspapers? (SIGNE, who has been talking confidentially to HAMAR on the
verandah, comes forward.)

Signe. I took them down to your office. I did not know you meant to stay
in here.

Tjaelde. Oh, bother the office! Please fetch them for me. (SIGNE goes
out, followed by Hamar.)

Mrs. Tjaelde (in an undertone to VALBORG). Why will you never listen to
your mother, Valborg? (VALBORG goes out to the verandah; leans on the
edge of it, with her head on her hands, and looks out.)

Tjaelde. I think I will change my coat. Oh no, I will wait till
dinner-time.

Mrs. Tjaelde. Dinner! And here I am still sitting here!

Tjaelde. Are we expecting any one?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Yes, have you forgotten?

Tjaelde. Of course, yes.

Mrs. Tjaelde (going out). What on earth am I to order?

(TJAELDE comes forward as soon as he is alone, sits down on a chair with
a weary, harassed expression, and buries his face in his hands with a
sigh. SIGNE and HAMAR come back, she carrying some newspapers. HAMAR is
going out to the verandah again, but SIGNE pulls him back.)

Signe. Here you are, father. Here are--

Tjaelde. What? Who?

Signe (astonished). The newspapers.

Tjaelde. Ah, yes. Give them to me.(Opens them hurriedly. They are mostly
foreign papers, in which he scans the money articles one after another.)

Signe (after a whispered conversation with HAMAR). Father!

Tjaelde (without looking up from the papers).Well? (To himself,
gloomily.) Down again, always down!

Signe. Hamar and I want so much to go into town again to Aunt Ulla's.

Tjaelde. But you know you were there only a fortnight ago. I received
your bills yesterday. Have you seen them?

Signe. No need for that, father, if _you_ have seen them! Why do you
sigh?

Tjaelde. Oh--because I see that stocks keep falling.

Signe. Pooh! Why should you bother about that? Now you are sighing
again. I am sure you know how horrid it is for those you love not to
have what they want. You won't be so unkind to us, father?

Tjaelde. No, my child, it can't be done.

Signe. Why?

Tjaelde. Because--because--well, because now that it is summer time so
many people will be coming here whom we shall have to entertain.

Signe. But entertaining people is the most tiresome thing I know, and
Hamar agrees with me.

Tjaelde. Don't you think I have to do tiresome things sometimes, my
girl?

Signe. Father dear, why are you talking so solemnly and ceremoniously?
It sounds quite funny from you!

Tjaelde. Seriously, my child, it is by no means an unimportant matter
for a big business house like ours, with such a wide-spread connection,
that people coming here from all quarters should find themselves
hospitably received. You might do that much for me.

Signe. Hamar and I will never have a moment alone at that rate.

Tjaelde. I think you mostly squabble when you are alone.

Signe. Squabble? That is a very ugly word, father.

Tjaelde. Besides, you would be no more alone if you were in town.

Signe. Oh, but it is quite different there!

Tjaelde. So I should think--from the way you throw your money about!

Signe (laughing). Throw our money about! What else have we to do? Isn't
that what we are for? Daddy, listen--dear old dad--

Tjaelde. No, dear--no.

Signe. You have never been so horrid to me before.

Hamar (who has been making signs to her to stop, whispers). Can't you be
quiet! Don't you see he is put out about something?

Signe (whispering). Well, you might have backed me up a little.

Hamar (as before). No, I am a bit wiser than you.

Signe (as before). You have been so odd lately. I am sure I don't know
what you want?

Hamar (as before). Oh, well, it doesn't matter now--because I am going
to town alone.

Signe (as before). What are you going to do?

Hamar (going). I am going to town alone. I am sick of this!

Signe (following him). Just you try! (Both go out by the verandah, to
the right. TJAELDE lets the newspapers fall out of his hands with a
heavy sigh.)

Valborg (looking in from the verandah). Father! (TJAELDE starts.) There
goes Mr. Berent, the lawyer from Christiania.

Tjaelde (getting up). Berent? Where? On the wharf?

Valborg. Yes. (Comes back into the room. TJAELDE looks out of the
window.) The reason I told you was because I saw him yesterday at the
timber-yard, and a little while before that, at the brewery and at the
works.

Tjaelde (to himself). What can that mean? (Aloud.) Oh, I know he is very
fond of making little trips to all sorts of places in the summer. This
year he has come here--and no doubt he likes to see the chief industries
of the place. There is not much else here to see! But are you sure it is
he? I think--

Valborg (looking out). Yes, it is he. Look now, you know his walk--

Tjaelde.--and his trick of crossing his feet--yes, it is he. It looks as
if he were coming here.

Valborg. No, he has turned away.

Tjaelde. All the better! (To himself, thoughtfully.) Could it possibly
mean--? (SANNAES comes in from the right.)

Sannaes. Am I disturbing you, sir?

Tjaelde. Is that you, Sannaes? (SANNAES, as he comes forward, sees
VALBORG standing by the farther window. He appears frightened and hides
his hands quickly behind his back.) What do you want? (VALBORG looks at
SANNAES, then goes on to the verandah and out to the right.) What is it,
man? What the deuce are you standing there for?

Sannaes (bringing his hands from behind his back as soon as VALBORG has
passed him, and looking after her.) I didn't like to ask you, before
Miss Valborg, whether you are coming down to your office to-day or not.

Tjaelde. Have you gone mad? Why on earth shouldn't you ask me that
before Miss Valborg?

Sannaes. I mean that--if not--I should like to speak to you here, if it
is convenient.

Tjaelde. Look here, Sannaes, you ought to try and get rid of your
shyness; it doesn't suit a business man. A business man should be smart
and active, and not let his wits go wool-gathering because he finds
himself in the same room with a woman. I have often noticed it in
you.--Now, what is it? Out with it!

Sannaes. You are not coming to the office this morning, sir?

Tjaelde. No, there is no post goes out before this evening.

Sannaes. No. But there are some bills of exchange--

Tjaelde. Bills? No.

Sannaes. Yes, sir--that fourth one of Möller's that was protested, and
the big English one.

Tjaelde (angrily). Have they not been met yet? What does this mean?

Sannaes. The manager of the bank wanted to see you first, sir!

Tjaelde. Have you gone crazy--? (Collects himself.) There must be some
misunderstanding, Sannaes.

Sannaes. That is what I thought; so I spoke about it to the chief clerk,
and to Mr. Holst as well.

Tjaelde. And Mr. Holst said--?

Sannaes. The same thing.

Tjaelde (walking up and down). I will go and see him--or rather, I
_won't_ go and see him; because this is evidently something that--. We
have some days' grace yet, haven't we?

Sannaes. Yes, sir.

Tjaelde. And still no telegram from Mr. Lind?

Sannaes. No, sir.

Tjaelde (to himself). I can't understand it. (Aloud.) We will negotiate
this matter direct with Christiania, Sannaes. That is what we will
do--and leave these little local banks alone in future. That will do,
Sannaes! (Makes a gesture of dismissal. Then says to himself:) That
damned Möller! It has made them all suspicious! (Turns round and sees
SANNAES still there.) What are you waiting for?

Sannaes. It is settling day--and I have no money in the safe.

Tjaelde. No money in the safe! A big business like this, and nothing in
the safe on settling day! What kind of management is that, I should like
to know? Must I teach you the A B C of business over and over again? One
can never take a half day off, or hand over the control! of the tiniest
part of the business--! I have no one, absolutely no one, that I can
rely on! How have you let things get into such a state?

Sannaes. Well, there was a third bill, which expired to-day--Holm and
Co., for £400. I had relied upon the bank, unfortunately--so there was
nothing for it but to empty the safe--here and at the brewery as well.

Tjaelde (walking about restlessly). Hm--hm--hm!--Now, who can have put
that into Holst's head?--Very well, that will do. (Dismisses SANNAES,
who goes out but comes back immediately.)

Sannaes (whispering). Here is Mr. Berent!

Tjaelde (surprised). Coming here?

Sannaes. He is just coming up the steps! (Goes out by the further door
on the right.)

Tjaelde. (calls after him in a whisper). Send up some wine and
cakes!--It is just as I suspected! (Catches sight of himself in a
mirror.) Good Lord, how bad I look! (Turns away painfully from the
mirror; looks in it again, forces a smile to his face, and so, smiling,
goes towards the verandah, where BERENT is seen coming in slowly from
the left.)

Tjaelde (greeting BERENT politely but with reserve). I feel honoured at
receiving a visit from so distinguished a man.

Berent. Mr. Tjaelde, I believe?

Tjaelde. At your service! My eldest daughter has just been telling me
that she had seen you walking about my property.

Berent. Yes; an extensive property--and an extensive business.

Tjaelde. Too extensive, Mr. Berent. Too many-sided. But one thing has
led to another. Pray sit down.

Berent. Thank you; it is very warm to-day. (A maid brings in cakes and
wine, and puts them on the table.)

Tjaelde. Let me give you a glass of wine?

Berent. No, thank you.

Tjaelde. Or something to eat?

Berent. Nothing, thank you.

Tjaelde (taking out his cigar-case). May I offer you a cigar? I can
answer for their quality.

Berent. I am very fond of a good cigar. But for the moment I will not
take anything, thank you! (A pause. TJAELDE takes a seat.)

Tjaelde (in a quiet, confidential voice). Have you been long here, Mr.
Berent?

Berent. Only a day or two. You have been away, have you not?

Tjaelde. Yes--that unhappy affair of Mr. Möller's. A meeting of
creditors after the sale.

Berent. Times are hard just now.

Tjaelde. Extraordinarily so!

Berent. Do you think that Möller's failure will bring down any more
firms with it-besides those we know of already, I mean?

Tjaelde. I don't think so. His--his misfortune was an exceptional case
in every respect.

Berent. It has made the banks a little nervous, I hear.

Tjaelde. I dare say.

Berent. Of course you know the state of affairs here better than any
one.

Tjaelde. (with a smile). I am very much indebted to you for your
flattering confidence in me.

Berent. I suppose all this might have a bad effect upon the export trade
of this part of the country?

Tjaelde. Yes--it is really hard to tell; but the important thing
certainly is to keep every one on their legs.

Berent. That is your opinion?

Tjaelde. Undoubtedly.

Berent. As a general rule a crisis of this sort shows up the unsound
elements in a commercial community.

Tjaelde (with a smile). And for that reason this crisis should be
allowed to take its natural course, you mean?

Berent. That is my meaning.

Tjaelde. Hm!--In some places it is possible that the dividing line
between the sound firms and the unsound may not be very distinct.

Berent. Can there really be any danger of such a thing here?

Tjaelde. Well--you are expecting too much of my knowledge of affairs;
but I should be inclined to think that there may. (A pause.)

Berent. I have been instructed by the banks to prepare an opinion upon
the situation--a fact which I have, so far, only confided to you.

Tjaelde. I am much obliged.

Berent. The smaller local banks here have combined, and are acting in
concert.

Tjaelde. Indeed? (A pause.) I suppose you have seen Mr. Holst, then?

Berent. Of course. (A pause.) If we are to assist the sound firms and
leave the others to their fate, the best way will certainly be for all
alike to disclose their actual position.

Tjaelde. Is that Mr. Holst's opinion too?

Berent. It is. (A pause.) I have advised him for the present--at all
events till we have all the balance-sheets--to say "no" to every request
for an advance, without exception.

Tjaelde. (with a look of relief). I understand!

Berent. Only a temporary measure, of course--

Tjaelde. Quite so!

Berent.--but one that must apply to every one impartially.

Tjaelde. Admirable!

Berent. Not to treat every one alike would be to run the danger of
throwing premature suspicion on individuals.

Tjaelde. I quite agree.

Berent. I am delighted to hear it. Then you will not misunderstand me
if I ask you also to prepare a balance-sheet which shall show the actual
position of your firm.

Tjaelde. With the greatest pleasure, if by doing so I can assist the
general welfare.

Berent. I assure you, you can. It is by such means that public
confidence is strengthened.

Tjaelde. When do you want the balance-sheet? Of course, it can only be a
summary one.

Berent. Naturally. I will give myself the pleasure of calling for it.

Tjaelde. By no means. I can let you have it at once, if you like. I am
in the habit of frequently drawing up summary balance-sheets of that
kind--as prices rise and fall, you know.

Berent. Indeed? (Smiles.) You know, of course, what they say of
swindlers--that they draw up three balance-sheets everyday, and all
different! But you are teaching me, apparently--

Tjaelde (laughing).--that others too, may have that bad habit!--though I
haven't actually got as far as three a day!

Berent. Of course I was only joking. (Gets up.)

Tjaelde (getting up). Of course. I will send it to the hotel in an
hour's time; for I suppose you are staying in our only so-called hotel!
Would you not care, for the rest of your stay, to move your things over
here and make yourself at home in a couple of empty spare rooms that I
have?

Bercnt. Thank you, but the length of my stay is so uncertain; and the
state of my health imposes habits upon me which are embarrassing to
every one, and to myself most of all, when I am among strangers.

Tjaelde. But at all events I hope you will dine with us to-day? I expect
one or two friends. And perhaps a short sail afterwards; it is very
pretty among the islands here.

Berent. Thank you, but my health won't allow me such dissipations.

Tjaelde. Ha, ha!--Well, if I can be of any further service to you--?

Berent. I should be glad to have a talk with you before I leave,
preferably as soon as possible.

Tjaelde (somewhat surprised). You mean, after you have received all the
balance-sheets?

Berent. I have already managed to get most of them quietly, through Mr.
Holst.

Tjaelde (more surprised). Oh--so you mean to-day--?

Berent. Would five o'clock suit you?

Tjaelde. I am quite at your disposal! I will give myself the pleasure of
calling upon you at five.

Berent. No, I will come here at five o'clock. (Bows, and turns to go.)

Tjaelde (following him). But you are the invalid--the older man--and a
distinguished man--

Berent. But you are at home here. Good-bye!

Tjaelde. Let me thank you for the honour you have done me by calling
upon me!

Berent. Please don't bother to see me out.

Tjaelde. Allow me to escort you?

Berent. I can find the way quite well, thank you.

Tjaelde. No doubt, no doubt-but I should feel it an honour!

Berent. As you please! (As they are about to go down the verandah steps
they are met by SIGNE and HAMAR, who are coming up arm in arm. Each
couple draws aside to make room for the other.)

Tjaelde. Let me introduce--no, I am sure Mr. Berent needs no
introduction. This is my youngest daughter--and her fiancé, Lieutenant
Hamar.

Berent. I thought your regiment was at the manoeuvres, Lieutenant?

Hamar. I have got furlough--

Berent. On account of urgent business, no doubt! Good day!

Tjaelde. Ha, ha, ha! (He and BERENT go down the steps.)

Hamar. Insolent fellow! But he is like that to every one.

Signe. Not to my father, as far as I could see.

Hamar. Your father is insolent too.

Signe. You shan't say such things of father!

Hamar. What else do you call it, to laugh at such impertinence as
Berent's.

Signe. I call it good spirits! (Sits down in a rocking-chair and begins
rocking herself.)

Hamar. Oh, then, so you--. You are not very agreeable to-day.

Signe (still rocking herself). No; do you know, sometimes I get so bored
with you.

Hamar. Yet you won't let me go away?

Signe. Because I should be still worse bored without you.

Hamar. Let me tell you this, I am not going to put up much longer with
the way I am treated here!

Signe. Very well. (Takes off her engagement ring and holds it between
her finger and her thumb, as she rocks herself and hums a tune.)

Hamar. Oh, I don't say anything about _you_; but look at Valborg! Look
at your father! He hasn't even as much as offered me a mount on his new
horse!

Signe. He has had something else to think about--possibly something even
more important than that. (Goes on humming.)

Hamar. Oh, do be nice, Signe! You must admit that my feelings are very
natural. Indeed, to speak quite candidly--because I know I can say
anything to you--it seems to me that, as I am to be his son-in-law and
am in a cavalry regiment, and as he has no sons of his own, I might
almost expect that--that he would make me a present of the horse.

Signe. Ha, ha, ha!

Hamar. Does it seem so unreasonable to you?

Signe. Ha, ha, ha!

Hamar. Why do you laugh at what I say, Signe? It seems to me that it
would reflect very well on your family if, when my friends admired my
horse, I could say: "My father-in-law made me a present of it." Because,
you know, there isn't a finer horse in the whole of Norway.

Signe. And that is the reason why you should have it? Ha, ha, ha!

Hamar. I won't stand it!

Signe. The peerless lieutenant on the peerless horse! Ha, ha, ha!

Hamar. Signe, be quiet!

Signe. You are so funny! (Begins to hum again.)

Hamar. Listen, Signe! No one has so much influence with your father as
you.--Oh, do listen! Can't you talk seriously for a moment?

Signe. I should like to! (Goes on humming.)

Hamar. My idea was that, if that horse were mine, I would stay here for
the summer and break it in thoroughly. (SIGNE stops rocking herself and
humming. HAMAR comes up to her chair and leans over her.) In that case
I would not go back till the autumn, and then you could come with the
horse and me into town. Wouldn't that be delightful?

Signe (after looking at him for a moment). Oh, yes, my dear, you always
have such delightful ideas!

Hamar. Don't I! But the whole thing depends, of course, on whether you
can get the horse from your father. Will you try, darling?

Signe. And then you would stay here all the summer?

Hamar. All the summer!

Signe. So as to break in the horse.

Hamar. Just to break in the horse!

Signe. And I would go with you into town in the autumn--that was what
you said, wasn't it?

Hamar. Yes; wouldn't it be jolly?

Signe. Shall you take the bay horse to stay with your Aunt Ulla too?

Hamar (laughing). What?

Signe. Well, you have spent your furlough here simply for the sake of
that horse--I know that well enough--and you propose to stay here, just
to break it in-and then you propose that the horse and I should go to
your aunt's--

Hamar. But, Signe, what do you--?

Signe (beginning to rock herself furiously). Ugh! Go away!

Hamar. Jealous of a horse! Ha, ha, ha!

Signe. Go away to the stables.

Hamar. Is that meant for a punishment? Because it would be more amusing
there than it is here.

Signe (throwing down her ring). There! Let your horse wear that!

Hamar. Every time you throw down that ring--

Signe. Oh, you have said that so often! I am tired of that too! (Turns
her chair round so as to turn her back on him.)

Hamar. You are such a spoilt child that it would be absurd to take
everything you say seriously--

Signe. I am sick of that too, I tell you--for the hundred and twentieth
time! Go away!

Hamar. But can't you see how ridiculous it is of you to be jealous of a
horse? Have you ever heard of anyone else behaving like that?

Signe (jumping up). Oh, you make me want to shout and scream! I feel so
ashamed of you! (Stamps her foot.) I despise you!

Hamar (laughing). And all on account of the horse?

Signe. No, on your own account--yours, yours! I feel so miserable
sometimes, I should like to throw myself down on the floor and cry--or
run away and never come back! Can't you let me alone! Can't you go away!

Hamar. Yes--and I have not picked up the ring this time, either!

Signe. Oh, do go!--go, go, go! (Bursts out crying and sits down.)

Hamar. All right!--I see the steamer in the distance; I shall go home at
once.

Signe. Oh, you know as well as I do that that steamer goes the other
way! Oh! (Cries. The masts and funnel of a steamer come into sight, and
a trail of smoke passes over the sky. TJAELDE'S voice is heard outside,
calling: "Hurry up! Take the lieutenant's boat; it is ready!" SIGNE
jumps up.)

Hamar. They are going to fetch some one from the steamer! (TJAELDE'S
voice is heard again: "You get the boat out! He is coming here!" HAMAR
runs to pick up the ring and comes back hurriedly to SIGNE.) Signe!

Signe. No, I won't!

Hamar. Signe, dear! What does this mean? What is it that I have done?

Signe. I don't know, but I am wretchedly unhappy! (Bursts into tears.)

Hamar. But you know that in the end I always do what you want? What more
can you wish than that?

Signe. I can't help it, I wish I were dead! It is always the same thing!
(In tears again.)

Hamar. But, Signe--you who have told me hundreds of times that you loved
me!

Signe. And so I do. But sometimes our engagement seems horrible!--No,
don't come near me!

Hamar. Signe! (TJAELDE'S voice is heard outside: "Of course, put your
best coat on!" He calls louder: "Sannaes!" An answering voice is heard
in the distance. TJAELDE continues: "Don't forget your gloves!") Dry
your eyes, Signe! Don't let him see you have been crying. (He tries to
give her the ring, but she turns away, wiping her eyes. TJAELDE comes up
the steps on to the verandah.)

Tjaelde. Oh, there you are! That's right. Mr. Lind is arriving by
this steamer--I had a telegram from him just now. (Calls out over the
verandah.) Come along with those flags! And get this boat out of the way
and unstep her mast! She is moored up tight! (HAMAR runs to help him.)
Yes, you cast her off! (HAMAR does so, and the boat is hauled away to
the right. TJAELDE comes forward into the room.) Signe! (Looks at her.)
What? Squabbling again?

Signe. Father!

Tjaelde. Well, this is no time for tomfoolery of that sort! You must all
do the honours of the house to-day. Tell Valborg--

Signe. Tell her yourself, please! You know Valborg only does just what
she likes.

Tjaelde. Don't talk such rubbish! This is an important moment--and you
will all do as _I_ say! Tell Valborg that she is to make herself look
nice and come to me here. And you do the same. (She goes.) Signe!

Signe (stopping). Yes?

Tjaelde. We must ask five or six more people to dinner. You must send
word to Mr. Finne that we shall dine punctually at three o'clock,
instead of four. Mr. Lind has to go away again by the next boat, at five
o'clock. Do you understand?

Signe. But has mother enough in the house for so many?

Tjaelde. It is not a mere question of there being enough--it must be a
very good dinner. I expect my larder to be kept thoroughly well stocked
all through the summer. How often am I to repeat that?

Signe (trying to repress her fears). But mother is feeling so ill
to-day--

Tjaelde. Oh! don't begin about that everlasting "feeling ill." There
is no time to-day to feel ill. Now, be quick! (SIGNE goes out by the
farther door. TJAELDE turns to HAMAR.) Get a pen and ink and some paper!
We must draw up a list of guests, at once!

Hamar (looking about). There is none here.

Tjaelde (impatiently). Fetch some, then! (HAMAR goes into the next room.
TJAELDE, after a long sigh of relief, reads a telegram he has in his
hand. His hand trembles as he reads it slowly, repeating some passages
twice.) "Letter received just as starting. Before taking charge of
affairs, must have interview. Coming to-day earliest boat, return five
o'clock. Have clear statement ready. Lind." I can hardly read it--but it
is true! Yes, if I can only work this properly all doors will be open to
me! (To HAMAR, who has come back.) Ah, there you are! It would take too
long to write invitations. We will just draw up a list of names and
one of my clerks shall run round to them all. Now then! (Dictates.) The
Vicar--Oh, by the way, what is the champagne like?

Hamar. Do you mean the new lot?

Tjaelde. Yes.

Hamar. The Vicar praised it highly.

Tjaelde. Good. Well, then--

Hamar (writing). The Vicar.

Tjzlde. Mr. Ring.

Hamar. Mr. Ring.

Tjaelde. And--and--

Hamar. Mr. Holst?

Tjaelde. No, not Holst. (HAMAR appears greatly astonished. TJAELDE says
to himself:) I can show him now that I have no need of him! (Suddenly,
to HAMAR.) Mr. Holm. (To himself.) Holst's enemy!

Hamar. Mr. Holm.

Tjaelde (to himself). Although Holm is a boor. Still, it will annoy
Holst. (Aloud.) The Chief Constable.

Hamar. The Chief--

Tjaelde. No, strike out the Chief Constable.

Hamar. Chief Constable struck out.

Tjaelde. Have we got the Vicar down?

Hamar. He is number one on the list.

Tjaelde. Of course, yes.

Hamar. What about the Magistrate?

Tjaelde. No, he lives too far off. Besides, unless he is the guest
of honour and can talk shop all the time--. No! But, let me see. Mr.
Knutzon--Knutzon with a "z."

Hamar. Knutzon with a "z."

Tjaelde. Oh!--and--Knudsen, too! Knudsen with an "s."

Hamar. Knudsen with an "s."

Tjaelde. How many have we got?

Hamar. The Vicar, Ring, Holm, the Chief--oh, no, the Chief Constable was
struck out; Knutzon with a "z," Knudsen with an "s "--that is one, two,
three, four, five, six.

Tjaelde. And Finne, you, and I make nine. We must have twelve.

Hamar. What about some ladies?

Tjaelde. No; ladies are out of place at a business dinner. They may do
the honours afterwards, when we have got to the cigarette stage. But
whom shall we--?

Hamar. That new lawyer fellow? He's a smart chap--I can't remember his
name?

Tjaelde. No, he always wants to be speechifying wherever he goes.--Ah,
Mr. Pram, the custom-house officer!

Hamar. That man? He always gets drunk!

Tjaelde. Yes, but he doesn't get noisy with it. He does no harm--quite
the contrary! Yes, put down Pram.

Hamar. Mr. Pram.

Tjaelde. It is a very difficult task, in such a small town, when you
want to get a good set of people together. Ah!--Falbe! I forgot him. He
is very neat, and no opinions.

Hamar. Neat in his dress, do you mean?

Tjaelde. Yes, in his dress too-but I meant it more generally. Now, for
the twelfth--Morten Schultz?

Hamar. Morten Schultz! (Gets up.) No, really, I must take the liberty of
protesting against him! Do you really know what he did the last time he
was here, when you had a lot of guests? In the middle of dinner he took
out his false teeth and began showing them to his neighbours. He wanted
to have them passed round the table! If that is your idea of a good set
of people--well!

Tjaelde. Yes, he is rather a rough diamond. But he is the richest man
about here.

Hamar (who has sat down again). Well in that case he really ought to
afford himself a new wig! It is far from pleasant to sit beside him, I
can assure you!

Tjaelde. Yes, I know he is a pig; but he is wide awake, and this would
flatter him! You see, my young friend, when a man is very rich you must
make certain allowances for him.

Hamar. I can't understand what _you_ can hope to get out of him.

Tjaelde. Hm, hm!--No, well, perhaps we had better leave him out?

Hamar. Certainly!

Tjaelde (to himself). Although Lind would understand the significance of
Morten Schultz's being here--

Hamar. And the things he says! Ladies have to leave the room!

Tjaelde. Yes, you are right. (Mutters to himself.) And, after all, I
don't need him any longer. (Aloud.) But what about our twelfth, then?
Let me see--.

Hamar. Christopher Hansen?

Tjaelde. Oh, Lord! no. We should have to talk politics. No, let
me see--. Yes, I think I might risk it! Hm, hm--yes, just the man!
Jakobsen, the brewery manager.

Hamar. Jakobsen?

Tjaelde. Hm, hm! Jakobsen will do very well. I know Jakobsen.

Hamar. Oh, he is a very good fellow--we all know that, but in polite
society--!

Tjaelde. Hm, hm, hm!--Put him down!

Hamar (writing). Jakobsen. There, then! (Gets up.)

Tjaelde. Now let Skogstad go with the list! Remember, three o'clock
punctually! And be quick! (Calls after HAMAR, who is going out.) And
come back when you have given him the list! There may be something more
to do! (HAMAR goes out by the nearer door. TJAELDE takes a letter out of
his pocket.) Ah, of course! Shall I send the balance-sheet to Berent?
I am independent of the banks now. Still, I am not out of the wood yet.
And, anyway, it is a very pretty balance-sheet! Holst would be sure to
see it, and that might be useful--and it might annoy him, too. Besides,
if I don't send it, they will think that my promising to send it had put
me into a hole, and that Lind had helped me out of it. I risk least by
sending it. (HAMAR comes back.) Look here, let him take this letter,
too. It is for Mr. Berent, at the Hotel Victoria.

Hamar. Is this an invitation? Because, if it is, we shall be thirteen at
table.

Tjaelde. It is not an invitation. Be quick, before he goes. (HAMAR goes
out again.) Oh, if only it succeeds! Lind is the sort of man one can
persuade--and I must, I must persuade him! (Looks at his watch.) I have
four whole hours to do it in. I have never felt so hopeful--not for a
long time. (Is lost in thought; then says quietly:) After all, sometimes
a crisis is a good thing--like a big wave that carries one on!--They
have all had their suspicions aroused now, and are all ready to get
into a panic. (Sighs.) If only I could get safely out of my difficulties
without any one's suspecting it!--Oh, this anxious fear, night and
day!--all this mystery, these shifts, these concealments, this farce
I have to keep up! I go about my business as if I were in a dream.
(Despairingly.) This shall be the last time--my last performance of this
sort! No more of it!--I only need a helping hand now, and I have got it!
But _have_ I got it? that is the question. Oh! if only, after this, I
could know what it was to have a good night's sleep and to wake in
the morning free from anxiety!--to join them at meals with an easy
conscience!--come home in the evening and feel that it was all done
with! If only I had something to take my stand upon that I could call my
own--really and truly my own! I hardly dare to believe that there is a
chance--I have so often been disappointed! (HAMAR comes back.)

Hamar. There--that's done!

Tjaelde. Good Lord, what about a salute from our cannon? We must give
him a salute!

Hamar. We have powder.

Tjaelde. Then send word up at once to Ole to see about it! (They hurry
out. The curtain falls.)




ACT II

SCENE I

(SCENE.--The same room. The table, which has been drawn to one side, is
covered with bottles of champagne aged dishes of fruit. MRS. TJAELDE and
SIGNE, with a man-servant and a maid, are busy preparing it. Through
the door on the right a lively conversation can be heard, and occasional
bursts of laughter.)

Mrs. Tjaelde (in a tired voice). Now I think it is all ready.

Signe. They are talking a long time over their dinner.

Mrs. Tjaelde (looking at her watch). Yes, they will only have half an
hour for their dessert, because Mr. Lind has to leave at five o'clock.

Signe. Ah, they have finished at last! Listen, they are getting up from
the table. (Amidst the loud noise of conversation the noise of chairs
being pushed back is audible.) Here they come!

Mrs. Tjaelde. Yes; let us retreat. (The maid goes out by the farther
door; SIGNE helps MRS. TJAELDE out after her. The man-servant begins
opening the champagne. The guests come in from the dining-room, headed
by LIND escorted by TJAELDE, whom he is assuring that the dinner was
excellent, to which TJAELDE replies that it is impossible to do much in
a small country town. Both look at their watches, and observe that there
is only half an hour left. TJAELDE vainly endeavours to persuade LIND
to stay longer. Close behind them come HOLM and RING, engaged in an
animated dispute about timber prices, the former maintaining that they
will fall still lower, the latter that they will rise speedily owing
to the fall in the prices of coal and iron, a point of view which the
former vigorously controverts. Immediately behind them comes the VICAR,
escorted by HAMAR, who is a little tipsy. The VICAR is assuring him that
he has no objection to parishioners repudiating the obligation to attend
the services of their own priest, so long as they are compelled to pay
him for those services whether they avail themselves of them or not;
because order, which is an essential characteristic of the Heavenly
Kingdom, must be maintained. HAMAR tries to get in a word or two about
the bay horse, but without success. At the same time KNUTZON and FALBE
are deep in a discussion about a dancer whom FALBE has seen at Hamburg.
He is maintaining that she can leap six feet into the air, which KNUTZON
ventures to doubt, but FALBE says there is no doubt about it, and he
knows because he has once sat at the same dinner-table with her. FINNE,
KNUDSEN, and JAKOBSEN follow them. JAKOBSEN is heard challenging any one
to contradict him, while the others eagerly protest that he has entirely
misunderstood their meaning. He affirms stoutly that he doesn't care a
damn what they meant, but that his employer is the greatest business
man and the finest fellow in the world, or at all events in Norway. PRAM
comes in by himself, wrapt in tipsy contemplation. They all talk at the
same time.)

Tjaelde (rapping on a glass). Gentlemen! (There is a sudden silence,
except for the sound of the voices of FALBE and JAKOBSEN, who are hushed
down by the others.) Gentlemen! I am sorry dinner has occupied such a
long time.

All (unanimously). No, no!

Tjaelde. Our distinguished guest has, unfortunately, to leave us in half
an hour, so I should like to take the opportunity of saying a few words.
Gentlemen, we have a prince among us to-day. I say a prince, because
if it is true that it is the financiers that rule the world--and it is
true, gentlemen--

Pram (who is standing well forward, supporting himself by the edge of
the table, says solemnly:) Yes.

Tjaelde.--then our friend here is a prince! There is not a single
important undertaking that he has not initiated, or at any rate backed
with his name.

Pram (lifting his glass). Mr. Lind, may I have the honour--?

Voices. Sh! Sh!

Tjaelde. Yes, gentlemen, his name backs every enterprise. It would be
impossible to carry one through that had not his backing.

Pram (solemnly). His backing.

Tjaelde. Am I not right, then, in describing him as a prince?

Falbe (in a feeble voice). Yes.

Tjaelde. Gentlemen, to-day his name is once more exercising its
powerful, I might say its creative, influence upon circumstances. I may
say that at this moment the country holds no truer benefactor than he.

Pram. Great man.

Tjaelde. Let us drink his health! May prosperity attend him and his, and
may his name be deathless in Norway! Mr. Lind!

All. Mr. Lind! Mr. Lind! (They all drink his health effusively.)

Tjaelde (to HAMAR, whom he pulls forward somewhat roughly, as the others
begin to help themselves to the dessert.) What has become of the salute?

Hamar (in consternation).Good Lord, yes! (Rushes to the window, but
comes back.) I have no handkerchief. I must have laid it down in the
dining-room.

Tjaelde. Here is mine!(Feels in his pocket for it.) One cannot rely
on you for the least thing. The salute will be too late now. It is
disgraceful! (HAMAR goes to the window and waves the handkerchief madly.
At last the report of a cannon is heard. The guests are standing in a
group, holding their dessert plates.)

Holm. A little bit late!

Knutzon. Rather behind the moment--

Ring. A very important moment, however!

Holm. A very unexpected one, anyway!

Knutzon (jestingly). Allow me, amidst the cannon's roar, to introduce to
you a man who has been led by the nose!

Ring. Oh, Tjaelde knows what he is about!

Tjaelde. Mr. Lind is kind enough to wish to propose a toast. (They all
compose themselves into respectful silence.)

Lind. Our worthy host has proposed my health in most flattering terms.
I would merely add this, that wealth is entrusted to those who have it
precisely in order that they may support industry, genius, and great
undertakings.

Pram (who has never changed his position). Nobly said.

Lind. I am only an administrator of a trust, and too often a weak and
short-sighted one.

Pram. Beautiful.

Lind. But I shall not be mistaken if I say that Mr. Tjaelde's many-sided
activities, which we must all admire, rest upon a sound foundation; and
of that fact no one, at the present moment, is better able to judge than
I. (The guests look at one another in surprise.) Therefore I have no
hesitation in saying that his activities are an honour to this town, to
this district, to our whole country, and that therefore his genius and
his energy deserve support. I propose the toast of "prosperity to the
firm of Tjaelde!"

All. Prosperity to the firm of Tjaelde!

(HAMAR signals again with the handkerchief, and a cannon shot is heard.)

Tjaelde. I thank you heartily, Mr. Lind! I am profoundly touched.

Lind. I said no more than I am convinced of, Mr. Tjaelde!!

Tjaelde. Thank you! (To HAMAR.) What do you mean by signalling for a
salute for the host? Blockhead!

Hamar. You said there was to be a salute when a toast was proposed,
didn't you?

Tjaelde. Oh, you are a--!

Hamar (to himself). Well, if ever again I--!

Holm. Then it is an accomplished fact, I suppose?

Knutzon. _Fait accompli_! That toast represents twenty thousand pounds,
at least.

Ring. Yes, Tjaelde knows what he is about! I have always said that!
(FALBE is seen drinking ceremoniously with LIND. JAKOBSEN comes forward,
talking to KNUDSEN.)

Jakobsen (in a low voice). There isn't a word of truth in what you say!

Knudsen. But, my dear Jakobsen, you misunderstand me!

Jakobsen (louder). Hang it, I know my people!

Knudsen. Don't talk so loud!

Jakobsen (still louder). What I say any one may hear!

Tjaelde. (at the same moment). The Vicar wishes to say a few words.

Knudsen (to JAKOBSEN). Hush! The Vicar wishes to say a few words.

Jakobsen. Have I got to hush because that damned--

Tjaelde (in a voice of authority). The Vicar wishes to speak.

Jakobsen. I beg your pardon!

The Vicar (in a feeble voice). As the spiritual adviser of this
household, I have the pleasing duty of invoking a blessing on the gifts
that have been so richly showered upon our host and his friends. May
they be to their souls' present good and eternal welfare!

Pram. Amen.

The Vicar. I am going to ask you to drink the health of our host's dear
children--those lovely girls whose welfare has been the object of my
prayers ever since they were confirmed--ever since that memorable day
when household and religious duties began to walk side by side.

Pram. Ah, yes!

The Vicar. May they always in the future, as they have in the past,
grow in the holy fear of God and in meekness and gratitude towards their
parents!

All. Miss Valborg, Miss Signe!

Hamar (in a panic). Am I to signal?

Tjaelde. Oh, go to--!

Hamar. Well, if ever again--!

Tjaelde. Thank you very much, Mr. Vicar. Like you, I hope that the
intimate relations between parent and child that exist here--

The Vicar. It has always been a pleasure to me to come into your most
hospitable house.

Tjaelde. May I have the honour of drinking a glass of wine with you?
(They drink to each other.)

The Vicar. Excellent champagne, my dear sir!

Lind (to HOLM). It pains me to hear what you say. Is it possible that
this town, which owes so much to Mr. Tjaelde, repays him with such
ingratitude?

Holm (in a low voice). One never can quite confidently rely on him.

Lind. Really? I have heard others sing his praises so loudly, you know.

Holm (as before). You misunderstand me. I mean his position--

Lind. His position? That must be merely envy! People are often so unjust
towards those whose enterprise has lifted them above the heads of the
crowd.

Holm. At any rate I assure you it was not from--

Lind (coldly). I don't doubt it. (Walks away from him.)

Jakobsen (with whom TJAELDE has just drunk). Gentlemen!

Knutzon (to HOLM, in passing). Is that boor really going to be allowed
to make a speech! (Going up to LIND.) May I have the honour of drinking
a glass of wine with you, Mr. Lind? (Several of the guests begin to
talk, ostentatiously indifferent to JAKOBSEN who is trying to begin his
speech.)

Jakobsen (in a formidable voice). Gentlemen! (Silence ensues, and he
continues in his usual voice.) Permit a common man to say a word, too,
on this festive occasion. I was a poor little boy when I entered Mr.
Tjaelde's employment; but he pulled me out of the gutter. (Laughter.) I
am-what I am, gentlemen! And therefore if any here is qualified to talk
about Mr. Tjaelde, it is I; because I know him. I know he is a fine
fellow.

Lind (to TJAELDE). Children and drunken men--

Tjaelde (laughing).--speak the truth!

Jakobsen. There are lots of people that will tell you one thing or
another about him--and, of course, he may have his failings like all of
us. But as I find myself in such fine company as this I am going to say
that--that--devil take me if Mr. Tjaelde isn't too good for the lot of
you! (Laughter.)

Tjaelde. That's enough, Jakobsen!

Jakobsen. No, it's not enough! Because there is one toast we have all
forgotten, although we have all had such a splendid dinner. (Laughter.
FALBE claps his hands and cries: "Bravo!") Yes, and it is nothing to
laugh at; because it is the toast of Mrs. Tjaelde's health that we have
not drunk!

Lind. Bravo!

Jakobsen. There's a wife and mother for you! I can tell you--and it's
true--she goes about the house attending to her duties and preparing for
our entertainment when all the time she is ill, and she takes the whole
thing on her shoulders and says nothing. God bless her, I say!--and that
is all I have to say.

Several of the Guests (raising their glasses). Mrs. Tjaelde! Mrs.
Tjaelde!

Pram (grasping JAKOBSEN by the hand). That was fine of you, Jakobsen!
(LIND joins them; PRAM steps aside respectfully.)

Lind. Will you drink a glass of wine with me, Jakobsen?

Jakobsen. Thank you, very much. I am only a common man--

Lind. But a good-hearted one! Your health! (They drink to each other. A
boat is seen putting in to shore below the verandah. Its crew of six men
stand up and toss their oars in naval fashion. SANNAES is standing at
the helm.)

Holm (in a whisper, to KNUTZON). Tjaelde knew what he was doing when he
invited Jakobsen!

Knutzon (whispering). Just look at the boat!

Ring. Tjaelde is a very clever fellow--a very clever fellow! (VALBORG,
SIGNE and MRS. TJAELDE are seen coming up the verandah steps.)

Tjaelde. Gentlemen, the moment of departure is at hand; I see the ladies
coming to take leave of our distinguished guest. Let us take this last
opportunity of gathering around him--round our prince--and thanking him
for coming! Let us cheer him with three times three! (Cheers.)

Lind. Thank you, gentlemen! There is so little time left that I must
confine myself to merely bidding you all good-bye. (To MRS. TJAELDE.)
Good-bye, my dear madam! You should have heard how your health was
proposed and drunk just now. My warmest thanks for your hospitality, and
forgive me for the trouble I have caused you. (To SIGNE.) Good-bye,
Miss Signe. I am sorry time has not permitted me to have the honour of
becoming better acquainted with you; you seem so full of spirit! But if,
as you said, you are soon coming to Christiania--

Signe. I shall then do myself the honour of calling upon your wife.

Lind. Thank you, thank you--you will be most welcome. (To VALBORG.) Are
you not feeling well, Miss Valborg?

Valborg. Yes.

Lind. You look so serious. (As VALBORG does not reply, he continues
somewhat coldly:) Good-bye, Miss Valborg. (To HAMAR.) Good-bye,
Mr.--Mr.--

Tjaelde. Mr. Hamar.

Lind. Ah, the young man that talked to me about a horse--your future
son-in-law! Pray forgive me for not--

Hamar. Don't mention it!

Lind. Good-bye!

Hamar. A pleasant journey, sir!

Lind (coldly, to HOLM). Good-bye, Mr. Holm.

Holm (imperturbably polite). I wish you a very pleasant journey, Mr.
Lind.

Lind (to PRAM). Good-bye, Mr. Pram.

Pram (holds his hand, and seems as if he wanted to say something but
could not. At last he finds his voice). I want to thank you for--for--I
want to thank you for--for--

Lind. You are an excellent fellow!

Pram (in a relieved voice). I am so glad to hear it! Thank you.

Lind (to KNUTZON). Good-bye, Mr.--

Knutzon (hastily). Knutzon.

Pram. With a "z."

Lind (to KNUDSEN). Good-bye, Mr.--

Knudsen. Knudsen, again.

Pram. With an "s."

Lind (to FALBE). Mr--?

Falbe. Falbe.

Lind. Good-bye, Mr. Falbe! (To RING.) I am delighted to see you looking
so well, Mr. Ring.

Ring (with a low bow). The same to you, sir!

Lind. Good-bye, Mr. Vicar!

The Vicar (holding his hand, impressively). Let me wish you good luck
and happiness, Mr. Lind--

Lind. Thank you. (Tries to get away.)

The Vicar.--in your journey over the perilous seas to foreign lands!

Lind. Thank you. (Tries to get away.)

The Vicar. Let me wish you a safe return, Mr. Lind--

Lind. Thank you very much. (Tries to get away.)

The Vicar.--to our dear fatherland; a land, Mr. Lind, which possesses in
you--

Lind. You must excuse me, Mr. Vicar, but time presses.

The Vicar. Let me thank you for the pleasure of our meeting to-day, Mr.
Lind, for--

Lind. Indeed, there is no occasion! Good-bye! (To JAKOBSEN.) Good-bye,
Jakobsen, good-bye!

Jakobsen. Good-bye, Mr. Lind! I am only a common man, I know; but that
is no reason why I shouldn't wish you a pleasant journey too, is it?

Lind. Certainly not, Jakobsen.--Good-bye, Mr. Finne! By the way--just a
word! (In an undertone.) You said that Mr. Berent--. (Takes him aside.)

Tjaelde (to HAMAR). Now, remember the salute this time!--No, no, no!
Don't be in such a hurry! Wait till the boat puts off! You want to make
a mess of it again!

Hamar. Well, if ever again I--!

Tjaelde (to LIND, who holds out his hand to him). Goodbye, Mr. Lind! (In
a low voice.) No one has so much reason to thank you for your visit as
I. You are the only one that can understand--.

Lind (a shade coldly). Don't mention it, Mr. Tjaelde! Good luck to your
business! (In warmer tones.) Good-bye everybody--and thank you all for
your kindness! (The footman, who has for some time been holding out his
hat to him, gives it him, and his coat to SANNAES. LIND steps on board
the boat.)

All. Good-bye, Mr. Lind, good-bye!

Tjaelde. One cheer more! (Cheers and a cannon salute are heard together.
The boat glides away. They all wave their handkerchiefs. TJAELDE hurries
into the room.) I have no handkerchief; that blockhead has--. (Looks at
VALBORG.) Why are you not waving?

Valborg. Because I don't wish to. (TJAELDE looks at her, but says
nothing. He goes into the other room and comes back with a table-napkin
in each hand, and hurries on to the verandah.)

Tjaelde (waving and shouting). Good-bye! Good-bye!

Signe. Let us go out to the point and see the last of them!

All. Yes, yes! (All but TJAELDE and VALBORG hurry off to the right.)

Tjaelde (coming into the room). I saw Berent coming! (VALBORG goes out
by the door on the right. TJAELDE comes forward, throws the napkins on
to a table and himself into a chair.) Oh--oh! But this must be the last
time.--I shan't need this sort of thing any more! Never again! (Gets up
wearily.) Ah, I had forgotten. Berent!

[The Curtain falls.]

[The interval between this scene and the next should be as short as
possible.]


SCENE II

(SCENE.-TJAELDE'S private office. On the left, a desk strewn with
ledgers and papers. On the right, a stove. An easy chair by the stove.
A table in the foreground to the right; on it an inkstand and pens. Two
armchairs; one at the table facing the audience, the other at the side
of the table. Windows on either side of the desk; a door beyond the
stove. A door in the background, leading to other offices. A bell-pull
hangs down the wall. A chair on either side of the door. Quite at the
back, on the left, a staircase leading direct to TJAELDE'S bedroom.
BERENT and TJAELDE come in from the back.)

Tjaelde. You must excuse my receiving you here. But the other rooms are
all upside down; we have had some people to dinner.

Berent. I heard you had guests.

Tjaelde. Yes, Mr. Lind from Christiana.

Berent. Quite so.

Tjaelde. Won't you sit down? (BERENT lays down his hat and coat on a
chair by the door. He comes slowly forward, sits down at the side of the
table, and takes some papers from his breast-pocket. TJAELDE sits down
at the other chair by the table and watches him indifferently.)

Berent. What we now want is some fixed standard by which to make our
valuations, especially of real estate. Have you any objection to our
making your business a basis for arriving at that?

Tjaelde. None at all.

Berent. Then may I make my comments on your own figures, and ask you a
few questions about them?

Tjaelde. By all means.

Berent. Well, to begin with, let us take your properties immediately
round here; they will give us the best idea of local values. For
instance, take the Mjölstad forest; you have put that down, I see, at
£16,500.

Tjaelde (indifferently). Have I?

Berent. You bought it for £10,000.

Tjaelde. Yes, four years ago. Timber prices ruled low then.

Berent. And since then you have cut down more than £20,000 worth of
timber there.

Tjaelde. Who told you so?

Berent. Mr. Holst.

Tjaelde. Holst knows nothing about it.

Berent. We must try to be very accurate, you know.

Tjaelde. Well, of course, the whole valuation is not my concern; but
those whom it does concern will protest.

Berent (taking no notice of his objection). So I think we will reduce
the £16,500 to £10,000.

Tjaelde. To £10,000! (Laughs.) As you please.

Berent. Calculating by the same standard, we can scarcely put down the
Stav forest at more than £4000.

Tjaelde. Allow me to say that, if that is the way you are going to make
your valuation, everybody in the place will have to go bankrupt!

Berent (with a smile). We will risk that. You have put down your wharf
and its contents at £12,000.

Tjaelde. Including two ships in course of construction--

Berent.--for which it would be difficult to find a purchaser, as they
are so far from completion.

Tjaelde. Indeed?

Berent. So I think we cannot put down the wharf and its contents at a
higher figure than £8,000--and I believe even that will turn out to be
too high.

Tjaelde. If you can find me another wharf as well stocked, and with the
advantages that this one has, I will buy it whenever you like for £8000;
I am certain I should be more than £4000 to the good over the bargain.

Berent. May I go on?

Tjaelde. If you like! I even feel a certain curiosity to view my
possessions under such an entirely new light.

Berent. As a matter of fact the items that are too highly valued are
just those that comprise this property that you live on--its land, its
gardens, its dwelling houses, warehouses, and quays-not to mention the
brewery and the factory, which I shall come to later. Even regarded as
business premises they seem to me to be over-valued.

Tjaelde. Well?

Berent, Moreover, the luxurious appointments of this house of yours,
which would very probably be superfluous for any one else, cannot
possibly be counted upon to realise their full value in a sale.
Suppose--as is indeed most likely--that it were a countryman that bought
the place?

Tjaelde. You are reckoning me as turned out of it already, then!

Berent. I am obliged to base all my calculations on what the property
would fetch if sold now.

Tjaelde (getting up). What may you happen to value it at then?

Berent. At less than half your valuation; that is to say at--

Tjaelde. You must really forgive me if I use an expression which has
been on the tip of my tongue for some time: this is scandalous! You
force yourself into a man's house, and then, under pretext of asking for
his opinion, you practically--on paper--rob him of his possessions!

Berent. I don't understand you. I am trying to arrive at a basis for
values hereabouts; and you said yourself, did you not, that it is a
matter that does not concern you alone?

Tjaelde. Certainly; but even in jest--if I may be allowed the
expression--one does not take the statement that an honourable man has
voluntarily offered and treat it as a mendacious document.

Berent. There are many different points of view from which valuations
can be made, obviously. I see nothing more in it than that.

Tjaelde. But don't you understand that this is like cutting into my
living flesh? Bit by bit, my property has been brought together or
created by my own work, and preserved by the most strenuous exertions on
my part under terribly trying conditions--it is bound up with my family,
with all that is dear to me--it has become a part of my very life!

Berent (with a bow). I understand that perfectly. You have put down the
Brewery at--

Tjaelde. No; I refuse to allow you to go on in this way. You must find
some one else's property as a basis for your calculations--you must
consult some one else, whose idea of business corresponds somewhat
closer to your own ridiculous one.

Berent (leaning back in his chair). That is a pity. The banks were
anxious to be acquainted with your answers to my observations.

Tjaelde. Have you sent my statement to the banks?

Berent. With my remarks and comments on it, and Mr. Holst's.

Tjaelde. This has been a trap, then? I believed I had to deal with a
gentleman!

Berent. The banks or I, what is the difference? It comes to the same
thing, as I represent them unreservedly.

Tjaelde. Such impudent audacity is unpardonable!

Berent. I would suggest that we avoid hard words--at all events, for
the moment--and rather consider the effect that will be produced by the
balance-sheet sent in.

Tjaelde. That some of us will see!

Berent. The banking house of Lind & Co., for instance?

Tjaelde. Do you mean to say that my balance-sheet, ornamented with
marginal notes by you and Holst, is to be submitted to Mr. Lind's firm
too?

Berent. When the cannon-salutes and noise of your festivities
enlightened me as to the situation, I took the liberty of making some
inquiries of the banks.

Tjaelde. So you have been spying here, too? You have been trying to
undermine my business connections?

Berent. Is your position such, then, that you are afraid?

Tjaelde. The question is not my position, but your behaviour!

Berent. I think we had better keep to the point. You have put down the
Brewery at--

Tjaelde. No; your conduct is so absolutely underhanded that, as an
honest man, I must refuse all further dealing with you. I am, as I said
before, accustomed to have to deal with gentlemen.

Berent. I think you misunderstand the situation. Your indebtedness to
the banks is so considerable that a settlement of it may reasonably be
required of you. But to effect that you must work with us in the matter.

Tjaelde (after a moment's thought). Very well! But, no more details--let
me know your conclusions, briefly.

Berent. My conclusions, briefly, are that you have estimated your assets
at £90,800. I estimate them at £40,600.

Tjaelde (quietly). That is to say, you make me out to have a deficit of
about £30,000?

Berent. As to that, I must point out that your estimate of your
liabilities does not agree with mine, either.

Tjaelde (quietly). Oh, of course not!

Berent. For instance, the dividend that Möller's estate is to yield to
you.

Tjaelde. No more details! What do you put my total liabilities at?

Berent. Let me see. Your total liabilities amount, according to your
calculations, to £70,000. I estimate them at £80,000--to be precise, at
£79,372.

Tjaelde. That puts my deficit at about--

Berent. At about £39,400--or, in round figures, £40,000.

Tjaelde. Oh, by all means let us stick to round figures!

Berent. So that the difference between your views of your balance-sheet
and mine is that, whereas you give yourself a surplus of about £20,000,
I give you a deficit of about £40,000.

Tjaelde. Thank you very much.--Do you know my opinion of the whole
matter? (BERENT looks up at him.) That I am in this room with a madman.

Berent. I have had the same opinion for some time.--The stock of timber
you hold in France I have not been able to deal with; you have forgotten
to include it in your account. Perhaps it may make a little difference.

Tjaelde. It is of no consequence! I have often enough heard people speak
of your callousness and your heartlessness; but their account of you has
come nowhere near the truth. I don't know why I have not turned you out
of my house long before this; but you will have the goodness to leave it
now!

Berent. We shall both leave presently. But before we do, we must discuss
the question of handing over the house to the Receiver in Bankruptcy.

Tjaelde. Ha, ha, ha! Allow me to inform you that at this very moment
a sum is being telegraphed to me which will be sufficient not only to
cover my present liabilities, but to set me straight in every direction!

Berent. The telegraph is a useful invention which is open to every one.

Tjaelde (after a moment's thought). What do you mean by that?

Berent. One effect of the noise of your festivities was that I used the
telegraph also. Mr. Lind will receive, on board the boat, a telegram
from his firm--and I doubt if the money you speak of will be
forthcoming.

Tjaelde. It is not true! You have not dared to do that!

Berent. The facts are exactly as I state.

Tjaelde. Give me my balance-sheet; let me look at it again. (Stretches
out his hand to take it.)

Berent (taking it up). Excuse me!

Tjaelde. Do you presume to keep back my own balance-sheet in my own
writing?

Berent. Yes, and even to put it in my pocket. (Does so.) A fraudulent
balance-sheet, dated and signed, is a document of some importance.

Tjaelde. You are determined to ruin my private and public reputation?

Berent. You have been working for that yourself for a long time. I know
your position. For a month past I have been in correspondence with all
the quarters in which you have business connections, both here any I
abroad.

Tjaelde. What underhanded deceitfulness an honest man is exposed to!
Here have I been surrounded by spies for the last month! A plot between
my business acquaintances and the banks! A snake creeping into my house
and crawling over my accounts! But I will break up the conspiracy! And
you will find out what it mean, to try and ruin a reputable firm by
underhand devices!

Berent. This is no time for fine phrases. Do you propose to surrender
your property at once?

Tjaelde. Ha, ha! I am to surrender it because you have made me out a
bankrupt on your bit of paper!

Berent. You might conceal the facts for a month, I know. But for your
own sake, and especially for the sake of others, I would urgently advise
you to end the matter at once. That was the reason of my journey here.

Tjaelde. Ah, now the truth is out! And you came here pretending a
friendly concern that the tangle should be straightened out! We were to
distinguish between the sound and unsound firms, and you requested me,
most politely, to give you my assistance in the matter!

Berent. Exactly. But there is no question of anything unsound here
except your own business and what is bound up with it.

Tjaelde (when he has controlled himself). So you came into my house with
the hidden design of ruining me?

Berent. I must repeat that it is not I that am responsible for your
bankruptcy; it is yourself.

Tjaelde. And I must repeat that my bankruptcy only exists in your
imagination! Much may happen in a month; and I have shown that I can
find a way out of difficulties before now!

Berent. That is to say, by involving yourself deeper and deeper in
falsehood.

Tjaelde. Only a man of business can understand such things. But, if you
really understand them, I would say to you: "Give me £20,000 and I will
save the situation entirely." That would be doing something worthy of
your great powers; that would give you a reputation for penetration
in discerning the real state of affairs; because by so doing you would
safeguard the welfare of more than a thousand people, and ensure a
prosperous future for the whole district!

Berent. I don't rise to that bait.

Tjaelde (after a moment's reflection). Do you want me to explain to you
how £20,000 would be sufficient to set the whole complicated situation
straight? Within three months remittances would be coming in. I can make
it its clear as daylight to you--

Berent.--that you would be falling from one disillusionment to another!
That is what you have been doing for the last three years, from month to
month.

Tjaelde. Because the last three years have been bad years--horrible
years! But we have reached the crisis; things must begin to improve now!

Berent. That is what every defaulter thinks.

Tjaelde. Do not drive me to despair! Have you any idea what I have gone
through in these three years? Have you any idea what I am capable of?

Berent. Of still further falsehood.

Tjaelde. Take care!--It is quite true that I am standing on the edge of
a precipice. It is true that for three years I have done everything
in mortal power to save the situation! I maintain that there has been
something heroic in the fight I have made. And that deserves some
reward. You have unrestricted powers; every one trusts you. Realise
for yourself what your mission is; do not let it be necessary for me to
teach it you! Let me tell you this, emphatically: it will be a dreadful
thing for _you_ if hundreds of people are to be ruined unnecessarily
now!

Berent. Let us make an end of this.

Tjaelde. No, devil take me if I give up a fight like this with a
senseless surrender!

Berent. How do you propose to end it, then?

Tjaelde. There is no issue to it that I have not turned over in my
thoughts--thousands of times. _I_ know what I shall do! I won't be a
mark for the jeers of this wretched little town, nor triumphed over by
those who have envied me all round the countryside!

Berent. What will you do, then?

Tjaelde. You shall see! (Speaking more and more excitedly.) You won't
help me under any conditions?

Berent. No.

Tjaelde. You insist that I shall surrender my estate, here and now?

Berent. Yes.

Tjaelde. Hell and damnation! You dare do that?

Berent. Yes.

Tjaelde (his agitation robbing him of his voice, which all at once sinks
to a hoarse whisper). You have never known what despair is!--You don't
know what an existence I have endured!-But if the decisive moment has
come, and I have a man here in my office who _ought_ to save me but will
not, then that man shall share what is in store for me.

Berent (leaning back in his chair). This is beginning to be impressive.

Tjaelde. No more jesting; you might regret it! (Goes to all the doors
and locks them with a key which he takes out of his pocket; then unlocks
his desk, and takes a revolver out of it.) How long do you suppose I
have had this in here?

Berent. Since you bought it, I suppose.

Tjaelde. And why do you suppose I bought it?--Do you suppose that after
I have been master of this town and the biggest man in the district, I
would endure the disgrace of bankruptcy?

Berent. You have been enduring it for a long time.

Tjaelde. It is in your power now either to ruin me or to wave me. You
have behaved in such a way that you deserve no mercy--and you shall have
none! Report to the banks that they may give me the use of £14,000 for
a year--I need no more than that--and I will save the situation for good
and all. Think seriously, now! Remember my family, remember how long my
firm has been established, remember the numbers that would be ruined if
I were! And do not forget to think of your own family! Because, if you
_don't_ agree to what I ask, neither of us shall leave this room alive!

Berent (pointing to the revolver). Is it loaded?

Tjaelde (putting his finger on the trigger). You will find that out in
good time. You must answer me now!

Berent. I have a suggestion to make. Shoot yourself first and me
afterwards.

Tjaelde (going up to him and holding the revolver to his head). I will
soon quiet your pretty wit.

Berent (getting up, and taking out of his pocket a paper which he
unfolds). This is a formal surrender of your estate to the Receiver
in Bankruptcy. If you sign it, you will be doing your duty to your
creditors, to your family, and to yourself. Shooting yourself and me
would only be adding an acted lie to all your others. Put away your
revolver and take up your pen!

Tjaelde. Never! I had resolved on this long ago. But you shall keep me
company, now!

Berent. Do what you please. But you cannot threaten me into a falsehood.

Tjaelde (who has lowered the revolver, takes a step back, raises the
revolver and aims at BERENT). Very well!

Berent (walking up to TJAELDE and looking him straight in the eyes,
while the latter reluctantly lowers the revolver). Do you suppose I
don't know that a man who has for so long shivered with falsehood and
terror in his inmost heart has lots of schemes but no courage? You
_dare_ not do it!

Tjaelde (furiously). I will show you! (Steps back and raises the
revolver again.)

Berent (following him). Shoot, and you will hear a report--that is what
you are longing for, I suppose! Or, give up your plan of shooting, think
of what you have done, confess, and afterwards hold your tongue!

Tjaelde. No; may the devil take both you and me--

Berent. And the horse?

Tjaelde. The horse?

Berent. I mean the magnificent charger on which you came galloping home
from the sale of Möller's estate. You had better let some one shoot
you on horseback--on what was your last and greatest piece of business
duplicity! (Goes nearer to him and speaks more quietly.) Or--strip
yourself of the tissue of lies which enfolds you, and your bankruptcy
will bring you more blessing than your riches have ever done. (TJAELDE
lets the revolver drop out of his hand, and sinks into a chair in an
outburst of tears. There is silence for a moment.) You have made an
amazing fight of it for these last three years. I do not believe I know
any one who could have done what you have done. But you have lost the
fight this time. Do not shrink now from a final settlement and the pain
that it must cost you. Nothing else will cleanse your soul for you.

Tjaelde (weeping unrestrainedly, with his face buried in his hands). Oh,
oh!

Berent. You have blamed me for my method of proceeding in the matter.
My answer to that is that I forgive you for yours. (A pause.) Try now to
look the situation in the face, and take it like a man.

Tjaelde (as before). Oh!

Berent. At the bottom of your heart you must be weary of it all; make an
end of it all now!

Tjaelde (as before). Oh!

Berent (sitting down beside him, after a moment's pause). Wouldn't you
like to feel your conscience clear again--to be able really to live with
your wife and children? Because I am sure you have not done that for
many a day.

Tjaelde (as before). Oh!

Berent. I have known many speculators in my time and have received
many confessions. So I know what you have been robbed of for three
years--never a good night's rest, never a meal eaten with a light heart.
You have scarcely been conscious of what your children were doing or
saying, except when accident brought you together. And your wife--

Tjaelde. My wife!

Berent. Yes, she has slaved hard enough to prepare these banquets that
were to conceal the nakedness of the land. Indeed, she has been the
hardest worked servant in your house.

Tjaelde. My patient, good wife!

Berent. I feel certain you would rather be the humblest labourer earning
your daily bread than live through such suffering again.

Tjaelde. A thousand times rather!

Berent. Then can you hesitate to do what will give every man his due,
and bring you back to truthfulness again? Take the paper and sign it!

Tjaelde (falling on his knees). Mercy, mercy! You do not know what you
are asking me. My own children will curse me. I have just heard of a
child doing that to her father! And my business friends, who will be
ruined with me--numbers of them--think of their families! Oh! What is to
become of my work-people? Do you know there are more than four
hundred of them? Think of them and their families, robbed of their
livelihood!--Be merciful! I cannot, I dare not, do it! Save me, help me!
It was horrible of me to try and threaten you; but now I implore you,
for the sake of all those that deserve more than I, but to whom I shall
devote the rest of my life in loyal work!

Berent. I cannot save you, least of all with money that belongs to
others. What you ask me to do would be disloyalty to them.

Tjaelde. No, no! Publish my accounts openly--put me under trustees, if
you like; but let me go on with the scheme that I believe will succeed!
Every clear-headed man will see that it must succeed!

Berent. Come and sit down. Let us discuss it. (TJAELDE sits down.) Isn't
what you are now proposing exactly what you have been trying to do for
the last three years? You _have_ been able to borrow the means; but what
good has it done?

Tjaelde. Times have been so bad!

Berent (shaking his head). You have mixed up falsehood and truth for so
long that you have forgotten the simplest laws of commerce. To speculate
during bad times, on the chance of their becoming better, is all very
well for those who can afford it. Others must leave such things alone.

Tjaelde. But it is to the advantage of my creditors themselves, and of
the banks too, that my estate should hold together!

Berent. It is of no advantage to sound firms to prop up unsound ones.

Tjaelde. But, surely, to avoid losing their capital--?

Berent, Oh, perhaps in the Receiver's hands the estate may--

Tjaelde (hopefully, half rising from his chair). Yes? Well?

Berent. But not till you have been removed from the control of it.

Tjaelde (sinking down again). Not till I have been removed from the
control of it!

Berent. On _its own_ resources I dare say the estate can hold out until
better times come, but not on borrowed money.

Tjaelde. Not on borrowed money--

Berent. You understand the difference, of course?

Tjaelde. Oh, yes.

Berent. Good. Then you must understand that there is nothing left for
you to do but to sign this.

Tjaelde. Nothing left but to sign--

Berent. Here is the paper. Come, now!

Tjaelde (rousing himself). Oh, I cannot, I cannot!

Berent. Very well. But in that case the crash will come of itself in a
short time, and everything will be worse than it is now.

Tjaelde (falling on his knees).Mercy, mercy! I cannot let go of all
hope! Think, after a fight like mine!

Berent. Tell the truth and say: "I haven't the courage to face the
consequences."

Tjaelde. Yes, that is the truth.

Berent. "I haven't the courage to begin an honest life."

Tjaelde. Yes.

Berent. You don't know what you are saying, man!

Tjaelde. No, I don't. But spare me!

Berent (getting up). This is nothing but despair! I am sorry for you.

Tjaelde (getting up). Yes, surely you must be? Try me! Ask me to do
anything you like! Tell me what you--

Berent. No, no! Before anything else, you must sign this.

Tjaelde (sinking back into his chair). Oh!--How shall I ever dare to
look any one in the face again?--I, who, have defied everything and
deceived every one!

Berent. The man who has enjoyed the respect which he did not deserve
must some day undergo the humiliation which he has deserved. That is a
law; and I cannot save you from that.

Tjaelde. But they will be crueller to me than to any one else! I deserve
it, I know; but I shall not be able to endure it!

Berent. Hm! You are remarkably tough; your fight, these last three
years, proves that.

Tjaelde. Be merciful! Surely your ingenuity--your influence--_must_ be
able to find some way out for me?

Berent. Yes. The way out is for you to sign this.

Tjaelde. Won't you even take it over from me by private contract? If you
did that, everything would come right.

Berent. Sign! Here is the paper! Every hour is precious.

Tjaelde. Oh! (Takes up a pen; but turns to BERENT with a gesture of
supplication.) Daren't you test me, after what I have just gone through?

Berent. Yes, when you have signed. (TJAELDE signs the paper, and sinks
back in his chair with an expression of the keenest anguish. BERENT
takes the paper, folds it, and puts it in his pocket-book.) Now I will
go to the Bankruptcy Court with this, and afterwards to the telegraph
office. Probably the officials of the court will come this evening to
make their inventory. So you ought to warn your family.

Tjaelde. How shall I be able to do that? Give me a little time! Be
merciful!

Berent. The sooner the better for you--not to speak of the interests of
all concerned. Well, I have finished for the present.

Tjaelde. Don't desert me like this! Don't desert me!

Berent. You would like your wife to come to you, wouldn't you?

Tjaelde (resignedly). Yes.

Berent (taking up the revolver). And this--I will not take it with me.
There is no danger from it now. But I will put it in the desk, for the
sake of the others. Now, if you or yours should need me, send word to
me.

Tjaelde. Thank you.

Berent. I shall not leave the town until the worst is over.--Remember,
night or day, if you need me, send word to me.

Tjaelde. Thank you.

Berent. And now will you unlock the door for me?

Tjaelde (getting up). Ah, of course. Excuse me!

Berent (taking his hat and coat). Won't you call your wife now?

Tjaelde. No. I must have a little time first. I have the worst part of
it before me now.

Berent. I believe you have, and that is just why--. (Takes hold of the
bell-pull and rings the bell.)

Tjaelde. What are you doing?

Berent. I want, before I go, to be sure of your wife's coming to you.

Tjaelde. You should not have done that! (An office-boy comes in. BERENT
looks at TJAELDE.) Ask your mistress--ask my wife to come to me.

Berent. At once, please. (The boy goes out.) Good-bye! (Goes out.
TJAELDE sinks down on to a chair by the door.)

[The Curtain falls.]




ACT III

(SCENE.-The same as in the preceding act. TJAELDE is sitting alone, on
the chair by the door, in the position he was in when the curtain fell
on the last act. After sitting motionless for a considerable time, he
suddenly gets up.)

Tjaelde. How am I to begin? After her, there are the children; after
them, all my work-people--and then all the others! If only I could get
away! But the Receiver's men will be here.--I must have some air! (Goes
to the nearest window.) What a beautiful day!--but not for me. (Opens
the window and looks out.) My horse! No, I daren't look at it. Why is it
saddled? Oh, of course I meant, after my talk with Berent, to--. But
now everything is different! (Walks up and down once or twice, thinking;
then says suddenly:) Yes, on that horse I might reach the outer harbour
before the foreign boat sails! (Looks at his watch.) I can do it! And I
shall be able to put behind me all--. (Stops, with a start, as he hears
footsteps on the stair.) Who is there? What is it? (MRS. TJAELDE comes
down the stair into the room.)

Mrs. Tjaelde. You sent for me?

Tjaelde. Yes. (Watching her.) Were you upstairs?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Yes, I was resting.

Tjaelde (sympathetically). Ah, you were sleeping, and I woke you up!

Mrs. Tjaelde. No, I was not asleep. (She has come slowly forward.)

Tjaelde. You weren't asleep? (Apprehensively, to her.) I suppose you
didn't--? (To himself.) No, I daren't ask her.

Mrs. Tjaelde. What did you want?

Tjaelde. I wanted--. (Sees her eyes fixed on the revolver.) You are
surprised at my having that out? I got it out because I am going on a
journey.

Mrs. Tjaelde (supporting herself on the desk). Going on a journey?

Tjaelde. Yes. Mr. Berent has been here, as I dare say you know. (She
does not answer.) Business, you know. I have to go abroad.

Mrs. Tjaelde (faintly). Abroad?

Tjaelde. Only for a few days. So I will only take my usual bag with a
change of clothes and one or two shirts; but I must have it at once.

Mrs. Tjaelde. I don't think your bag has been unpacked since you brought
it home to-day.

Tjaelde. So much the better. Will you get it for me?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Are you going away now--at once?

Tjaelde. Yes, by the foreign boat--from the outer harbour.

Mrs. Tjaelde. You have no time to lose, then.

Tjaelde. Are you not well?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Not very.

Tiwlde. One of your attacks?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Yes!--but I must fetch your bag. (TJAELDE helps her over
to the staircase.)

Tjaelde. You are not well, my dear--but you will be better some day.

Mrs. Tjaelde. I only wish _you_ looked better.

Tjaelde. We all have our burdens to bear.

Mrs. Tjaelde. If only we could bear more together!

Tjaelde. But you don't understand my affairs--and I have never had time
to talk about yours.

Mrs. Tjaelde. No--that's it. (Begins to go upstairs slowly.)

Tjaelde. Shall I help you?

Mrs. Tjaelde. No, thank you, dear.

Tjaelde (coming forward). Does she suspect? She is always like that--she
takes all my courage away from me. But there is no other way! Now--about
money? I surely have some gold here somewhere. (Goes to his desk, takes
some gold out of a drawer and counts it; then lifts his head and sees
MRS. TJAELDE who has sat down on the stair half-way up.) My dear, are
you sitting down?

Mrs. Tjaelde. I felt faint for a moment. I will go up now. (Gets up and
climbs the stair slowly.)

Tjaelde. Poor thing, she is worn out. (Pulls himself together.)
No--five, six, eight, ten--that is not enough. I must have some more.
(Searches in the desk.) And when I run short I have my watch and chain.
Twenty, twenty-four--that is all I can find. Ah, my papers! I must on
no account forget them. The ground is falling away under me! Isn't she
coming back? The bag was packed, surely?--Ah, how all this will make her
suffer! But it will not be so bad for her if I am away. People will be
more merciful, both to her and the children. Oh, my children! (Collects
himself.) Only let me get away, away! Thoughts will follow me there, all
the same!--Ah, here she is! (MRS. TJAELDE is seen coming down slowly,
with a bag which is evidently, heavy.) Shall I help you, dear?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Thanks, will you take hold of the bag?

Tjaelde (takes it; she comes slowly down). It is heavier than it was
this morning.

Mrs. Tjaelde. Is it?

Tjaelde. I have some papers to put in it. (Opens the bag.) But, my dear,
there is money in this bag.

Mrs. Tjaelde. Yes--some gold that you have given me at odd times. I
thought it might be useful to you now.

Tjaelde. There is a large sum.

Mrs. Tjaelde. I don't believe you even know how much you have given me.

Tjaelde. She knows everything!--My dear! (Opens his arms.)

Mrs. Tjaelde. Henning! (They both burst into tears and fall into each
other's arms. MRS. TJAELDE whispers to him:) Shall I call the children?

Tjaelde (in a whisper). No, say nothing--till later! (They embrace
again. He takes up the bag.) Go to the window, so that I can see you
when I mount. (Shuts the bag and hurries to the door, but stops.) My
dear!

Mrs. Tjaelde. Yes?

Tjaelde. Forgive me!

Mrs. Tjaelde. Everything! (TJAELDE, as he is hurrying out, meets in the
doorway an office-boy who is bringing him a letter. TJAELDE takes it,
and the boy goes out.)

Tjaelde. From Berent! (Opens the letter, stands in the doorway and reads
it; then comes back into the room, with his bag in his hand, and reads
it again.) "When I left your house, I saw a horse standing saddled at
your door. To prevent misunderstanding, let me inform you that your
house is watched by the police."

Mrs. Tjaelde (supporting herself on the desk). You can't go?

Tjaelde. No. (A pause. He puts down the bag and wipes his forehead.)

Mrs. Tjaelde. Henning, shall we pray together?

Tjaelde. What do you mean?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Pray--pray to God to help us? (Bursts into tears. TJAELDE
is silent. She falls on her knees.) Come, Henning! You see that all
human ingenuity is of no avail!

Tjaelde. I know that, only too well.

Mrs. Tjaelde. Well, try once, in this hour of our greatest need!
(TJAELDE appears to be struggling with his emotion.) You never would!
You have never confided in us, or in your God!--never opened your heart
to any one!

Tjaelde. Be quiet!

Mrs. Tjaelde. But what you concealed by day, you used to talk of in
the night. We mortals must talk, you know! But I have lain awake and
listened to your distress. Now you know why I am no longer good for
anything. No sleep at night, and none of your confidence in the daytime.
I have suffered even more than you. (TJAELDE throws himself into a
chair. She goes to him.) You wanted to run away. When we are afraid of
our fellow-men, we have only Him to turn to. Do you think I should be
alive now, if it were not for Him?

Tjaelde. I have thrown myself imploringly at His feet, but always in
vain!

Mrs. Tjaelde. Henning, Henning!

Tjaelde. Why did He not bless my work and the fight I was making? It is
all one now.

Mrs. Tjaelde. Ah, there is more to come.

Tjaelde (getting up). Yes, the worst is before us now--

Mrs. Tjaelde.--because it is in our own hearts! (A pause. VALBORG
appears coming down the stair, but stops at the sight of the others.)
What do you want, dear?

Valborg (with suppressed emotion). From my room I can see the police
watching the house. Are the Receiver's men coming now?

Mrs. Tjaelde (sitting down). Yes, my child. After a terrible
struggle--how terrible, his God and I alone know--your father has just
sent in his declaration of bankruptcy. (VALBORG takes a step or two
forward, then stands still. A pause.)

Tjaelde (unable to control himself). Now I suppose you will say to me
just what Möller's daughter said to him!

Mrs. Tjaelde (getting up). You won't do that, Valborg!--God alone can
judge him.

Tjaelde. Tell me how cruelly I have wronged you! Tell me that you will
never be able to forgive me--(breaking down)--that I have lost your
respect and your love for ever!

Mrs. Tjaelde. Oh, my child!

Tjaelde. That your anger and your shame know no bounds!

Valborg. Oh, father, father! (Goes out by the door at the back. TJAELDE
tries to cross the room, as if to follow her, but can only stagger as
far as the staircase, to which he clings for support. MRS. TJAELDE sinks
back into her chair. There is a long pause. Suddenly JAKOBSEN cones in
from the outer once, dressed as before except that he has changed his
coat. TJAELDE is not aware of his entrance until JAKOBSEN is close
to him; then he stretches out his hands to him as if in entreaty, but
JAKOBSEN goes right up to him and speaks in a voice choked with rage.)

Jakobsen. You scoundrel! (TJAELDE recoils.)

Mrs. Tjaelde. Jakobsen! Jakobsen!

Jakobsen (without heeding her). The Receiver's men are here. The books
and papers at the Brewery have been seized. Work is at a standstill--and
the same thing at the factory.

Mrs. Tjaelde. My God!

Jakobsen. And I had made myself responsible for twice as much as
I possessed! (He speaks low, but his voice vibrates with anger and
emotion.)

Mrs. Tjaelde. Dear Jakobsen!

Jakobsen (turning to her). Didn't I say to him, every time he told me
to sign, "But I don't possess as much as that! It's not right!"--But he
used to answer, "It is only a matter of form, Jakobsen." "Yes, but
not an honourable form," I used to say. "It is a matter of form in
business," he would say; "all business folk do it." And all I knew of
business, I had learnt from him; so I trusted him. (With emotion.) And
he made me do it time after time. And now I owe more than I shall ever
be able to pay, all my life. I shall live and die a dishonoured man.
What have you to say to that, Mrs. Tjaelde? (She does not answer him. He
turns angrily upon TJAELDE.) Do you hear? Even _she_ can find nothing to
say!--Scoundrel!

Mrs. Tjaelde. Jakobsen!

Jakobsen (in a voice broken with emotion). I have nothing but the
deepest respect for you, Mrs. Tjaelde. But, you see, he has made me
swindle other people! In his name I shall have ruined numbers of them.
They trusted me, you see; just as I trusted him. I used to tell them
that he was a benefactor to the whole countryside, and that therefore
they ought to help him in these hard times. And now there will be many
an honest family robbed of house and home by our treachery. And that is
what he has brought me to! What heartless cruelty! (To TJAELDE.) I can
tell I feel inclined to--. (Takes a threatening step towards him.)

Mrs. Tjaelde (getting up). For my sake, Jakobsen!

Jakobsen (restraining himself). Yes, for your sake, ma'am; because I
have the deepest respect for you. But how am I to face all those poor
creatures that I have ruined? It will do them no good to explain to them
how it has happened; that won't help them to get their daily bread! How
shall I face my own wife! (With emotion.) She has had such faith in
me, and in those I trusted. And my children, too? It is very hard on
children, because they hear so much talk in the street. It won't be long
before they hear what sort of a father they have got; and they will hear
it from the children of the men I have ruined.

Mrs. Tjaelde. As you feel how hard it is yourself, that should make you
willing to spare others. Be merciful!

Jakobsen. I have the deepest respect for you; but it is hard that in my
home we should never again be able to eat a crust that we can properly
call our own--for I owe more than I can ever live to repay! That is
hard, Mrs. Tjaelde! What will become of my evenings with my children
now?--of our Sundays together? No, I mean that he shall hear the truth
from me. (Turns upon TJAELDE.) You scoundrel! You shan't escape me!
(TJAELDE shrinks back in terror and tries to reach the office door, but
at that moment the RECEIVER comes in, followed by two of his clerks and
SANNAES. TJAELDE crosses the room, staggers to his desk, and leans upon
it with his back turned to the newcomers.)

The Receiver (coming up behind Tjaelde). Excuse me! May I have your
books and papers? (TJAELDE gives a start, moves away to the stove, and
supports himself on it.)

Jakobsen (in a whisper, standing over him). Scoundrel! (TJAELDE moves
away from him and sits down on a chair by the door, hiding his face in
his hands.)

Mrs. Tjaelde (getting up and whispering to JAKOBSEN), Jakobsen!
Jakobsen! (He comes towards her.) He has never deliberately cheated
any one! He has never been what you say, and never will be! (Sits down
again.)

Jakobsen. I have the deepest respect for _you_, Mrs. Tjaelde. But if
_he_ is not a liar and swindler, there is no truth in anything! (Bursts
into tears. MRS. TJAELDE hides her face in her hands as she leans back
in her chair. A short silence. Then a confused noise of voices is
heard without. The RECEIVER and his men stop their work of sorting and
inventorying papers, and all look up.)

Mrs. Tjaelde (apprehensively). What is that? (SANNAES and the RECEIVER
go to one window, and JAKOBSEN to another.)

Jakobsen. It's the hands from the quay and the brewery and the factory
and the warehouse. All work is stopped until further orders; but this is
pay-day--and there is no pay for them! (The others resume their work.)

Tjaelde (coming forward despairingly). I had forgotten that!

Jakobsen (going up to him). Well, go out and face them, and they will
let you know what you are!

Tjaelde (in a low voice, as he takes up his saddle-bag). Here is money,
but it is all in gold. Go into the town and get it changed, and pay
them!

Mrs. Tjaelde. Yes, do, Jakobsen!

Jakobsen (in lower tones). If _you_ ask me to, ma'am, I--So there is
money in this bag? (Opens it.) And all done up in rolls. He meant to
bolt, then!--and with the money his people had lent him. And yet you
say he is not a scoundrel! (TJAELDE gives a groan. The noise of voices
without grows louder.)

Mrs. Tjaelde (in a low voice). Be quick, or we shall have them in here.

Jakobsen. I will go.

The Receiver (interposing). Excuse me, but nothing must be taken away
from here until it has been examined and inventoried.

Jakobsen. It is pay-day, and this is the money for the wages.

Mrs. Tjaelde. Jakobsen is responsible for it, and will account for it.

The Receiver. Oh, that alters the case. Mr. Jakobsen is a man of
integrity. (Goes back to his work.)

Jakobsen (to MRS. TJAELDE, in a low voice full of emotion). Did you hear
that, Mrs. Tjaelde? He called me a man of integrity--and very soon not
a single soul will call me that! (Goes out past TJAELDE to whom he
whispers as he passes:) Scoundrel! I shall come back again!

The Receiver (going up to TJAELDE). Excuse me, but I must ask you for
the keys of your private rooms and cupboards.

Mrs. Tjaelde (answering for her husband). My housekeeper shall go with
you. Sannaes, here is the key of the cupboard. (SANNAES takes it from
her.)

The Receiver (looking at TJAELDE'S massive watch-chain). Whatever
article of dress can be called a necessary, we have nothing to do with;
but if it happens that it comrises jewellery of any great value--.
(TJAELDE begins to take off the watch-chain.) No, no; keep it on. But it
will have to be included in the inventory.

Tjaelde. I don't wish to keep it.

The Receiver. As you please. (Signs to one of his clerks to take it.)
Good-day! (Meanwhile SIGNE and HAMAR have appeared at the door of the
outer office, and have seen what passed. The RECEIVER, SANNAES, and the
clerks try to open the door on the right, but find it locked.) This door
is locked.

Tjaelde (as if waking from a dream). Ah, of course! (Goes to the door
and unlocks it.)

Signe (rushing to MRS. TJAELDE and falling on her knees beside her).
Mother!

Mrs. Tjaelde. Yes, dear, the day of our trial has come! And I am
afraid--afraid that it may find us all too weak.

Signe. Mother, what is to become of us?

Mrs. Tjaelde. We are in God's hands.

Signe. I will go with Hamar to his aunt's. We will go at once.

Mrs. Tjaelde. It is possible that his aunt may not be willing to have
you now.

Signe. Aunt Ulla! What do you mean?

Mrs. Tjaelde. I mean that you have been the rich man's daughter; and you
do not know what the world is.

Signe. Hamar, do you think Aunt Ulla would refuse to have me?

Hamar (after a moment's thought). I don't know.

Mrs. Tjaelde. You hear that, my child. In the next few hours you will
learn more than you have learnt in all your life.

Signe (in a horrified whisper). Do you mean that even--?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Hush! (SIGNE hides her face in her mother's lap. A loud
burst of laughter is heard outside.)

Hamar (going to the nearest window). What is that? (SANNAES comes in
through the right-hand door and goes to the other window. TJAELDE, SIGNE
and MRS. TJAELDE get up.) The bay horse! They have got hold of it.

Sannaes. They have led it up the steps, and are pretending to sell it by
auction.

Hamar. They are ill-treating it! (SANNAES runs out. HAMAR snatches up
the revolver from the desk and looks to see if it is loaded.) I will--!

Signe. What are you going to do? (As he starts to go out, she clings to
him and prevents him.)

Hamar. Let me go!

Signe. Tell me first what you are going to do! Do you mean to go out
among all those men--alone?

Hamar. Yes.

Signe (throwing her arms round him). You shan't go!

Hamar. Take care, this is loaded!

Signe. What are you going to do with it?

Hamar (in a determined voice, as he shakes himself free of her). Put a
bullet into the poor beast! It is too good for that crew. It shan't be
put up for auction, either in joke or in earnest! (Goes to the farther
window.) I shall get a better aim from here.

Signe (following him, with a cry). You will hit some one!

Hamar. No, I can aim too well for that. (Takes aim.)

Signe. Father! If they hear a shot from here now--

Tjaelde (starting up). The house belongs to my creditors now--and the
revolver too!

Hamar. No, I am past taking orders from you now! (TJAELDE snatches at
the revolver, which goes off. SIGNE screams and rushes to her mother.
Outside, but this time immediately below the window, two cries are
heard: "They are shooting at us! They are shooting at us!" Then the
noise of breaking glass is heard, and stones fly in through the windows,
followed by shouts and ribald laughter. VALBORG, who has rushed in from
the outer office, stands in front of her father to protect him, her face
turned to the window. A voice is heard: "Follow me, my lads!")

Hamar (pointing the revolver at the window). Yes, just you try it!

Mrs. Tjaelde and Signe. They are coming in here!

Valborg. You shan't shoot! (Stands between him and the window.)

Tjaelde. It is Sannaes with the police! (Cries of "Get back, there!" are
heard; then a renewed uproar and a loud voice gradually dominating it;
until at last the noise gradually lessens and ceases.)

Mrs. Tjaelde. Thank God! We were in great danger. (Sinks into a chair.
A pause.) Henning, where are you? (TJAELDE comes up behind her, and
strokes her head with his hand, but turns away immediately to hide his
deep emotion. A pause.)

Signe (on her knees by her mother's side). But won't they come back?
Hadn't we better go away from here?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Where to?

Signe (despairingly). What is to become of us?

Mrs. Tjaelde. What God wills. (A pause. Meanwhile HAMAR, unobserved,
has laid down the revolver on a chair and slipped out of the room by the
door at the back.)

Valborg (softly). Signe, look! (SIGNE gets up, looks round the room, and
gives a little cry.)

Mrs. Tjaelde. What is it?

Signe. I knew he would!

Mrs. Tjaelde (apprehensively). What is it?

Valborg. Every rich family has its tame lieutenant--and ours has just
left us. That's all.

Mrs. Tjaelde (getting up). Signe, my child!

Signe (throwing herself into her arms). Mother!

Mrs. Tjaelde. There will be no more pretence now. Do not let us regret
it!

Signe (in tears). Mother, mother!

Mrs. Tjaelde. Things are better as they are. Do you hear, dear? Don't
cry!

Signe. I am not crying! but I feel so ashamed--oh, so ashamed!

Mrs. Tjaelde. It is I that ought to feel ashamed for never having had
the courage to put a stop to what I saw was folly.

Signe (as before). Mother!

Mrs. Tjaelde. Soon there will be no one else left to desert us; and we
shall have nothing left that any one can rob us of, either.

Valborg (comes forward evidently labouring under great emotion). Yes,
there is, mother; _I_ mean to desert you.

Signe. You, Valborg? Desert us? You?

Valborg. Our home is going to be broken up, anyway. Each of us ought to
shift for herself.

Signe. But what am I to do? I don't know how to do anything.

Mrs. Tjaelde (who has sunk back into her chair). What a bad mother I
must have been, not to be able to keep my children together now!

Valborg (impetuously). You know we cannot stay together now! You know we
cannot put up with living on the charity of our creditors; we have done
that too long!

Mrs. Tjaelde. Hush, remember your father is in the room. (A pause.) What
do you want to do, Valborg?

Valborg (after she has regained her self-control, quietly). I want to go
into Mr. Holst's office, and learn commercial work--and keep myself.

Mrs. Tjaelde. You don't know what you are undertaking.

Valborg. But I know what I am leaving.

Signe. And I shall only be a burden to you, mother, because I can't do
anything--

Valborg. You _can_! Go out and earn a living; even if it is only as a
servant, what does that matter? Don't live on our creditors--not for a
day, not for an hour!

Signe. And what is to become of mother, then?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Your mother will stay with your father.

Signe. But all alone? You, who are so ill?

Mrs. Tjaelde. No, not alone! Your father and I will be together.
(TJAELDE comes forward, kisses the hand she has stretched out to him,
and falls on his knees by her chair, burying his face in her lap. She
strokes his hair gently.) Forgive your father, children. That is the
finest thing you can do. (TJAELDE gets up again and goes back to the
other end of the room. A messenger comes in with a letter.)

Signe (turning round anxiously). It is a letter from him! I can't stand
any more! I won't have it! (The messenger hands the letter to TJAELDE.)

Tjaelde. I accept no more letters.

Valborg (looking at the letter). It is from Sannaes?

Tjaelde. He, too!

Mrs. Tjaelde. Take it and read it, Valborg. Let us get it all over at
once. (VALBORG takes the letter from the messenger, who goes out. She
opens the letter, looks at it, and then reads it with emotion.) "Sir,--I
have owed you everything since I entered your employment as a boy.
Therefore do not take what I am going to say amiss. You know that about
eight years ago I came into a little legacy. I have used the money to
some advantage, having especially looked out for such investments as
would not be affected by the uncertainties of high finance. The total
sum, which now amounts to about £1400, I beg to offer to you as a token
of respectful gratitude; because, in the end, I owe it to you that I
have been able to make it that sum. Besides, you will be able to make
many times better use of it than I could. If you need me, my dearest
wish is to remain with you in the future. Forgive me for having seized
just this moment for doing this; I could not do otherwise.--Your
obedient servant, J. SANNAES." (While VALBORG has been reading, TJAELDE
has come gradually forward, and is now standing beside his wife.)

Mrs. Tjaelde. Though out of all those you have helped, Henning, only one
comes to your aid at a time like this, you must feel that you have your
reward. (TJAELDE nods, and goes to the back of the room again.) And you,
children--do you see how loyally this man, a stranger, is standing by
your father? (A pause. SIGNE stands by the desk, crying. TJAELDE walks
up and down uneasily at the back of the room once or twice, then goes up
the staircase.)

Valborg. I should like to speak to Sannaes.

Mrs. Tjaelde. Yes, do, dear! I couldn't, just now; and I am sure your
father couldn't either. You speak to him! (Gets up.) Come, Signe, you
and I must have a talk; you must open your heart to me now.--Ah, when
have we ever had a real talk together? (SIGNE goes to her.) Where is
your father?

Valborg. He went upstairs.

Mrs. Tjaelde (leaning on SIGNE's arm). So he did. I am sure he must be
longing to rest--although he won't find it easy to do that. It has been
a terrible day; but surely God will turn it to our good! (Goes out
with SIGNE. VALBORG goes to the back of the room and rings the bell. A
messenger comes.)

Valborg. If Mr. Sannaes is out there, please ask him to be so good as
to come in here for a moment. (The messenger goes out.) Perhaps he won't
come, when he hears it is I. (Listens.) Yes, he is coming!

(SANNAES comes in, but stops short when he sees VALBORG, and hurriedly
puts his hands behind his back.)

Sannaes. Is it you, Miss Valborg, that want me?

Valborg. Please come in. (SANNAES takes a few timid steps forward.
VALBORG speaks in a more friendly tone.) Come in, then! (SANNAES comes
further into the room.)

Valborg. You have written a letter to my father.

Sannaes (after a moment's pause). Yes.

Valborg. And made him a most generous offer.

Sannaes (as before). Oh, well--it was only natural that I should.

Valborg. Do you think so? It doesn't seem so to me. It is an offer that
honours the man that made it. (A pause.)

Sannaes. I hope he means to accept it?

Valborg. I don't know.

Sannaes (sadly, after a moment's pause). Then he doesn't mean to? No--I
suppose not.

Valborg. I honestly don't know. It depends on whether he dare.

Sannaes. Whether he dare?

Valborg. Yes. (A pause.)

Sannaes (evidently very shy of VALBORG). Have you any more orders for
me, Miss Valborg?

Valborg (with a smile). Orders? I am not giving you orders.--You have
offered also to stay with my father for the future.

Sannaes. Yes--that is to say, if he wishes me to.

Valborg. I don't know. In that case there would be only he and my mother
and you; no one else.

Sannaes. Indeed? What about the others, then?

Valborg. I don't know for certain what my sister means to do--but I am
leaving home to-day.

Sannaes. Then you are going to--

Valborg.--to try and get a clerkship somewhere. So that it will be a bit
lonely for you to be in my father's employment now. (A pause.) I expect
you had not thought of it in that light?

Sannaes. No--yes--that is to say, your father will have all the more
need of me then.

Valborg. Indeed he will. But what sort of a prospect is it for you
to bind up your fortunes with my father's? The future is so very
problematical, you know.

Sannaes. What sort of a prospect--?

Valborg. Yes, a young man should have some sort of a prospect before
him.

Sannaes. Yes--of course; that is to say, I only thought that at first it
would be so difficult for him.

Valborg. But I am thinking of you. Surely you have some plans for the
future?

Sannaes (embarrassed). Really I would rather not talk about myself.

Valborg. But I want to.--You have something else in reserve, then?

Sannaes. Well--if I must tell you--I have some well-to-do relations in
America who have for a long time wanted me to go over there. I should
soon be able to get, a good situation there.

Valborg. Indeed?--But why haven't you accepted such a good offer long
before this? (SANNAES does not answer.) You must have been sacrificing
your best interests by staying so long with us? (SANNAES is still
silent.) Any! it will be making a still greater sacrifice to stay with
us now--

Sannaes (struggling with his embarrassment). I have never thought of it
as being that.

Valborg. But my father can scarcely accept so much from you.

Sannaes (in alarm). Why not?

Valborg. Because it really would be too much.--And, in any case, I shall
try to prevent him.

Sannaes (almost imploringly). You, Miss Valborg?

Valborg. Yes. You must not be misemployed any longer.

Sannaes. Misemployed? In what I _myself_ desire so much?

Valborg. When I have talked it over with my father, I think he will see
my point.

Sannaes (anxiously). What do you mean?

Valborg (after a moment's reflection).--I mean, the reason of your
having made such great sacrifices for us--and of your being willing to
make still greater now. (A pause. SANNAES hangs his head, and is raising
his hands to hide his face, when suddenly he puts them behind his back
again. VALBORG continues, in gentle but firm tones:) I have taught
myself, all my life, to look behind deeds and words for their motives.

Sannaes (quietly, without raising his head). You have taught yourself to
be cruelly bitter, hard and unjust.

Valborg (starts, but collects herself, and says gently:) Don't say that,
Mr. Sannaes! It is not hard-heartedness or bitterness that makes me
think of your future now--and makes me wish to spare you disappointment.

Sannaes (with a cry of pain). Miss Valborg!

Valborg. Be honest with yourself, and you will be able to take a fairer
view of what I have just said.

Sannaes. Have you any more orders, Miss Valborg?

Valborg. I give you no orders, as I have told you already. I am only
bidding you good-bye; and I do it with grateful thanks to you for all
your goodness to me--and to us all. Good-bye and good luck, Mr. Sannaes.
(SANNAES bows.)Won't you shake hands? Ah, I forgot--I offended you.
I beg your pardon for that. (SANNAES bows and turns to go.) Come, Mr.
Sannaes--let us at least part as good friends! You are going to America,
and I am going among strangers. Let us go away wishing one another well.

Sannaes (moved). Good-bye, Miss Valborg. (Turns to go.)

Valborg. Mr. Sannaes--shake hands!

Sannaes (stopping). No, Miss Valborg.

Valborg. Don't treat me uncivilly; I have not deserved that. (SANNAES
again turns to go.) Mr. Sannaes!

Sannaes (stopping). You might soil your fingers, Miss Valborg! (Walks
proudly away.)

Valborg (controlling herself with an effort). Well, we have offended
each other now. But why should we not forgive each other as well?

Sannaes. Because you have just offended me for the second time
to-day--and more deeply than the first time.

Valborg. Oh, this is too much! I spoke as I did, because I owed it to
myself not to be put in a false position, and owed it to you to spare
you future disappointment. And you call that insulting you! Which of us
has insulted the other, I should like to know?

Sannaes. You have, by thinking such things of me. Do you realise how
cruelly you have spoilt the happiest action of my life?

Valborg. I have done so quite unintentionally, then. I am only glad that
I was mistaken.

Sannes (bitterly). You are glad! So it really makes you glad to know
that I am not a scoundrel!

Valborg (quietly). Who said anything of the kind?

Sannaes. You! You know the weak spot in my armour; but that you should
on that account believe that I could lay a trap for you and try to trade
on your father's misfortune, Miss Valborg--! No, I cannot shake hands
with any one who has thought so badly of me as that! And, since you have
so persistently insulted me that I have lost all the timidity I used
to feel in your presence, let me tell you this openly; these hands
(stretching out his hands to her) have grown red and ugly in loyal work
for your father, and his daughter should have been above mocking at me
for them! (Turns to go, but stops.) And, one word more. Ask your father
for _his_ hand now, and hold fast to it, instead of deserting him on the
very day that misfortune has overtaken him. That would be more to the
point than worrying about _my_ future. I can look after that for myself.
(Turns again to go, but comes back.) And when, in his service--which
will be no easy service now--your hands bear the same honourable marks
of work as mine do, and are as red as mine, then you will perhaps
understand how you have hurt me! At present you cannot. (He goes quickly
towards the door of the outer office.)

Valborg (with a wry smile). What a temper! (More seriously.) And
yet, after all--. (Looks after him. Just as SANNAES gets to the door
TJAELDE'S voice is heard calling him from the top of the staircase.
SANNAES answers him.)

Tjaelde (coming down the stairs). Sannaes! Sannaes! I can see Jakobsen
coming. (Hurries across the room as if pursued by fear. SANNAES follows
him.) Of course he will be coming back to look for me again! It is
cowardly of me to feel that I cannot stand it; but I cannot--not to-day,
not now! I cannot stand any more! Stop him! Don't let him come in! I
shall have to drink my cup of misery to the dregs; but (almost in a
whisper) not all at one draught! (Hides his face in his hands.)

Sannaes. He shan't come; don't be afraid! (Goes quickly out, with an air
of determination.)

Tjaelde. It is hard--oh, it is hard!

Valborg (coming to his side). Father! (He looks at her, anxiously.) You
may safely accept the money Sannaes offers you.

Tjaelde (in surprise). What do you mean by that?

Valborg. I mean--that, if you do, I will not forsake you either, but
stay here with you too.

Tjaelde (incredulously). You, Valborg?

Valborg. Yes, you know I want to learn office work, and business; and I
would rather learn in your office.

Tjaelde (shyly). I don't understand what you--?

Valborg. Don't you understand, dear? I believe I could become of some
use in the office. And in that way, you know, we might begin afresh--and
try, with God's help, to pay your creditors.

Tjaelde (happily, but shyly). My child! Who put such a happy idea into
your head?

Valborg (putting an arm round his neck). Father, forgive me for all that
I have neglected to do! You shall see how I will try and make up for it!
How hard I shall work!

Tjaelde (still half incredulous). My child! My child!

Valborg. I feel--I cannot tell you how deeply--a craving for love and
for work! (Throws both her arms round his neck.) Oh, father, how I love
you!--and how I shall work for you!

Tjaelde. Ah, that is the Valborg I have waited for, ever since you were
a little child! But we had drifted away from one another, somehow.

Valborg. No more about the past! Look forward, father, look forward!
Concerns "that would not be affected by the uncertainties of high
finance,"--weren't those his words?

Tjaelde. So you were struck by that expression, too?

Valborg. That may mean a future for us now! We will have a home all to
ourselves--a little house down on the shore--and I shall help you, and
Signe will help mother--we shall know what it is to live, for the first
time!

Tjaelde. What happiness it will be!

Valborg. Only look forward, father! Look forward! A united family is
invincible!

Tjaelde. And to think that such help should come to me now!

Valborg. Yes, now we are all going to our posts--and all together, where
formerly you stood alone! You will have good fairies round you; wherever
you look, you will see happy faces and busy fingers all day long; and we
shall all enjoy our meals and our evenings together, just as we did when
we were children!

Tjaelde. That, above everything!

Valborg. Ha, ha!--it is after the rain that the birds sing blithest, you
know! And this time our happiness can never miscarry, because we shall
have something worth living for!

Tjaelde. Let us go to your mother! This will cheer her heart!

Valborg. Ah, how I have learnt to love her! What has happened to-day has
taught me.

Tjaelde. It is for her that we shall all work now.

Valborg. Yes--for her, for her. She shall rest now. Let us go to her!

Tjaelde. Kiss me first, my dear. (His voice trembles.) It is so long
since you did!

Valborg (kissing him). Father!

Tjaelde. Now let us go to your mother. (The curtain falls as they go out
together.)




ACT IV

(SCENE.--In the garden of TJAELDE'S new home, on the shore of the fjord,
three years later. A view of tranquil sunlit sea, dotted with boats, in
the background. On the left a portion of the house is seen, with an open
window within which VALBORG is seen writing at a desk. The garden is
shaded with birch trees; flower-beds run round the house, and the whole
atmosphere one of modest comfort. Two small garden tables and several
chairs are in the foreground on the right. A chair standing by itself,
further back, has evidently had a recent occupant. When the curtain
rises the stage is empty, but VALBORG is visible at the open window.
Soon afterwards TJAELDE comes in, wheeling MRS. TJAELDE in an invalid
chair.)

Mrs. Tjaelde. Another lovely day!

Tjaelde. Tjaelde. Lovely! There was not a ripple on the sea last night.
I saw a couple of steamers far out, and a sailing ship that had hove to,
and the fisher-boats drifting silently in.

Mrs. Tjaelde. And think of the storm that was raging two days ago!

Tjaelde. And think of the storm that broke over our lives barely three
years ago! I was thinking of that in the night.

Mrs. Tjaelde. Sit down here with me.

Tjaelde. Shall we not continue our stroll?

Mrs. Tjaelde. The sun is too hot.

Tjaelde. Not for me.

Mrs. Tjaelde. You big strong man! It is too hot for me.

Tjaelde (taking a chair). There you are, then.

Mrs. Tjaelde (taking off his hat and wiping his forehead). You are very
hot, dear. You have never looked so handsome as you do now!

Tjaelde. That's just as well, as you have so much time to admire me now!

Mrs. Tjaelde. Now that I find getting about so difficult, you mean? Ah,
that is only my pretence, so as to get you to wheel me about!

Tjaelde (with a sigh). Ah, my dear, it is good of you to take it so
cheerfully. But that you should be the only one of us to bear such hard
traces of our misfortune--

Mrs. Tjaelde (interrupting him). Do you forget your own whitened hair?
That is a sign of it, too, but a beautiful one! And, as for my being an
invalid, I thank God every day for it! In the first place I have almost
no pain, and then it gives me the opportunity to feel how good you are
to me in every way.

Tjaelde. You enjoy your life, then?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Yes, indeed I do--and just as I should wish to.

Tjaelde. Just to be spoiled, and yourself to spoil us?

Valborg (from the window). I have finished the accounts, father.

Tjaelde. Doesn't it come out at about what I said?

Valborg. Almost exactly. Shall I enter it in the ledger at once?

Tjaelde. Oho! You are glad then, as you seem in such it hurry?

Valborg. Certainly! Such a good stroke of business!

Tjaelde. And both you and Sannaes tried your best to dissuade me from
it!

Valborg. Such a pair of wiseacres!

Mrs. Tjaelde. Ah, your father is your master, my dear!

Tjaelde. Tjaelde. Oh, it is easy enough to captain a small army that
marches on, instead of a big one that is in retreat. (VALBORG goes on
with her work.)

Mrs. Tjaelde. And yet it seemed hard enough for us to give it up.

Tjaelde. Yes, yes--oh, yes. I can tell you, I was thinking of that last
night. If God had given me what I begged for then, what state should we
have been in now? I was thinking of that, too.

Mrs. Tjaelde. It is the fact of the estate being at last wound up that
has brought all these thoughts into your mind, dear?

Tjaelde. Yes.

Mrs. Tjaelde. Then I must confess that I, too, have scarcely been able
to think of anything else since yesterday, when Sannaes went into town
to settle it up. This a red-letter day! Signe is wrestling with a little
banquet for us; we shall see what an artist she has become! Here she is!

Tjaelde. I think I will just go and look over Valborg's accounts. (Goes
to the window. SIGNE comes out of the house, wearing a cook's apron and
carrying a basin.)

Signe. Mother, you must taste my soup! (Offers her a spoonful.)

Mrs. Tjaelde. Clever girl! (Tastes the soup.) Perhaps it would stand a
little--. No, it is very good as it is. You are clever!

Signe. Am I not! Will Sannaes be back soon?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Your father says we may expect him any moment.

Tjaelde (at the window, to VALBORG). No, wait a moment. I will come in.
(Goes into the house, and is seen within the window beside VALBORG.)

Mrs. Tjaelde. My little Signe, I want to ask you something?

Signe. Do you?

Mrs. Tjaelde. What was in the letter you had yesterday evening?

Signe. Aha, I might have guessed that was it! Nothing, mother.

Mrs. Tjaelde. Nothing that pained you, then?

Signe. I slept like a top all night--so you can judge for yourself.

Mrs. Tjaelde. I am so glad. But, you know, there seems to me something a
little forced in the gay way you say that?

Signe. Does there? Well, it was something that I shall always be ashamed
of; that is all.

Mrs. Tjaelde. I am thankful to hear it, for--

Signe (interrupting her). That must be Sannaes. I hear wheels. Yes, here
he is! He has come too soon; dinner won't be ready for half an hour yet.

Mrs. Tjaelde. That doesn't matter.

Signe. Father, here is Sannaes!

Tjaelde (from within). Good! I will come out! (SIGNE goes into the house
as TJAELDE comes out. SANNAES comes in a moment later.)

Tjaelde and Mrs. Tjaelde. Welcome!

Sannaes. Thank you! (Lays down his dust-coat and driving gloves on a
chair, and comes forward.)

Tjaelde. Well?

Sannaes. Yes--your bankruptcy is discharged!

Mrs. Tjaelde. And the result was--?

Sannaes. Just about what we expected.

Tjaelde. And, I suppose, just about what Mr. Berent wrote?

Sannaes. Just about, except for one or two inconsiderable trifles. You
can see for yourself. (Gives him a bundle of papers.) The high prices
that have ruled of late, and good management, have altered the whole
situation.

Tjaelde (who has opened the papers and glanced at the totals). A deficit
of £12,000.

Sannaes. I made a declaration on your behalf, that you intended to
try and repay that sum, but that you should be at liberty to do it in
whatever way you found best. And so--

Tjaelde. And so--?

Sannaes.--I proferred on the spot rather more than half the amount you
still owed Jakobsen.

Mrs. Tjaelde. Not really? (TJAELDE takes out a pencil and begins making
calculations on the margins of the papers.)

Sannaes. There was general satisfaction--and they all sent you their
cordial congratulations.

Mrs. Tjaelde. So that, if all goes well--

Tjaelde. Yes, if things go as well with the business as they promise
to, Sannaes, in twelve or fourteen years I shall have paid every one in
full.

Mrs. Tjaelde. We haven't much longer than that left to live, dear!

Tjaelde. Then we shall die poor. And I shall not complain!

Mrs. Tjaelde. No, indeed! The honourable name you will leave to your
children will be well worth it.

Tjaelde. And they will inherit a sound business, which they can go on
with if they choose.

Mrs. Tjaelde. Did you hear that, Valborg?

Valborg (from the window). Every word! (SANNAES bows to her.) I must go
in and tell Signe! (Moves away from the window.)

Mrs. Tjaelde. What did Jakobsen say?--honest old Jakobsen?

Sannaes. He was very much affected, as you would expect. He will
certainly be coming out here to-day.

Tjaelde (looking up from the papers). And Mr. Berent?

Sannaes. He is coming hard on my heels. I was to give you his kind
regards and tell you so.

Tjaelde. Splendid! We owe him so much.

Mrs. Tjaelde. Yes, he has been a true friend to us. But, talking of true
friends, I have something particular to ask _you_, Sannaes.

Sannaes. Me, Mrs. Tjaelde?

Mrs. Tjaelde. The maid told me that yesterday, when you went into town,
you took the greater part of your belongings with you. Is that so?

Sannaes. Yes, Mrs. Tjaelde.

Tjaelde. What does that mean? (To his wife.) You said nothing about it
to me, my dear.

Mrs. Tjaelde. Because I thought it might be a misunderstanding. But now
I must ask what was the meaning of it. Are you going away?

Sannaes (fingering a chair, in evident confusion). Yes, Mrs. Tjaelde.

Tjaelde. Where to? You never said anything about it.

Sannaes. No; but I have always considered that I should have finished my
task here as soon as the estate was finally wound up.

Tjaelde and Mrs. Tjaelde. You mean to leave us?

Sannaes. Yes.

Tjaelde. But why?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Where do you mean to go?

Sannaes. To my relations in America. I can now, without doing you any
harm, withdraw my capital from the business by degrees and transfer it
abroad.

Tjaelde. And dissolve our partnership?

Sannaes. You know that at any rate you had decided now to resume the old
style of the firm's name.

Tjaelde. That is true; but, Sannaes, what does it all mean? What is your
reason?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Are you not happy here, where we are all so attached to
you?

Tjaelde. You have quite as good a prospect for the future here as in
America.

Mrs. Tjaelde. We held together in evil days; are we not to hold together
now that good days have come?

Sannaes. I owe you both so much.

Mrs. Tjaelde. Good heavens, it is we that owe you--

Tjaelde.--more than we can ever repay. (Reproachfully.) Sannaes!

(SIGNE comes in, having taken off her cooking apron.)

Signe. Congratulations! Congratulations! Father mother! (Kisses them
both.) Welcome, Sannaes!--But aren't you pleased?--now? (A pause.
VALBORG comes in.)

Valborg. What has happened?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Sannaes wants to leave us, my children (A pause.)

Signe. But, Sannaes--!

Tjaelde. Even if you want to go away, why have you never said a single
word to us about it before? (To the others.) Or has he spoken to any of
you? (MRS. TJAELDE shakes her head.)

Signe. No.

Sannaes. It was because--because--I wanted to be able to go as soon as I
had told you. Otherwise it would be too hard to go.

Tjaelde. You must have very serious grounds for it, then! Has anything
happened to you to--to make it necessary? (SANNAES does not answer.)

Mrs. Tjaelde. And to make it impossible for you to trust any of us?

Sannaes (shyly). I thought I had better keep it to myself. (A pause.)

Tjaelde. That makes it still more painful for us--to think that you
could go about in our little home circle here, where you have shared
everything with us, carrying the secret of this intention hidden in your
heart.

Sannaes. Do not be hard on me! Believe me, if I could stay, I would; and
if I could tell you the reason, I would. (A pause.)

Signe (to her mother, in an undertone). Perhaps he wants to get married?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Would his being here with us make any difference to that?
Any one that Sannaes loved would be dear to us.

Tjaelde (going up to SANNAES and putting an arm round his shoulders).
Tell one of us, then, if you cannot tell us all. Is it nothing we can
help you in?

Sannaes. No.

Tjaelde. But can you judge of that alone? One does not always realise
how much some one else's advice, on the experience of an older man, may
help one.

Sannaes. Unfortunately it is as I say.

Tjaelde. It must be something very painful, then?

Sannaes. Please--!

Tjaelde. Well, Sannaes, you have quite cast a cloud over to-day's
happiness for us. I shall miss you as I have never missed any one.

Mrs. Tjaelde. I cannot imagine the house without Sannaes!

Tjaelde (to his wife). Come, dear, shall we go in again?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Yes--it is not nice out here any longer. (TJAELDE takes
her into the house. SIGNE turns to VALBORG to go in with her, but when
she comes close to her she gives a little cry. VALBORG takes her arm,
and their eyes meet.)

Signe. Where have my wits been? (She goes into the house, looking back
at VALBORG and SANNAES. The latter is giving way to his emotion, but as
soon as his eyes fall on VALBORG he recovers himself.)

Valborg (impetuously). Sannaes!

Sannaes. What are your orders, Miss Valborg?

Valborg (turning away from him, then turning back, but avoiding his
eyes). Do you really mean to leave us?

Sannaes. Yes, Miss Valborg. (A pause.)

Valborg. So we shall never stand back to back at our desks in the same
room again?

Sannaes. No, Miss Valborg.

Valborg. That is a pity; I had become so accustomed to it.

Sannaes. You will easily become accustomed to some one else's--back.

Valborg. Ah, some one else is some one else.

Sannaes. You must excuse me, Miss Valborg; I don't feel in the humour
for jesting to-day. (Turn to go.)

Valborg (looking up at him). Is this to be our parting, then? (A pause.)

Sannaes. I thought of taking leave of you all this afternoon.

Valborg (taking a step towards him). But ought not we two to settle our
accounts first?

Sannaes (coldly). No, Miss Valborg.

Valborg. Do you feel then that everything between us has been just as it
ought?

Sannaes. God knows I don't!

Valborg. But you think I am to blame?--Oh, well, it doesn't matter.

Sannaes. I am quite willing to take the blame. Put anyway, it is all
finished with now.

Valborg. But if we were to share the blame? You cannot be quite
indifferent as to which of us should take it?

Sannaes. I confess I am not. But, as I said, I do not wish for any
settling of accounts between us.

Valborg. But I wish it.

Sannaes. You will have plenty of time to settle it to your own
satisfaction.

Valborg. But, if I am in difficulties about it, I cannot do it alone.

Sannaes. I do not think you will find any difficulty.

Valborg. But if _I_ think so?--if I feel myself deeply wronged?

Sannaes. I have told you that I am willing to take all the blame upon
myself.

Valborg. No, Sannaes--I don't want charity; I want to be understood. I
have a question to ask you.

Sannaes. As you will.

Valborg. How was it that we got on so well for the first year after my
father's failure-and even longer? Have you ever thought of that?

Sannaes. Yes. I think it was because we never talked about anything but
our work--about business.

Valborg. You were my instructor.

Sannaes. And when you no longer needed an instructor--

Valborg.--we hardly spoke to one another.

Sannaes (softly). No.

Valborg. Well, what could I say or do, when every sign of friendship on
my part went unnoticed?

Sannaes. Unnoticed? Oh no, Miss Valborg, I noticed them.

Valborg. That was my punishment, then!

Sannas. God forbid I should do you an injustice. You had a motive which
did you credit; you felt compassion for me, and so you could not help
acting as you did. But, Miss Valborg, I refuse your compassion.

Valborg. And suppose it were gratitude?

Sannaes (softly). I dreaded that more than anything else! I had had a
warning.

Valborg. You must admit, Sannaes, that all this made you very difficult
to deal with!

Sannaes. I quite admit that. But, honestly, _you_ must admit that I
had good reason to mistrust an interest in me that sprang from mere
gratitude. Had circumstances been different, I should only have bored
you cruelly; I knew that quite well. And I had no fancy for being an
amusement for your idle hours.

Valborg. How you have mistaken me!--If you will think of it, surely you
must understand how different a girl, who has been accustomed to travel
and society, becomes when she has to stay at home and work because it
is her duty. She comes to judge men by an altogether different standard,
too. The men that she used to think delightful are very likely to appear
small in her eyes when it is a question of the demands life makes on
ability or courage or self-sacrifice; while the men she used to laugh
at are transformed in her eyes into models of what God meant men to
be, when she is brought into close contact with them in her father's
office.--Is there anything so surprising in that? (A pause.)

Sannaes. Thank you, at all events, for saying that to me. It has done me
good. But you should have said it sooner.

Valborg (emphatically). How could I, when you misjudged everything I did
or said? No; it was impossible until mistakes and misunderstandings had
driven us so far apart that we could not endure them any longer (Turns
away.)

Sannaes. Perhaps you are right. I cannot at once recall all that has
happened. If I have been mistaken, I shall by degrees find the knowledge
of it a profound comfort.--You must excuse me, Miss Valborg, I have a
number of things to see to. (Turns to go.)

Valborg (anxiously). Sannaes, as you admit that you have judged
me unjustly, don't you think you ought at least to give me--some
satisfaction?

Sannaes. You may be certain, Miss Valborg, that when I am balancing our
account you shall not suffer any injustice. But I cannot do it now. All
I have to do now is to get ready to go.

Valborg. But you are not ready to go, Sannaes! You have not finished
your work here yet! There is what I just spoke of--and something else
that dates farther back than that.

Sannaes. You must feel how painful it is for me to prolong this
interview. (Turns to go.)

Valborg. But surely you won't go without setting right something that I
am going to beg you to?

Sannas. What is that, Miss Valborg?

Valborg. Something that happened a long time ago.

Sannaes. If it is in my power, I will do what you ask.

Valborg. It is.--Ever since that day you have never offered to shake
hands with me.

Sannaes. Have you really noticed that? (A pause.)

Valborg (with a smile, turning away). Will you do so now?

Sannaes (stepping nearer to her). Is this more than a mere whim?

Valborg (concealing her emotion). How can you ask such a question now?

Sannaes. Because all this time you have never once asked me to shake
hands with you.

Valborg. I wanted you to offer me your hand. (A pause.)

Sannaes. Are you serious for once?

Valborg. I mean it, seriously.

Sannaes (in a happier voice). You really set a value on it?

Valborg. A great value.

Sannaes (going up to her). Here it is, then!

Valborg (turning and taking his hand). I accept the hand you offer me.

Sannaes (turning pale). What do you mean?

Valborg. I mean that for some time past I have known that I should be
proud to be the wife of a man who has loved me, and me alone, ever since
he was a boy, and has saved my father and us all.

Sannaes. Oh, Miss Valborg!

Valborg. And you wanted to go away, rather than offer me your hand; and
that, only because we had accepted help from you--and you did not think
we were free agents! That was too much; and, as you would not speak, I
had to!

Sannaes (kneeling to her). Miss Valborg!

Valborg. You have the most loyal nature, the most delicate mind, and the
warmest heart I have ever known.

Sannaes. This is a thousand times too much!

Valborg. Next to God, I have to thank you that I have become what I
am; and I feel that I can offer you a life's devotion such as you would
rarely find in this world.

Sannaes. I cannot answer because I scarcely realise what you are saying.
But you are saying it because you are sorry for me, now that I have to
go away, and feel that you owe me some gratitude. (Takes both her
hand in his.) Let me speak! I know the truth better than you, and have
thought over it far more than you. You are so immeasurably above me in
ability, in education, in manners--and a wife should not be able to look
down on her husband. At all events, I am too proud to be willing to be
exposed to that. No, what you are feeling now is only the result of your
beautiful nature, and the recollection of it will hallow all my life.
All the pain and all the happiness I have known have come from you. Your
life will be one of self-renunciation; but, God knows there are many
such! And my burden will be lightened now, because I shall know
that your good wishes will always be with me. (Gets up.) But part we
must--and now more than ever! For I could not bear to be near you unless
you were mine, and to make you mine would only mean misery for us both
after a little while!

Valborg. Sannaes--!

Sannaes (holding her hands and interrupting her). I entreat you not to
say anything more! You have too much power over me; do not use it to
make me sin! For it would be that--a great sin--to put two honest hearts
into a false position, where they would distress one another, even
perhaps get to hate one another.

Valborg. But let me--

Sannas (letting go her hands and stepping back). No, you must not tempt
me. Life with you would mean perpetual anxiety, for I should never
feel equal to what it would demand of me! But now I can part from you
comforted. There will be no bitterness in my heart now; and by degrees
all my thoughts of the past and of you will turn to sweetness. God bless
you! May every good fortune go with you! Good-bye! (Goes quickly towards
the house.)

Valborg. Sannaes! (Follows him.) Sannaes! Listen to me! (SANNAES takes
up his coat and gloves, and, as he rushes out without looking where
he is going, runs full tilt into BERENT who comes in at that moment
followed by JAKOBSEN.)

Sannaes. I beg your pardon! (Rushes out to the right.)

Berent. Are you two playing a game of blind man's buff?

Valborg. God knows we are!

Berent. You need not be so emphatic about it! I have had forcible
evidence of it. (Rubs his stomach and laughs.)

Valborg. You must excuse me! Father is in there. (Points to the left and
goes hurriedly out to the right.)

Berent. We don't seem to be getting a particularly polite reception!

Jakobsen. No, we seem to be rather in the way, Mr. Berent.

Berent (laughing). It looks like it. But what has been going on?

Jakobsen. I don't know. They looked as if they had been fighting, their
faces were so flushed.

Berent. They looked upset, you mean?

Jakobsen. Yes, that's it. Ah, here is Mr. Tjaelde! (To himself.) Good
Lord, how aged he looks! (Withdraws into the background as BERENT goes
forward to greet TJAELDE, who comes in.)

Tjaelde (to BERENT). I am delighted to see you! You are always welcome
in our little home--and this year more welcome than ever!

Berent. Because things are going better than ever this year! I
congratulate you on your discharge--and also on your determination to
pay everything in full!

Tjaelde. Yes, if God wills, I mean to--

Berent. Well, things are going splendidly, aren't they?

Tjaelde. So far, yes.

Berent. You are over the worst of it, now that you have laid the
foundations of a new business and laid them solidly.

Tjaelde. One of the things that have given me the greatest encouragement
has been the fact that I have won your confidence--and that has gained
me the confidence of others.

Berent. I could have done nothing unless you had first of all done
everything. But don't let us say any more about it!--Well, the place
looks even prettier than it did last year.

Tjaelde. We do a little more to it each year, you know.

Berent. And you are still all together here?

Tjaelde. So far, yes.

Berent. Ah, by the way, I can give you news of your deserter. (TJAELDE
looks surprised.) I mean your lieutenant!

Tjaelde. Oh--of him! Have you seen him?

Berent. I was on the same boat coming here. There was a very rich girl
on board.

Tjaelde (laughing). Oh, I see!

Berent. All the same, I don't think it came to any thing. It is rather
like coming upon a herd of deer when you are stalking; after your first
shot, you don't find it so easy to get another; they have grown wary!

Jakobsen (who during this conversation has been screwing up his courage
to address TJAELDE). I--I am a pig, I am! I know that!

Tjaelde (taking his hand). Oh, come, Jakobsen--!

Jakobsen. A great blundering pig!--But I know it now!

Tjaelde. That's all right! I can tell you I am delighted to be able to
set affairs straight between you and me.

Jakobsen. I don't know what to answer. It goes to my heart! (Shakes his
hand heartily.) You are a far better man than I,--and I said so to my
wife. "He's a splendid fellow," I said.

Tjaelde (releasing his hand). Let us forget everything except the happy
days we have had together, Jakobsen! How do things go at the Brewery?

Jakobsen. At the Brewery! As long as folk ladle beer into their stomachs
at the rate they do now--

Berent. Jakobsen was kind enough to drive me out here. We had a most
amusing drive. He is a character.

Jakobsen (in an anxious undertone, to TJAELDE). What does he mean by
that?

Tjaelde. That you are different from most people.

Jakobsen. Ah!--I didn't feel sure, you know, whether he wasn't sitting
there making game of me, all the way here.

Tjaelde. How can you think such a thing? (To BERENT.) Do come into the
house. Excuse my going first; but my wife is not always quite prepared
to receive visitors since she has been able to do so little for herself.
(Goes into the house.)

Berent. I don't think Mr. Tjaelde seems to me to be looking in quite as
good form as I expected?

Jakobsen. Don't you? I didn't notice anything.

Berent. Perhaps I am mistaken. I think he meant us to follow him in,
didn't he?

Jakobsen. So I understood.

Berent. Then, as you have brought me so far, you must take me in to Mrs.
Tjaelde.

Jakobsen. I am quite at your service, sir. I have the deepest respect
for Mrs. Tjaelde--(hurriedly)--and of course for Mr. Tjaelde too. Of
course.

Berent. Yes. Well, let us go in.

Jakobsen. Let us go in. (He tries anxiously to keep in step with
BERENT'S peculiar walk, but finds it difficult.)

Berent. I think you had better not try. My step suits very few.

Jakobsen. Oh, I shall manage--! (They go out to the left. SANNAES comes
hurriedly in from the right, and crosses the stage; looks around; then
comes across to the foreground and leans with his back against a tree.
VALBORG comes in a moment later, comes forward, sees him, and laughs.)

Sannaes. There, you see, Miss Valborg; you are laughing at me.

Valborg. I don't know whether I want to laugh or to cry.

Sannaes. Believe me, you are mistaken about this, Miss Valborg. You
don't see things as plainly as I do.

Valborg. Which of us was it that was mistaken to-day?--and had to beg
pardon for it?

Sannaes. It was I, I know. But this is impossible! A real union of
hearts needs to be founded on more than respect--

Valborg (laughing). On love?

Sannaes. You misunderstand me. Could you go into society with me without
feeling embarrassed? (VALBORG laughs.) You see, the mere idea of it
makes you laugh.

Valborg (laughing). I am laughing because you are magnifying the least
important part of it into the most important.

Sannaes. You know how awkward and shy--in fact downright frightened I am
amongst those who--. (VALBORG laughs again.) There, you see--you can't
help laughing at the idea!

Valborg. I should perhaps even laugh at you when we were in society
together! (Laughs.)

Sannaes (seriously). But I should suffer horribly if you did.

Valborg. Believe me, Sannaes, I love you well enough to be able to
afford to have a little laugh sometimes at your little imperfections.
Indeed, I often do! And suppose we were out in society, and I saw you
weighed down under the necessity for pretty manners that do not come
easy to you; if I did laugh at you, do you think there would be any
unkindness behind my laughter? If others laughed at you, do you suppose
I would not, the very next moment, take your arm and walk proudly down
the room with you? I know what you really are, and others know it too!
Thank God it is not only bad deeds that are known to others in this
world!

Sannaes. Your words intoxicate me and carry me off my feet!

Valborg (earnestly). If you think I am only flattering you, let us put
it to the test. Mr. Berent is here. He moves in the very best society,
but he is superior to its littlenesses. Shall we take his opinion?
Without betraying anything, I could make him give it in a moment.

Sannaes (carried away). I want no one's opinion but yours!

Valborg. That's right! If only you feel certain of my love--

Sannaes (impetuously).--then nothing else will seem to matter; and that
alone will be able to teach me all that I lack, in a very short time.

Valborg. Look into my eyes!

Sannaes (taking her hands). Yes!

Valborg. Do you believe that nothing would ever make me ashamed of you!

Sannaes. Yes, I believe that.

Valborg (with emotion). Do you believe that I love you?

Sannaes. Yes! (Falls on one knee.)

Valborg. Deeply enough for my love to last all our lives--

Sannaes. Yes, yes!

Valborg. Then stay with me; and we will look after the old folk--and
replace them when, in God's good time, they are taken from us. (SANNAES
bursts into tears. TJAELDE, who has come to the window to show BERENT
his ledgers, happens to look up and sees VALBORG and SANNAES.)

Tjaelde (leaning out of the window, and speaking gently:) Valborg, what
has happened?

Valborg (quietly). Only that Sannaes and I are engaged to be married.

Tjaelde. Is it possible! (To BERENT, who is immersed in the accounts.)
Excuse me! (Hurries away from the window.)

Sannaes (who, in his emotion has heard nothing). Forgive me! It has been
such a long, hard struggle--and I feel overwhelmed!

Valborg. Let us go in to my mother.

Sannws (shrinking back). I can't, Miss Valborg--you must wait a little--

Valborg. Here they come. (TJAELDE comes in wheeling MRS. TJAELDE in her
chair. VALBORG runs to her mother and throws herself into her arms.)

Mrs. Tjaelde (softly). God be praised and thanked!

Tjaelde (going up to SANNAES and embracing him). My son!

Mrs. Tjaelde. So that was why Sannaes wanted to go away! Oh, Sannaes!
(TJAELDE brings SANNAES up to her. SANNAES kneels and kisses her hand,
then gets up and goes into the background, to recover himself. SIGNE
comes in.)

Signe. Mother, everything is ready now!

Mrs. Tjaelde. So are things out here!

Signe (looking round). Not really?

Valborg (to SIGNE). Forgive me for never having told you!

Signe. You certainly kept your secret well!

Valborg. I kept long years of suffering secret--that was all! (SIGNE
kisses her and whispers to her; then turns to SANNAES.)

Signe. Sannaes! (Shakes his hand.) So we are to be brother and
sister-in-law?

Sannaes (embarrassed). Oh, Miss Signe--

Signe. But you mustn't call me Miss Signe now, you know!

Valborg. You must expect that! He calls me "Miss" Valborg still!

Singe. Well, he won't be able to do that when you are married, anyway!

Mrs. Tjaelde (to TJAELDE). But where are our friends?

Tjaelde. Mr. Berent is in the office. There he is, at the window.

Berent (at the window). Now I am coming straight out to congratulate
you, with my friend Jakobsen. (Comes out.)

Valborg (going to TJAELDE). Father!

Tjaelde. My child!

Valborg. If we had not known those bad days we should never have known
this happy one! (He gives her a grip of the hand.)

Tjaelde (to BERENT). Allow me to present to you my daughter Valborg's
fiancé--Mr. Sannaes.

Berent. I congratulate you on your choice, Miss Valborg--and I
congratulate the whole family on such a son-in-law.

Valborg (triumphantly). There, Sannaes!

Jakobsen. May I too, though I am only a stupid sort of chap, say that
this lad has been in love with you ever since he was in his teens--he
hardly could be sooner than that. But I can tell you, honestly, I should
never have credited you with having so much sense as to take him. (All
laugh.)

Mrs. Tjaelde. Signe is whispering to me that our dinner is getting cold.

Signe. May I take my mother's place and ask you to take me in to dinner,
Mr. Berent?

Berent (offering her his arm). I am honoured!--But our bridal pair must
go first!

Valborg. Sannaes--?

Sannaes (whispers, as he gives her his arm). To think that I have you
on my arm! (They go into the house, followed by BERENT and SIGNE, and by
JAKOBSEN.)

Tjaelde (bending over his wife, as he prepares to wheel her chair in).
My dear, God has blessed our house now!

Mrs. Tjaelde. My dear man!

Curtain.
﻿THE KING

A PLAY IN A PROLOGUE AND FOUR ACTS


DRAMATIS PERSONAE

     The KING.
     HARALD GRAN, a rich manufacturer.
     KOLL, Chief Magistrate of the district.
     FLINK.
     CLARA ERNST.
     The PRINCESS.
     BARONESS MARC.
     ANNA, a deaf and dumb girl.
     FALBE.
     The MAYOR.
     NATHALIE, his daughter.
     ALSTAD.
     VILHELM, his son.
     The PARISH PRIEST.
     BANG, a rich trader.
     VINÄGER.
     COUNT PLATEN.
     The GENERAL.
     MATILDE.
     A Ballad Singer.
     A Young Beggar.
     A Servant of the King's.
     Ladies and Gentlemen,
     Masked Dancers,
     Work-people,
     Farmers, etc.




PROLOGUE

(SCENE.--A large gothic hall, brilliantly illuminated, in which a masked
ball is taking place. At the rise of the curtain a ballet is being
performed in the centre of the hall. Masked dancers are grouped around,
watching it. Two of them, women, are conversing on the right of the
stage.)

First Mask. Have you heard that the King is to be here to-night?

Second Mask. Yes, and since I heard it I have been imagining I saw him
everywhere.

First Mask (pointing). That is not he, is it?

Second Mask. He is taller than that.

First Mask. That one, then? Look, that one!

Second Mask. That one has spoken to me. He has too old a voice.

First Mask. Shall we see if we can find him?

Second Mask. Yes, come along!

(A number of girls, wearing similar costumes and all masked, have
meanwhile collected on the left side of the stage.)

First Girl. Are we all here?

Second Girl. All but Matilde.

Matilde. Here I am! Have you heard that the King is to be here?

All. Really?

Matilde. I don't know how he is dressed; but one of the masters of the
ceremonies told me he was to be here.

Several of the Girls. The dear King! (Two masked dancers, dressed as
Cats, pass by.)

Tom Cat. Do you hear that, my pet?

Puss. Miau!

Matilde. Let us try and discover him.

All. Yes, yes!

A Mask. And when we have discovered him--?

Matilde. Let us all dance round him!

All. Yes!

Tom Cat (to Puss). You had better look after your virtue, Miss!

Puss. Miau!

Tom Cat. Miau! (They pass out of sight.)

Matilde. Remember that we are all to meet here in a quarter of an hour!

All. Yes! (They disperse. The ballet comes to a close amidst universal
applause. Conversation among the dancers becomes general and animated.
The BARONESS MARC, disguised as an Old Woman, comes forward, talking to
another mask dressed as a Donkey.)

Baroness. I will never forgive you for that, my lord chamberlain.

The Donkey. But you frighten me clean out of my part, Baroness!

Baroness. If only I could understand how it happened!

The Donkey. After all, my dear Baroness, you cannot be expected to take
out all your schoolmistresses and their senior pupils on a leash!

Baroness. No, but I have particular reasons for wishing to look closely
after _her_. (All this time she has been persistently looking round the
room.) And in such a whirling crowd as this--

The Donkey. Let us lose ourselves in it, then! (He brays as they go out.
The PRINCESS, masked and dressed in a costume of the time of Louis
XV., comes forward accompanied by a Cavalier in a costume of the same
period.)

Princess (continuing a discussion). And I say that if a king has such
graces of mind and person as ours has, he may do anything he pleases.

Cavalier. _Anything_, Princess?

Princess. Anything that his mind prompts, provided that he do it
beautifully. (A GENTLEMAN-IN-WAITING, dressed in a costume of the same
period, approaches them.)

Gentleman-in-Waiting. I cannot discover him, your Royal Highness!

Princess. But he is here. He is _here_. And for a lady's sake. I am
certain I am right.

Cavalier. But I asked one of the masters of the ceremonies, and he knew
nothing about it.

Princess. Then it must have been one that has not been let into the
secret.

Cavalier. But, your Royal Highness--

Princess. Don't keep calling me "your Royal Highness," but get me a
description of the costume he is wearing. (The GENTLEMAN-IN-WAITING bows
and goes away.) And you and I will go on hunting--

Cavalier.--for the noble huntsman--

Princess.--who is being hunted himself! (Moves away, but stops
suddenly.) Who is that? (CLARA ERNST, masked and in peasant costume,
comes forward followed by a masked figure wearing a domino. He is
whispering to her over her shoulder. She keeps glancing about, as if
looking for some one.)

The Domino.--and there, in the enchanted castle, buried deep in the
wooded park--

Clara. Let me alone!

The Domino.--there we shall be greeted by a babbling fountain of
water--a nymph, holding the cup of joy high above her head--

Clara (anxiously). What can have become of her?

(Meanwhile one of the masked dancers has been following them, and now
turns back to join others.)

A Masked Dancer (pointing to the DOMINO). That is the King!

Another (quickly). But who is _she_?

The Domino.--on both sides, shady alleys leading to the doors of a
secret retreat; and there--

Clara (turning round). I despise you! (The dancing and music suddenly
stop. General consternation.)

The Baroness (starting forward as she hears CLARA voice.) Clara!

The Domino (taking CLARA's hand and leading her apart from the others).
Do you know who it is that you despise?

Clara (greatly agitated). Yes, I know who you are!--and that is why,
from the bottom of my heart, I despise you! (The music begins afresh,
covering the general consternation that has spread among the dancers.
The BARONESS comes forward with a cry of "Clara!" CLARA bursts into
tears and throws herself into her arms. Curtain.)




ACT I


SCENE I

(SCENE.--A large hall in Gran's factory. The walls are bare. On the
left, about half-way forward, is a small platform. A meeting of the
shareholders of a railway company is in progress. Facing the platform
are seated the gentry; the common herd, mainly farmers and work-people,
are sitting and standing about wherever they can find room. On the
right, large windows are standing open; through these another crowd
can be seen, listening from outside. GRAN is standing in front of the
platform, speaking to the meeting.)

Gran. And, as it was found impossible for the main line of the railway
to touch our town, we determined, rather than allow all our exertions
to be wasted, to construct a branch line on our own account. I had
the honour to be elected chairman of the board of directors of this
undertaking. No directors ever had more unrestricted powers than were
given to us--possibly because there were no two opinions as to the route
the line should take the natural formation of the ground indicated
it unmistakably. It was only when we approached the question of the
purchase of our rolling-stock that any dissension arose--not among the
directors, but among the shareholders. As the majority of the latter
are farmers and work-people, we had decided on buying only one class of
railway carriage of a type slightly more comfortable than the ordinary
third-class carriage. That is the extent of our misdeeds! To-day's
meeting will probably show what the general sense on the matter is. Our
powers being unlimited, we were under no obligation to consult any one
in the matter; but, notwithstanding that, we decided to call a meeting
of the shareholders and submit the question to them. And, on the
directors' behalf, I must thank the shareholders for having attended in
such numbers; young and old, men and women, I dare say quite a third
of the total number of shareholders are present. The meeting will now
proceed to elect a chairman. (Sits down.)

The Mayor (after a pause). I beg to move that Mr. Koll, our chief
magistrate, whom it is a great pleasure to see honouring this meeting
with his presence, have the further kindness to take the chair.

Gran. The motion before the meeting is that the Chief Magistrate shall
take the chair. Shall I assume it to be carried? (Silence follows.)

The Mayor. Yes. (Laughter.)

Gran. The meeting should preferably elect some one who may be considered
to be unaffected by considerations of party.

Alstad (half rising, with his glasses in his hand). Then we shall have
to send for some one that does not live in these parts! There is no one
of that sort left here! (Sits down, amidst laughter.)

The Priest. All authority springs from on high. Obedience to those set
in authority over us is obedience to the Almighty. But it is against
this very obedience that people are rebelling nowadays.

Gran. It is precisely some one to be in authority over us that we want
to elect. At present we have no one.

The Priest. No, that's just it. Every meeting nowadays seems to claim
authority on its own account. Let rather show our respect to actual
authority--such respect as we would show to our fathers. (Sits down.)

Gran. Then, as far as I can grasp the situation, the Chief Magistrate
has been proposed and seconded?

The Priest. Yes.

Gran. Does any one wish to propose any one else? (Silence.)

Alstad. May I request the Chief Magistrate to take the chair?

Koll (getting up). I don't know that it is any great compliment to be
elected in this way; but I will take the chair, for the sole reason of
enabling the meeting to proceed to business. (Takes his place on the
platform, and raps on the table with a mallet.) I declare the meeting
open.

Gran (getting up). Mr. Chairman!

Koll. Mr. Gran will address the meeting.

Gran. The motion proposed by the directors is this: "That only one class
of railway carriage shall be purchased, slightly more comfortable than
the ordinary third-class carriage." (Gives the motion in writing to the
chairman, and sits down.)

Koll. The following is the motion submitted to meeting. (Reads it out.)
Who wishes to speak on the motion? (Silence.) Come, some one must
speak on it--or I shall have to put it to the vote forthwith. (Silence,
followed by laughter here and there.)

The Priest. Mr. Chairman!

Koll. The Priest will address the meeting.

The Priest. I see, in this assembly, a number of young men, even a
number of maidens; and I feel bound to ask whether young men, and even
maidens, are to be allowed to take part in these proceedings?

Koll. Any shareholder that is of age has the right to.

The Priest. But St. Paul expressly tells us that women are not to speak
in public places.

Koll. Well, they can hold their tongues, then. (Laughter.)

The Priest. But even the fact of voting at a railway meeting does not
seem to me to be in accordance with the humility and modesty that both
Nature and the Scriptures indicate as characteristic of woman. I believe
it to be the first step on a wrong road. The apostle says--

Koll. We must leave them to decide the matter for themselves. Does any
one wish to--?

The Priest (interrupting him). Mr. Chairman, if you will not permit me
to quote the apostle, allow me at all events to say that the spectacle
of a young man voting against his father, or a woman voting against her
husband--

Koll. Will you tell me who could prohibit it? Does any one wish to
speak--?

The Priest (interrupting). The Scriptures prohibit it, Mr.
Chairman!--the Scriptures, which we are all bound to obey, even--

Gran (getting up and interrupting him). Mr. Chairman!

Koll. Mr. Gran will address the meeting.

Gran. I only want to ask whether--

The Priest. But _I_ was addressing the meeting!

Koll. Mr. Gran will address the meeting.

The Priest. I protest against that ruling!

Alstad (half rising). Our worthy Priest must obey authority. (Sits down
amidst laughter.)

The Priest. Not when it does an injustice! I appeal to the meeting!

Koll. Very good!--Will those in favour of the Priest addressing the
meeting kindly stand up? (No one gets up; and those who were previously
standing bob down. Laughter.) Carried unanimously, that the Priest do
not address the meeting. (The PRIEST sits down.) Mr. Gran will address
the meeting.

Gran (getting up). I withdraw from my right! (Renewed laughter.)

The Mayor (getting up). Mr. Chairman!

Koll. The Mayor will address the meeting.

The Mayor. I am one of many to whom this proposal of the directors seems
extraordinary, to say the least of it. Do they propose that the ladies
of my family--I will leave myself out of the question, for as a public
man I have to rub shoulders with all sorts of people--do they propose,
I say, that ladies who have been delicately brought up shall travel with
any Tom, Dick and Harry?--perhaps with convicts being conveyed to gaol,
or with journeymen labourers? Is his honour the Chief Magistrate, who is
a Commander of a noble Order of Knighthood, to travel side by side
with a drunken navvy? Supposing the King were to pay a visit to this
beautiful district, which has acquired such a reputation since so many
of the best people from town have taken villas here; is his Majesty to
make the journey in one of these third-class carriages, with the chance
of travelling in company with tradesman stinking of stale cheese?--with
folk who, moreover--well, perhaps in common decency I ought not to
go on, as ladies are present. (Laughter.) "Economy," I hear some one
suggest. That word is in great favour nowadays. But I should like to
know what economy there is getting your clothes soiled? (Laughter.) Does
a first-class carriage wear out sooner than a third class? It costs
more to build, no doubt, but that is soon made up by the higher fares
charged. I can discover no reasonable ground for this proposal, look at
it how you will from the commercial point of view. One has to look
at the _political_ aspect of the matter, to understand it; and I am
reluctant to drag in politics. I will only say, in conclusion, that it
must be those who have framed this proposal that expect to derive some
profit from it; the railway certainly would derive none. (Sits down.)

Koll. That last remark was a little like an accusation--

The Mayor (getting up). I only alluded to what is in every one's mind.
(Sits down.)

Koll. A speaker is not in order in making accusations, even though they
be assumed to be in every one's mind.--I see that Mr. Alstad wishes to
speak.

Alstad. Human nature is frail. That seems to me a sufficient explanation
of how such a proposal came to be laid before us. But honestly--for we
all ought to be honest!--it seems to me that any material advantage
it might bring would be more than counterbalanced by loss of esteem.
(Uproar.) There has been quite a different spirit in the place of late
years--what with the factories, and the stranger workmen, and the summer
visitors. We never used to have so much unrest or to hear so much of
this talk about "equality." And now, if we are to give the impression
that there is only one social class here--and that a third class--I
know that I shall be by no means alone in feeling offended. We certainly
don't want to sit on our work-people's laps; and, equally, we don't want
to have them sitting on ours. (Sits down.)

Gran. Our friend the Mayor is very fond of talking of his loyalty; but I
must say I am surprised at his dragging the King even into this matter.
As for the matter of the railway carriage in which one of so high degree
would travel here--well, if our carriages are not good enough, surely
his Majesty's private saloon can be used on our line as well as on
the main line. And as for any of us ordinary mortals who are afraid of
mixing with the common herd, surely they can sit together in carriages
by themselves. The carriages would be separate; they would only be of
the same kind. I think there would be little fear of their being exposed
to intrusion on the part of our country-folk. _They_ are much more apt
to be more timidly shy than is even desirable. On all small lines--even
on many of the bigger ones--it is the less luxurious carriages, the
second and third class, that for the cost of the more luxurious ones;
it is the third class that pays for the first. But that some passengers
should travel comfortably at the expense of those who travel less
comfortably, is what we wish to avoid. (Applause.) An old resident of
the yeoman class has reproached us with wishing to alter our customs.
Well, if one of our old customs is the aristocratic one which makes the
gulf that separates masters and men wider than it already is, all I can
say is that the sooner it is abolished the better; for it is not a good
custom; it is even a dangerous one. (Murmurs.) And as for the political
aspect of the question--

Koll. Don't you think we should leave politics out of the question?

Gran (bows, with a laugh). That is just what I was going to say, Mr.
Chairman; that we ought to leave politics out out of the question. (Sits
down, amidst laughter applause. The audience, first the younger men and
then the older farmers, begin arguing the matter with one another, more
and more loudly.)

Koll. I must beg the meeting to keep quiet, as long as this business is
under discussion. The Mayor wishes to speak.

The Mayor. I admit that I am loyal--

Koll. Those people outside must be quiet!

Alstad (going to the window). You must keep quiet!

The Mayor. I admit I am loyal! I count it a point of honour, as a native
of the place, to show his Majesty that our first thought when we planned
this railway was, at that important moment, that his Majesty might
possibly be pleased to manifest a desire to pay us a visit. "Let him use
his own private saloon," we are told! No, Mr. Chairman, that is not the
way to speak when we are speaking of his Majesty! And what about his
Majesty's suite? Are they to travel third class? What I say is that we
are casting a slight on his Majesty if we cast a slight on his railway
carriage--I should say, on his suite. And I go farther than that. I say
that his Majesty's functionaries are his Majesty's representatives, and
that it is casting an additional slight upon his Majesty not to show
a proper respect for them. I know that this jars upon the ears of many
present; they do not consider that a man who holds a public office
should be shown any more respect than any one else. The majority rules,
and the majority only thinks of its own interests and those of its
servile supporters. But even in this community of ours there is a
minority that bears the burden of its affairs and represents its honour;
and we will never consent to be dragged down into the mire of this
"equality" into which you want to plunge each and every one of us!
(Uproar.)

Koll. The honourable speaker appears to me to be trenching upon
politics--

The Mayor. Possibly I am, Mr. Chairman; but what honest man can shirk
the truth? Only compare the present state of things in this community
with what was the case when everything here was as it should be; when
the King and his officials were respected; when public affairs were in
the hands of those who knew how to direct them; when we used to have
singing competitions, shooting competitions, and other festal meetings
of that kind. And--yes--well--compare, I say, the conditions in those
days with our conditions to-day--that is to say, with all this talk of
"the people;" as, for instance--

Koll. It is railway carriages that we are discussing.

The Mayor. Quite so! But what is it that is at the bottom of this
proposal, Mr. Chairman? Does it not spring from that passion for
destruction, for a universal levelling which aims at abolishing the
monarchy, at destroying authority--

The Priest. And the Church too, my friend!

The Mayor.--and the Church, it is quite true! Yes, it is because they
desire the Church and--

Koll. It is railway carriages that we are discussing.

The Mayor. Exactly. But an old public official like myself, who once was
held in respect, when he sees the pillars of society tottering and feels
the keenest pang of sorrow at--

Koll. For the last time, it is railway carriages that we are discussing!

The Mayor (overcome by his feelings). I have no more say. (Sits down.)

Koll. Mr. Alstad wishes to speak.

Alstad (getting up). The question before the meeting is itself a small
matter; but it is the consequences of it that I fear. We may expect any
proposal of the same kidney now. Never let it be said that our community
was eager to range itself under this banner of "equality!" It bears too
old and honoured a name for that! But there is one thing I want to say.
We have always, before this, felt it an honour and a privilege to have
the richest man in these parts living amongst us. But when we see him
one of the most eager in support of a "popular" proposal of this sort,
then it appears, to me at all events, to be absolutely unaccountable
how--oh, well, I won't run the risk making what our chairman calls
"accusations"; I will sit down and hold my tongue. I have the right to
do that at all events. (Sits down.)

Koll. Mr. Gran will address the meeting.

Flink. Three cheers for Mr. Gran! (Almost the whole meeting cheers
lustily. KOLL shouts at them and hammers on the table with his mallet in
vain.)

Koll (when peace is restored). I must ask the meeting to show some
respect for its chairman. If not, I will leave the chair.--Mr. Gran will
address the meeting.

Gran. The plan that we are proposing is no new one. It has been in
practice for a long time. In America--

The Priest, Alstad, and others. Yes, in America!

The Mayor (getting up). Mr. Chairman, are we to have politics, after
all?

Koll. I cannot see that to mention America is to talk politics.

The Mayor. Then what is politics, if America isn't?

Koll. To talk politics is--for instance--to use the arguments your
worship did. Mr. Gran will proceed.

Gran. I see that the Priest wishes to speak. I shall be happy to give
way.

Koll. The Priest will address the meeting.

The Priest. I see here, in this assembly, a number of those whom I am
accustomed to address in more solemn surroundings. My dear
parishioners, it was for your sake that I came here. You have heard
for yourselves--the whole question is a political one; and, dear fellow
Christians, let me entreat you to shun politics! Did not our Lord
Himself say: "My kingdom is not of this world"? This freedom, this
equality, of which they talk is not the soul's freedom, not that
equality which--

Koll. I would suggest to the reverend speaker that he should postpone
his remarks until the next time he gets into the pulpit. (Slight
laughter.)

The Priest. One should be instant in season and out of season;
therefore--

Koll. I forbid you to continue.

The Priest. It is written: "Thou shalt obey God rather than man"! My
dear parishioners, let us all leave this meeting! Who will follow his
priest? (Takes a few steps towards the door, but no one follows him.
Laughter. He sighs deeply, and sits down again.)

Koll. If no one else wishes to speak--

Vinäger. Mr. Chairman!

Koll. Mr. Vinäger wishes to speak.

Vinäger. These proceedings remind me of China, and of the Chinese
mandarins who will not allow any one of lesser degree to come near
them--although at moments I have felt as if I were still in Europe
in the presence of a still greater power, greater even than the Grand
Turk--I mean this democratic envy which grudges others what it has
not got itself. To reconcile both parties I should like to make the
following suggestion. Build the carriages, as is often done, in two
stories. Then those who wish to ensure their privacy can do so by
sitting upstairs; and the others will be satisfied too, because they
will all be in the same carriage after all. (Loud laughter.)

Koll. If no one else wishes to speak (looks at GRAN, who shakes his
head) I shall proceed to put the question to the vote. The motion
submitted by the directors, which is now before the meeting, is as
follows--

The Mayor. Excuse me, but what of my motion wit h regard to a saloon for
his Majesty?

Koll. I did not understand your worship to mean your suggestion as a
formal motion.

The Mayor. I did, though.

Koll. Then I will put it to the vote after the director, motion has been
voted upon.

The Mayor. A motion that concerns the King should take precedence of all
others.

Koll. Even the King is subject to the rules of logic. The directors'
motion is: "That only one class of railway carriage shall be purchased,
of a type slightly more comfortable than the ordinary third-class
carriage." Will those in favour of the motion kindly go to the left--on
this side of the room; those against the motion, to the right. (Nearly
all go to the left. Cheers are heard outside, and are gradually taken
up by those inside. KOLL hammers with his mallet.) Order, please! (The
cheering ceases, but an animated conversation goes on.) The directors'
motion is carried!

The Mayor (shouting). I am sure every one did not understand the method
of voting!

Koll (hammering with his mallet). Order, order. (Quiet is gradually
restored.) What did your worship say?

The Mayor. That some people must have misunderstood the way of voting;
because I see my daughter Natalie, who is a shareholder too, on the
other side of the room. Of course she has made a mistake.

Natalie. Oh no, father, I haven't. (Loud laughter, and applause.)

The Priest. Ah, my poor deluded parishioners, I shall pray for you!

The Mayor. Order!--The Mayor's motion--

Alstad. I would suggest that the Mayor should withdraw it. We know what
its fate would be in such a meeting as this.

Koll. As long as I occupy the chair, I shall not permit any derogatory
expressions to be applied to the meeting. Does the Mayor still insist on
his motion being put? (Whispers to him: "Say no!")

The Mayor. No.

Koll. Then, as no one else wishes to speak, I declare the meeting at an
end. (Every one begins to move about and discuss affairs vigorously.)

Alstad (to his son VILHELM). So you have the face to vote with
these--these Americans, against your old father, have you?

Vilhelm. Well, father, I honestly think--

Alstad. Just you wait till I get you home!

Vilhelm. Oh, that's it, is it? Then I shan't go home--so there! I shall
stay here and get drunk, I shall.

Alstad. Oh, come, come!

Vilhelm. Yes, I shall! I shall stay here and get drunk!

Alstad. But, Vilhelm, listen to me! (Takes him by the arm. Meantime a
STRANGER has taken KOLL and GRAN by the arm, to their manifest surprise,
and brought the forward away from the crowd. He stands for a moment,
looking them in the face, till suddenly KOLL gives a start and cries
out: "The King!")

The King. Hush!

Gran. It really is--!

The King (to GRAN). You are at home here; take up into a room--and give
us some champagne. My throat is as dry as a lime-kiln!

Curtain


SCENE II

(SCENE.--A room built in Gothic style, comfortably furnished and
decorated with trophies of the chase. GRAN ushers in the KING and KOLL.)

Gran. We can be quite alone here. (ANNA, a deaf and dumb girl of about
fifteen, brings in some bottles of champagne, and, during the following
dialogue, sets out glasses, refreshments, cigars, and pipes. She is
quick and attentive to render the slightest service required of her;
when not employed, she sits on a stool in the background. She talks to
GRAN on her fingers, and receives orders from him in the same manner.)

The King. Ah, this is like old times! I know the setting: "Gothic room
in mediaeval style, decorated with trophies of the chase. Furnished with
an eye to bachelor comfort!" You always had bachelor habits, you know,
even when you were quite a boy. (To KOLL.) We never called him anything
but "the Bachelor" on board ship. He never had a love affair in all the
three years our cruise lasted; but the rest of us had them in every port
we touched at!

Koll. He is just the same in that respect now.

Gran (offering the KING some champagne). Allow me!

The King. Thanks; I shall be glad of it. (To KOLL.) Your health, my
former tutor! (To GRAN.) And yours! (They drink.) Ah, that has done me
good!--Well now, let me ask you this: isn't it true that, all through
the meeting, you were talking nothing but republicanism, although you
didn't actually mention the word?

Koll (laughing). You are not far wrong.

The King. And you, who in the old days were considered to be too
advanced in your opinions to be retained as my tutor, are now not
considered advanced enough! They nearly--threw you over, didn't they?

Koll. Yes! That shows you, if I may say so, the result of government by
a minority.

The King. And the result of mixing with such people as our excellent
friend the millionaire here, I suppose?

Gran. It is always a mistake to lay the blame of public opinion on
individuals.

The King. I quite agree with you. And now it is time you knew the reason
of my coming here--in the strictest incognito, as you see. By the way, I
hope no one recognised me?

Gran and Koll. Not a soul!

(FLINK comes in.)

Flink. Ah, here you are! (Comes forward, rubbing his hands delightedly.)
Well, what did you think of the meeting, my boys?

The King (aside to GRAN). Who is that?

Gran (to the KING). We will get rid of him. (To FLINK.) Look here, old
chap--!

Flink (catching sight of the KING). Oh, I beg your pardon, I thought we
were--

Gran (obliged to introduce him). Let me introduce Mr.--? Mr.--? (Looks
at the KING inquiringly.)

The King. Speranza.

Flink. An Italian?

The King. In name only.

Gran (completing the introduction). Mr. Flink.

The King. Surely not A. B. Flink?

Gran. Yes.

The King (interested). Our peripatetic philosopher? (Shakes hands with
him.) I have read one or two of your books.

Flink (laughing). Really?

The King. Are you meditating another expedition?

Flink. That's it.

The King. And on foot?

Flink. Always on foot.

The King. Upon my word, I don't believe there is a man in the country
that can gauge popular opinion as accurately as you! Let us sit down and
have a chat. Do you drink champagne?

Flink. Yes--when I can't get anything better!

The King (lifting his glass to FLINK). Your health, (They all drink, and
then seat themselves.) What part the country were you in last?

Flink. I have just been shooting with our friend here.

The King. So he is your friend? He is mine, too! My best friend, ever
since I was a boy. (He stretches out his hand; GRAN gets up and grasps
it in both of his.)

Koll (to FLINK, who is looking astonished). Mr. Speranza was a naval
cadet at the same time as Gran.

Flink. Really! Were they on the same ship?

The King. Yes, we were on a cruise round the world together--

Flink. Do you mean the time when the Prince went on account of his
lungs?--the present King, I mean?

The King. The Prince that afterwards became King--yes.

Flink. There is quite a royal flavour about our little gathering, then!
Here is the King's shipmate, and here is his tutor in jurisprudence--

Koll. You are forgetting yourself! You are the King's tutor's tutor, you
know--

The King. Were you Koll's tutor? Really?

Flink (with a laugh). Yes, I had that misfortune!

The King. You hadn't so great a misfortune in your pupil as he had in
his!

Koll. The King was a very apt pupil.

Flink (jestingly). He has shown traces of it in his reign, hasn't he!

Koll. Don't speak ill of the King, please.

Flink (ironically). Heaven forbid! (Takes a pinch of snuff.) I know
all about his talent--his great talent, his genial talent! (Offers his
snuff-box to the KING.)

Gran. But it was public opinion we were talking about, Flink; is it very
much like what we heard to-day?

Flink. I wouldn't say that; your opinions are rather advanced in these
parts.

The King. Is the tendency republican, rather than monarchical?

Flink. That depends how you look at it. The King has just been paying
some visits in the country districts; he is, so to speak, the commercial
traveller for his firm--as all kings and crown princes are. Of course he
was cheered everywhere. But go and ask the agricultural classes if
they set great store by the pomp and circumstance of royalty; they will
unanimously answer: "It costs an infernal lot to keep up!" Ha, ha, ha!

Gran. Your farmer is a realist.

Flink. A brutal realist! Ha, ha, ha! Self-government is cheaper. He has
it all at his fingers' ends, the scoundrel!

The King. He is not a republican by conviction, then

Flink. Not universally, no. At least, not _yet_. But things are moving
that way; and our reactionary government is helping the movement--that,
and the letter they get from America.

The King. The letters they get from America?

Koll. Letters from their relations in America.

Gran. There is scarcely a family in the country now that has not
relations in America.

The King. And they write home about self-government?--about republican
principles?

Flink. And republican institutions. That is the situation!

The King. Have you read any of these letters?

Flink. Lots!

The King. This is excellent champagne! (Drinks.)

Gran. Let me fill your glasses. (They all drink.)

Flink. It doesn't really agree with me.

The King. But suppose the King were to establish democratic government?
Suppose he were to live like an ordinary citizen in every way?

Flink. In every way? What do you mean by that?

The King. Kept house like an ordinary citizen--were married like an
ordinary citizen--were to be found in his office at regular hours like
any other official?

Gran. And had no court, I suppose?

The King. No. (KOLL and GRAN exchange glances.)

Flink (shrugging his shoulders). It would be the last sensation left for
him to try.

The King (who did not observe his shrug, eagerly). That is so, isn't it?
You agree with me as to that? I am delighted to have had this talk with
you, Mr. Flink.

Flink. The same to you, Mr.--Mr.--. (In an undertone, to KOLL.) Is he a
republican?

The King (who has overheard him). Am I a republican? I have had too
much experience not to be! Ha, ha! (Takes up his glass.) Devilish good
champagne, this!

Flink (drinking). But, you know, Mr.--Mr. Republican--ha, ha!--(smiles
and whispers)--the King simply would not be allowed to do what you
suggest. Ha, ha!

The King. What do you mean?

Gran (aside to KOLL, who gets up). Are you sure this is right?

Koll. It will do him good, anyway, to hear all sides.

Flink (who has got up and gone to the table on the other side to get a
pipe). He simply would not be allowed to, poor chap! What is monarchy,
I ask you? Nothing more or less than an insurance business in which
a whole crew of priests, officials, noblemen, landed proprietors,
merchants and military men hold shares? And, goodness knows, _they_ are
not going to give their director leave to commit any such folly! Ha, ha,
ha!

The King (getting up). Ha, ha, ha!

Flink (vociferously, to him). Don't you think that is true?

The King. Good Lord!--perfectly true! Ha, ha ha!

Flink (who has cleaned and filled a pipe, but forgotten to light it,
going up to the KING). And what do they insure themselves again,
these beauties? (More seriously.) Against the great mass of the
people--against _his_ people! (The KING looks at him and makes a
movement of dislike.)

Gran. Look here, Flink; suppose we go out into the garden for a little?
These spring evenings are so lovely.

Flink. Compared to a political talk, the loveliest spring evenings have
no attraction for me--no more than warm water, offered me in place of
fine cooling wine, would have. No, let us stay where we are. What is the
matter with this pipe? (ANNA signs that she will put it right for him,
but he does not understand.)

Gran. Give her your pipe; she will put it right.

Koll. What I have always said is that, if the King had an opportunity of
understanding the situation, he would interfere.

Flink. The King? He doesn't care a brass farthing about the whole
matter! He has something else to do! Ha, ha!

The King. Ha, ha, ha!

Koll. The King is an unusually gifted man; he would not remain
indifferent in the long run.

Flink. He has so many unusual gifts that have gone to the devil--!

The King. Tralalla! Tralalalalala! Tralala! It feels quite odd to be
with you fellows again! (Drinks.)

Flink (in an undertone, to GRAN). Is he drunk?

The King (sitting down). Give me a cigar--! And let us discuss the
matter a little more seriously. (KOLL and GRAN sit down.)

Gran. As a matter of fact, it is not a thing that can be discussed.
It must be tried. If, one day, the King were to say: "I mean to live
a natural life among my people, and to withdraw my name from the
old-established royal firm, which has lost all its reputation for
honesty"--that day everything else would follow of itself.

Flink. Yes, that day, I dare say!

Gran. Remember you are the guest of a man who is a friend of the King's!

The King. Don't play the domestic despot--you who are a republican! Let
us have free discussion!

Flink. I certainly don't intend to insult the King. He has never done me
any harm. But surely you will allow me to doubt whether he is really the
shining light you make him out to be?

The King. That is true enough!

Flink (eagerly). You agree with me as to that, then?

The King. Absolutely! But--leaving him out of the question--suppose we
_had_ a king who made himself independent of others, and, as a necessary
consequence, rose superior to questions of party--?

Flink (interrupting him). It is a vain supposition, my dear fellow! A
king bound to no party? (Puffs at his pipe.) It wouldn't work!
(Puffs again.) It wouldn't work!--It wouldn't work!--Falsehood is the
foundation of constitutional monarchy. A king superior to questions of
party? Rubbish!

Gran. It would be expecting something superhuman of him, too.

Flink. Of course it would!

The King. But the president of a republic is even less independent of
party, isn't he?

Flink (turning to hint). He doesn't make any pretence that he isn't.
Haha! That's the difference! (Comes forward, repeating to himself.) It
is the falsehood that makes the difference.

Koll. Oh, there are falsehoods enough in republics too, unfortunately!

Flink. I know; but they are not old-established institutions! Ha, ha!

The King. That is an idea you have got from Professor Ernst's writings.

Flink (eagerly). Have you read them?

The King. I have scarcely read anything else for the last few months.
(KOLL and GRAN exchange glances.)

Flink. Indeed?--Then there is no need for me to say anything more.

Koll. But, after all this talk, we have got no further. Our friend
(pointing to the KING) wants to know, I think, whether a real, serious
attempt at what one might call "democratic monarchy" could not reckon on
being understood and supported--

The King (breaking in, eagerly). Yes, that's just it!

Koll.--understood and supported by the most enlightened section of the
people, who are weary of falsehood and long for a generous but secure
measure of self-government.

The King. That's just it!

Flink (who was just going to sit down, jumps up again, lays down
his pipe and stands with arms akimbo, as he says:) But what sort of
ridiculous ideas are these? Aren't you republicans, then?

Koll. I am not.

Gran. I am; but that does not prevent my being of opinion that the
change of government should be made gradually and gently--

Flink. That would be treason!

Gran. Treason!

Flink. Treason against the truth--against our convictions!

Koll. Don't let us use big words! Monarchy is strongly rooted in the
existing order of things.

Flink (with a laugh). In the insurance company!

Koll. Well, call it so if you like. It _exists_; that is the point. And,
since it exists, we must make it as honest and as serviceable as we can.

The King. Your health, Koll! (Drinks to him.)

Flink (moving away from them). No true republican would agree with you.

Gran. You are wrong there. (FLINK gives a start of surprise.)

The King (who has seen FLINK's surprise, gets up). Listen to me! Suppose
we had a king who said: "Either you help me to establish a democratic
monarchy--purged of all traces of absolutism, purged of falsehood--or
else I abdicate--"

Flink. Bah!

The King. I only say, "suppose"! You know quite well that the cousin of
the present king, the heir apparent, is a bigoted--

Koll (who has been exchanging glances with GRAN while the KING was
speaking, breaks in hurriedly). Don't go on!

The King (with a laugh). I won't!--And his mother, who rules him--

Flink.--is even worse!

The King. What would be your choice, then? Would you help the king to
establish a democratic monarchy or--?

Flink (impetuously). I would ten thousand times rather have the bigoted
prince, with all his own and his mother's follies!--the madder the
better!

Gran. No, no, no, no!

The King (to GRAN and KOLL). We see his true colours now! (Moves away
from them.)

Koll (to FLINK). That is the way you republicans always ride your
principles to death.

Gran. Patriotism ought to come before--

Flink.--before truth? No; a short sharp pang of agony is better than
endless doubt and falsehood, my friend! That is true patriotism.

Koll. Oh, these theories!--these phrases!

Gran. I am a republican as well as you, and, I think, as sincere a one.
But I should have no hesitation--

Flink.--in playing the traitor?

Gran. Why do you use such words as that?

Flink. Words! Do you think it is nothing but words? No, my friend, if
you did what--what I did not allow you to say--I should come here one
day to call you to account. And if you refused to fight me, I should
shoot you like a dog!

Gran (gently). You would not do that.

Flink (heatedly). Not do it?--Have I given you the deepest affection of
which my heart is capable, only for you to turn traitor to it? Am I
to see the man whose character is the crowning achievement of my life,
betraying our cause--and, by reason of his great personal
prestige, dragging thousands down with him? On the head of all the
disillusionments I have suffered, am I to have this one in the evening
of my life--? (Stops, overcome by his emotion. A pause.) You shouldn't
jest about such things you know. (Walks away. ANNA has placed herself in
front of GRAN, as if to protect him.)

Koll. I think we had better change the subject, and go out for a little!

The King (aside, to him). Yes, get him away!

Flink (in the background, as if he were addressing an invisible
audience). We must have discipline in the ranks!

Koll. Gran, ask your maid to hurry up with the supper.

Gran. Yes, I will.

Koll (to the KING). What do you say to a turn in the garden, meanwhile?

The King. By all means!

Flink (coming forward to GRAN). This friendship of yours with the
King--to which I had attached no particular importance--I hope it has
not altogether--(Stops short.)

Gran.--not altogether corrupted me, you mean?

Flink. Exactly.

The King (laughing). Politically?

Flink. Politics are not unconnected with morals, sir!

The King. But why get so heated, sir? We know that the present King is
a--

Koll (breaking in hurriedly). Don't say any more!

The King (with a laugh). You said yourself that he doesn't care a brass
farthing about the whole matter--he has something else to do! And so the
whole thing ends in smoke!

Flink (more amiably). I dare say you are right.

The King. Of course I am. You are all agreed that, under his rule,
republican sentiments are growing in real earnest.

Flink. You are right! He couldn't help things on better if he were a
republican himself, I assure you!

The King. Perhaps he _is_ a republican?

Flink (animatedly). Perhaps he _is_! Splendid! And works against his own
interests--!

The King. A sort of commercial traveller working for the downfall of his
own firm!

Flink (excitedly). For the downfall of his own firm! Splendid! Props
up his reactionary rule by means of royal pronouncements, confidential
communications, public speeches--

The King.--in a suicidal manner!

Flink. Splendidly suicidal! Ah, that makes you laugh, does it?

Koll. Hush, some one might hear us!

Flink. I don't care who hears us! (The KING bursts out laughing.) But
you ought, as one of the King's officials, to stop _his_ laughing!
(Points to the KING.) It's shocking!--It's high treason!

Koll. Listen to me!

Flink. You ought to arrest him for laughing like that! Suppose the
King--

Gran. That _is_ the King! (The KING goes on laughing. FLINK looks from
him to the others, and from the others to him.)

The King. This is too much for me! (Sits down. FLINK rushes out.)

Koll. That was very bad of you.

The King. I know it was; but forgive me! I couldn't help it! Ha, ha, ha,
ha, ha!

Koll. For all his queer ways, he is too good a fellow to be made a fool
of.

The King. Yes, scold me; I deserve it. But, all the same--ha, ha, ha,
ha!

Gran. Hush!--he is coming back. (The KING gets up as FLINK comes in
again.)

Flink. Your Majesty may be assured that I would never have expressed
myself as I did in your Majesty's presence if I had been fairly treated
and told whom I was addressing.

The King. I know. The fault is mine alone.

Flink. The fault is that of others--my so-called friends.

The King (earnestly). By no means! It is mine--mine alone. I have had a
scolding for it!--And in your presence I ask my friends' pardon; I have
put them in a false position. And, in the next place, I ask for your
forgiveness. My sense of humour got the better of me. (Laughs again.)

Flink. Yes, it was extremely amusing.

The King. It really was! And, after all, what have you to complain of?
You had an opportunity of speaking your mind, any way!

Flink. I certainly did!

The King. Very well, then!--And when you wanted to show any respect, _I_
prevented you. So I think we are quits.

Flink. No, we are not.

The King (impatiently). Indeed?--What do you want from me, then?

Flink (proudly). Nothing!

The King. I beg your pardon! I did not mean to offend you.

Flink. You have done so to a degree that you are naturally incapable of
appreciating. (Goes out.)

The King. This is a nice business! (Laughs. Then notices GRAN, who is
standing at his desk with his back to the KING, and goes up to him.) You
are angry with me.

Gran (looking up slowly). Yes.

The King. Why didn't you stop me?

Gran. It all happened too quickly. But to think that you could have the
heart to do it--in my own house--to a man who was my father's oldest
friend, and is mine--!

The King. Harald! (Puts his arm round his shoulders.) Have I ever asked
you for anything that you have not given me?

Gran. No.

The King. Then I ask you now to admit that you know that, if I had
thought this would hurt you, I would never have done it--not for worlds!
Do you still believe as well of me as that?

Gran. Yes.

The King. Thank you. Then I will admit to you, in return, that for
months past I have lived in a state of horrible tension of mind; and
that is why I jump too easily from one extreme to the other. So, my
friends, you must forgive me! Or finish my scolding some other time!
Because now I must talk to you of the matter which induced me to come
here. You are the only ones I can turn to; so be good to me!--Shall we
sit down again?

Koll. As you please.

The King (moving towards the table). I know you both want to ask me the
same question: why I have never come before now. My answer is: because
I have only now arrived at a clear conception of my own position. Some
months ago some hard words that were used to me lit a fire in my heart
and burnt out a heap of rubbish that had collected there. (ANNA fills
their glasses.) Won't you send that girl away?

Gran. She is deaf and dumb.

The King. Poor girl! (Sits down.) When I came back from my cruise round
the world, the old king was dead. My father had come to the throne, and
I was crown prince, and I went with my father to the cathedral to attend
a thanksgiving service for my safe return.

Gran. I was there.

The King. The whole thing was a novelty to me, and a solemn one. I was
overcome with emotion. Seeing that, my father whispered to me: "Come
farther forward, my boy! The people must see their future king praying."
That finished it! I was not born to be a king; my soul was still too
unsullied, and I spurned such falsehood with the deepest loathing. Just
think of it!--to come back from three years at sea, and begin my life in
that way--as if perpetually in front of a mirror! I won't dwell on it.
But when my father died and I became king, I had become so accustomed to
the atmosphere of falsehood I lived in that I no longer recognised
truth when I saw it. The constitution prescribed my religion for me--and
naturally I had none. And it was the same with everything--one thing
after another! What else could you expect? The only tutor I valued--you,
Koll--had been dismissed; they considered you to be too freethinking.

Koll (smilingly). Oh, yes!

The King. The only real friend that dated from my happier days--you,
Harald, had been sent to the right about; you were a republican. It was
while I was in despair over that loss that I fell really in love for the
first time--with your sister, Harald. Banishment, again. What then?
Why, then the craving that every healthy youth feels--the desire for
love--was turned into dissolute channels. (Drinks.)

Gran. I understand, well enough.

The King. Well, put all those things together. That was what my life
was--until just lately. Because lately something happened, my dear
friends. And now you must help me! Because, to make a long story short,
either I mean to be the chief official in my country in a peaceful,
citizenlike, genuine way, or--as God is above me--I will no longer be
king! (Gets up, and the others do so.)

Koll. Ah, we have got it at last!

The King. Do you think I don't know that our republican friend there
spoke what is every thoughtful man's verdict upon me? (They are silent.)
But how could I possibly undertake my task, as long as I believed
everything to be make-believe and falsehood, without exception? Now I
know the root of the falsehood! It is in our institutions; he was quite
right. And one kind of falsehood begets another. You cannot imagine how
ludicrous it appeared to me--who up till then had led such a sinful,
miserable existence--when I saw honourable men pretending that I was a
being of some superior mould! I! (Walks up and down, then stops.) It is
the state--our institutions--that demand this falsehood both on their
part and on mine. And that for the security and happiness of the
country! (Moves about restlessly.) From the time I became crown prince
they kept from me everything that might have instilled truth into
me--friendship, love, religion, a vocation--for my vocation is quite
another one; and it was all done in the name of my country! And now
that I am king, they take away all responsibility from me as well--all
responsibility for my own acts--the system demands it! Instead of an
individual, what sort of a contemptible creature do they make of me! The
kingly power, too?--that is in the hands of the people's representatives
and the government. I don't complain of that; but what I do complain of
is that they should pretend that _I_ have it, and that everything should
be done in _my_ name; that I should be the recipient of petitions,
cheers, acclamations, obeisances--as if the whole power and
responsibility were centred in _my_ person! In me--from whom, in the
interests of all, they have taken away everything! Is that not a pitiful
and ludicrous falsehood? And, to make it credible, they endow me into
the bargain with a halo of sanctity! "The King is sacred;" "Our Most
Gracious Sovereign," "Your Majesty!" It becomes almost blasphemous!

Gran. Quite true.

The King. No, if that cannot be done away with, I can do away with
myself. But it must be possible to do away with it! It cannot be
necessary for a people, who are marching on the eternal path towards
truth, to have a lie marching at the head of them!

Koll. No, it is not necessary.

The King (eagerly). And that is what you will help me to show them.

Koll. I have no objection! There is life in the country yet!

The King (to Gran). And you, my friend? Are you afraid of being shot by
a mad republican if you help me?

Gran. I am not particularly afraid of death, any way. But the maid is
telling us that supper is served.

The King. Yes, let us have supper!

Koll. And then, to our task!

Curtain




ACT II

(SCENE.--A park with old lofty trees. In the foreground, to the right,
an arbour with a seat. The KING is sitting, talking to BANG, who is a
man of gross corpulence.)

Bang. And I felt so well in every way that, I assure your Majesty, I
used to feel it a pleasure to be alive.

The King (drawing patterns in the dust with his walking stick). I can
quite believe it.

Bang. And then I was attacked by this pain in my heart and this
difficulty in breathing. I run round and round this park, on an empty
stomach, till I am absolutely exhausted.

The King (absently). Couldn't you drive round, then?

Bang. Drive?--But it is the exercise, your Majesty, that--

The King. Of course. I was thinking of something else.

Bang. I would not mind betting that I know what your Majesty was
thinking of--if I may say so without impertinence.

The King. What was it, then?

Bang. Your Majesty was thinking of the socialists!

The King. Of the--?

Bang. The socialists!

The King (looking amused). Why particularly of them?

Bang. I was right, you see! Ha, ha, ha! (His laughter brings on a
violent fit of coughing.) Your Majesty must excuse me; laughing always
brings on my cough.--But, you know, the papers this morning are full of
their goings on!

The King. I have not read the paper.

Bang. Then I can assure your Majesty that the way they are going on is
dreadful. And just when we were all getting on so comfortably! What in
the world do they want?

The King. Probably they want to get on comfortably too.

Bang. Aren't they well off as it is, the beasts? Excuse me, your
Majesty, for losing my temper in your Majesty's presence.

The King. Don't mention it.

Bang. You are very good. These strikes, too--what is the object of them?
To make every one poor? Every one can't be rich. However, I pin my faith
to a strong monarchy. Your Majesty is the padlock on my cash-box!

The King. I am what?

Bang. The padlock on my cash-box! A figure of speech I ventured to apply
to your Majesty.

The King. I am much obliged!

Bang. Heaven help us if the liberals come into power; their aim is to
weaken the monarchy.

(A BEGGAR BOY comes up to them.)

Beggar Boy. Please, kind gentlemen, spare a penny! I've had nothing to
eat to-day!

Bang (taking no notice of him). Aren't there whispers of the sort about?
But of course it can't be true.

Beggar Boy (pertinaciously). Please, kind gentlemen, spare a penny! I've
had nothing to eat to-day.

Bang. You have no right to beg.

The King. You have only the right to starve, my boy! Here! (Gives him
a gold coin. The BEGGAR Boy backs away from him, staring at him, and
gripping the coin in his fist.)

Bang. He never even thanked you! Probably the son of a socialist!--I
would never have opened this park to every one in the way your Majesty
has done.

The King. It saves the work-people a quarter of am hour if they can go
through it to get to their work.

(The GENERAL appears, driving the BEGGAR BOY before him with his stick.)

The General (to the BEGGAR). A gentleman sitting on a seat gave it you?
Point him out to me, then!

Bang (getting up). Good morning, your Majesty!

The King. Good morning! (Looks at his watch.)

The General. That gentleman, do you say?

The King (looking up). What is it?

The General. Your Majesty? Allow me to welcome you back!

The King. Thank you.

The General. Excuse me, sir; but I saw this fellow with a gold coin in
his hand, and stopped him. He says your Majesty gave it to him--?

The King. It is quite true.

The General. Oh--of course that alters the case! (To the BEGGAR.) It is
the King. Have you thanked him? (The boy stands still, staring at the
KING.)

The King. Are you taking a morning walk on an empty stomach because of a
weak heart, too?

The General. Because of my stomach, sir--because of my stomach! It has
struck work!

The Beggar Boy. Ha, ha, ha! Ho, ho, ho! (Runs away.)

The General. I am astonished at your Majesty's having thrown this park
open to every one.

The King. It saves the work-people a quarter of an hour if they can
go through it to get to their work.--Well, General, it seems you have
become religious all of a sudden?

The General. Ha, ha, ha! Your Majesty has read my Order of the Day,
then?

The King. Yes.

The General (confidentially). Well, sir, you see things couldn't go on
any longer as they were. (Whispers.) Debauchery in the ranks! I won't
say anything about the officers; but when the men take to such courses
openly--!

The King. Oho!

The General. My brother the bishop and I, between us, composed an Order
of the Day on the subject of the necessity of religion--religion as the
basis of discipline.

The King. As a matter of fact the bishop was the first person I met here
to-day.--Is he suffering from a disordered stomach, too?

The General. More so than any of us, Sir! Ha, ha, ha! (The KING motions
to him to sit down.) Thank you, Sir.--But, apart from that, I have had
it in my mind for some time that in these troublous days there ought to
be a closer co-operation between the Army and the Church--

The King. In the matter of digestion, do you mean?

The General. Ha, ha, ha!--But seriously, Sir, the time is approaching
when such a co-operation will be the only safeguard of the throne.

The King. Indeed?

The General (hurriedly). That is to say, of course, the throne stands
firm by itself--God forbid I should hint otherwise! But what I mean is
that it is the Army ants the Church that must supply the monarchy with
the necessary splendour and authority--

The King. I suppose, then, that the monarchy has no longer any of its
own?

The General (jumping up). Heaven forbid that I should say such a thing!
I would give my life in support of the monarchy!

The King. You will have to die some day, unfortunately (Laughs as he
gets up.) Who is that coming this way?

The General (putting up his eyeglass). That? It is the Princess and
Countess L'Estoque, Sir.

The King. Is the Princess suffering from indigestion too?

The General (confidentially). I fancy your Majesty knows best what the
Princess is suffering from. (The KING moves away from him.) I made a
mess of that! It comes of my trying to be too clever.--He is walking
towards her. Perhaps there is something in it, after all? I must tell
Falbe about it. (Turns to go.) Confound it, he saw that I was watching
them! (Goes out. The KING returns to the arbour with the PRINCESS on his
arm. The COUNTESS and one of the royal servants are seen crossing the
park in the background.)

The Princess. This is a most surprising meeting! When did your Majesty
return?

The King. Last night.--You look very charming, Princess! Such blushing
cheeks!--and so early in the morning!

The Princess. I suppose you think it is rouge?--No, Sir, it is nothing
but pleasure at meeting you.

The King. Flatterer! And I went pale at the sight of you.

The Princess. Perhaps your conscience--?

The King. I am sorry to say my conscience had nothing to do with it. But
this morning I have been meeting so many people that are suffering from
indigestion that, when I saw your Highness walking quickly along--

The Princess. Make your mind easy! My reason for my morning walk is to
keep my fat down. Later in the day I ride--for the same reason. I live
for nothing else now.

The King. It is a sacred vocation!

The Princess. Because it is a royal one?

The King. Do you attribute your sanctity to me? Wicked Princess!

The Princess. Both my sanctity and any good fortune I enjoy. It
is nothing but my relationship to your Majesty that induces the
tradespeople to give me unlimited credit.

The King. You don't feel any awkwardness about it, then?

The Princess. Not a bit! The good folk have to maintain many worse
parasites than me!--By the way, talking of parasites, is it true that
you have pensioned off all your lords-in-waiting and their hangers-on?

The King. Yes.

The Princess. Ha, ha, ha! But why did you make the special stipulation
that they should live in Switzerland?

The King. Because there is no court in Switzerland, and--

The Princess. And so they could not fall into temptation again! I have
had many a good laugh at the thought of it. But it has its serious side
too, you know; because your Majesty cannot dispense with a court.

The King. Why not?

The Princess. Well, suppose some day you are "joined in the bonds of
holy matrimony," as the parsons so beautifully put it?

The King. If I were, it would be for the sake of knowing what family
life is.

The Princess. Like any other citizen?

The King. Precisely.

The Princess. Are you going to keep no servants?

The King. As many as are necessary--but no more.

The Princess. Then I must secure a place as chambermaid in your
Majesty's household as soon as possible. Because if my financial
circumstances are inquired into there will be nothing else left for me
but that!

The King. You have too sacred a vocation for that, Princess!

The Princess. How pretty! Your Majesty is a poet, and poets are allowed
to be enthusiastic about ideals. But the people are poets too, in their
way; they like their figure-head to be well gilded, and don't mind
paying for it. That is their poetry.

The King. Are you certain of that?

The Princess. Absolutely certain! It is a point of honour with them.

The King. Then I have to weigh my honour against theirs! And my honour
forbids me--for the honour of my people and their poetry--to keep up my
palaces, my guards, and my court any longer! _Voilà tout_!

The Princess. My dear King, certain positions carry with them certain
duties!

The King. Then I know higher duties than those!--But, Princess, here are
we two seriously discussing--

The Princess. Yes, but there is something at the bottom of it that is
not to be laughed away. All tradition and all experience proclaim it to
be the truth that a king--the kingly majesty--should be a dignity apart;
and should be the ultimate source of law, surrounded with pomp and
circumstance, and secure behind the fortified walls of wealth, rank,
and hereditary nobility. If he steps out of that magic circle, the law's
authority is weakened.

The King. Has your Royal Highness breakfasted yet?

The Princess. No. (Bursts out laughing.)

The King. Because, if you had, I should have had great pleasure is
giving you a lesson in history; but on an empty stomach that would be
cruel.

The Princess. Do you know--you used to be such an entertaining king, but
this last year you have become so tedious!

The King. Most beautiful of princesses! Do you really mean to say that
I rise and fall in your estimation according as I have my pretty royal
gew-gaws on or not?

The Princess. In my estimation?

The King. Or in any one's? You know the story of "The Emperor's New
Clothes"?

The Princess. Yes.

The King. We don't keep up that pretence any longer.

The Princess. But will every one understand?

The King. You understand, don't you?

The Princess. The people or I--that is all the same, I suppose! You are
very flattering.

The King. Heaven forbid that I should lump your Royal Highness together
with the common herd; but--

The Princess. We have already had proof of the fact that your Majesty
does not hold the same place in _every one's_ estimation that you do in
mine, at all events!

The King. If I occupy a place of honour in your Royal Highness's heart,
your Royal Highness may be certain that--

The Princess. I will interrupt you to save you from speaking an untruth!
Because the way to attain to a place of honour in your Majesty's heart
is not to admire you as I do, but, on the contrary, to shout out: "I
despise you!"--Au revoir!

The King. You wicked, terrifying, dangerous--

The Princess.--omniscient and ubiquitous Princess! (Makes a deep
curtsey, and goes away.)

The King (calling after her). In spite of everything, my heart goes with
you--

The Princess.--to show me the door! I know all about that! (To the
COUNTESS.) Come, Countess! (Goes out. FALBE, an old gentleman in
civilian dress, has come in from the side to which the KING'S back is
turned.)

The King. How the devil did she--?

Falbe (coming up behind him). Your Majesty!

The King (turning quickly). Ah, there you are!

Falbe. Yes, sir--we have been walking about in the park for some time;
your Majesty was engaged.

The King. Not engaged--I was only deadening thoughts by gossiping. My
anxiety was too much for me. So they have come?--both of them?

Falbe. Both of them.

The King. Can I believe it! (Appears overcome.) But--you must wait a
moment! I can't, just at this moment--. I don't know what has come over
me!

Falbe. Are you unwell, sir? You look so pale.

The King My nerves are not what they should be. Is there any water near
here?

Falbe (pointing, in astonishment). Why, there is the fountain, Sir!

The King. Of course! Of course!--I don't seem able to collect my
thoughts. And my mouth is as dry as--. Look here, I am going that way
(points); and then you can--you can bring the ladies here.--She is here!
She is here! (Goes out to the left, and turns round as he goes.) Don't
forget to lock the gates of the inner park!

Falbe. Of course not, Sir. (Goes out to the right, and returns bringing
in the BARONESS MARC and CLARA.) His Majesty will be here in a moment.
(Goes out to the right.)

Clara. You must stay near enough for me to be able to call you.

Baroness. Of course, my dear. Compose yourself; nothing can happen.

Clara. I am so frightened.

Baroness. Here is the King! (The KING comes in and bows to them.)

The King. Excuse me, ladies, for having kept you waiting. I am very
grateful to you both for coming.

Baroness. We only came upon your Majesty's solemn promise--

The King.--which shall be inviolable.

Baroness. I understand that you wish to speak to Miss Ernst alone?

The King. Your ladyship need only go up to the top of that little slope.
(Points.) I can recommend the view from there.

Baroness. The interview will not be a long one, I suppose?

The King. If it is, I give your ladyship permission to come and
interrupt us. (The BARONESS goes out. The KING turns to CLARA.) May I be
permitted to thank you again--you especially--for having been so good as
to grant me this interview?

Clara. It will be the only one.

The King. I know that. You have not condescended to answer one of my
letters--

Clara. I have not read them.

The King.--so there was nothing left for me but to address myself to the
Baroness. She was _obliged_ to listen to me, Miss Ernst.

Clara (trembling). What has your Majesty to say to me?

The King. Indeed, I can't tell it you in a single sentence. Won't you
sit down? (CLARA remains standing.) You must not be afraid of me. I mean
you no harm; I never could mean you any harm.

Clara (in tears). Then what do you call the persecution that I have
endured for more than a year?

The King. If you had condescended to read a single one of my long and
many letters you would have known I call it a passion that is stronger
than--. (CLARA turns to go. The KING continues anxiously.) No, Miss
Ernst, by everything you hold dear, I beg you not to leave me!

Clara. Then you must not insult me!

The King. If that is an insult your terms are very hard.

Clara. Hard? No, but what you have done to me is hard! (Bursts into
tears.)

The King. Don't cry, Miss Ernst! You don't know how you hurt me!

Clara (angrily). Do you know what it means to try and ruin a young
girl's reputation?

The King. I repeat that you are doing me an injustice

Clara. An injustice?--Good God! Do you know who I am?

The King (taking of his hat respectfully). You are the woman I love.

Clara (quietly and with dignity). Your Majesty has solemnly promised not
to insult me.

The King. As sure as there is a heaven above us I will not, and could
not, insult you! But I will obey your wishes.

Clara. When a king says such a thing as--as you did just now, to a poor
little governess, it is more than an insult! It is so cowardly, so base!
And to think that you could have the heart to do it after what you have
done to my father!

The King. Your father?--I?

Clara. Do you really not know who I am?

The King I don't understand--

Clara. Whose daughter I am, I mean?

The King. I only know that your father's name is Ernst. (Suddenly.)
Surely your father is not--?

Clara. Professor Ernst.

The King. The republican?

Clara (slowly). Yes. (A pause.) I may remind your Majesty that he was
sentenced for high treason. And why? Because he warned the young men at
the university against the bad example set by the King! (A pause.)
He was sentenced to a long term of imprisonment. In escaping from
his prison he broke both his legs; and now he lives in exile--a
cripple--supported by what money I am able to earn. (A pause.) You have
ruined his life--and now you are trying to ruin mine too!

The King. I beg of you--!

Clara. I am ashamed of my tears. It is not compassion for myself or for
my father that makes them flow; it is the heartless injustice of it all
that overcomes me.

The King. God knows, if only I could atone for the injustice--! But what
can I do?

Clara. You can let me alone, so that I may do my work in peace; that is
what you can do! Neither he nor I ask for more than that--of you!

The King. I must do more than that!

Clara. No! Can you not understand that a girl who is persecuted by the
king's attentions cannot be a governess? All you will achieve will be to
rob me and my father of our bread!--Oh, God!

The King. But my intention is not to--

Clara (interrupting him). And you are not even man enough to be ashamed
of yourself!

The King. Yes, you may say what you please to me!

Clara. I have nothing more to say to you. I have said what I have to
say. (Turns to go.)

The King. No, don't go! You have not even heard me yet. You don't even
know what I want to beg of you!

Clara. My dishonour.

The King (vehemently). You misunderstand me utterly! If you had only
read a single one of my letters you would have known that there is
standing before you a man whom you have humbled. Ah, don't look so
incredulous! It is true, if there is any truth in anything. You don't
believe me? (Despairingly.) How am I to--! A man who has risked your
contempt for more than a year, and has been faithful to you without even
being allowed to see you or exchange a word with you--who has had no
thought for anything or any one else--is not likely to be doing that out
of mere idleness of heart! Do you not believe that, either?

Clara. No.

The King. Well, then, there must surely be some general truths that you,
as Ernst's daughter, cannot refuse to believe! Let me ask you if you can
understand how a man becomes what I was at the time when I repeatedly
insulted you. You must know, from your father's books, in what an
unnatural atmosphere a king is brought up, the soul-destroying sense of
self-importance which all his surroundings foster, until, even in
his dreams, he thinks himself something more than human; the doubtful
channels into which his thoughts are forced, while any virtues that he
has are trumpeted abroad, and his vices glossed over with tactful and
humorous tolerance. Don't you think that a young king, full of eager
life, as I was, may plead something in excuse of himself that no other
man can?

Clara. Yes, I admit that.

The King. Then you must admit that the very position he has to assume as
a constitutional monarch is an acted lie. Think what a king's vocation
is; _can_ a vocation of that sort be hereditary? Can the finest and
noblest vocation in the world be that?

Clara. No!

The King. Then suppose that he realises that himself; suppose that the
young king is conscious, however dimly and partially, of the lie he is
living--and suppose that, to escape from it, he rushes into a life of
pleasure. Is it not conceivable that he may have some good in him, for
all that? And then suppose that one morning, after a night of revelling,
the sun shines into his room; and he seems to see upon the wall, in
letters of fire, some words that were said to him the night before--true
words (CLARA looks up at him in surprise)--the words: "I despise you!"
(CLARA gives a start.) Words like that can burn out falsehood. And he,
to whom they are said, may long to hear again the tones of the voice
that spoke them. No man has ever hated what has given him new life. If
you had read a single one of the letters which I felt impelled to write
even if they were refused acceptance--you would not have called it
persecution. (CLARA does not answer.) And, as for my persecution of your
father--I am not going to make any excuses for myself; I will only
ask you to remember that a king has no control over the law and its
judgments. I feel the sincerest respect for your father.

Clara. Thank you.

The King. And it is just part of the falsehood I was speaking of, that
he should be condemned for saying of me what I have said a thousand
times of myself!

Clara (softly). Dare I believe that?

The King. Ah, if only you had read one of my letters! Or even the little
book of poems I sent you last! I thought that, if you would not receive
my letters, perhaps a book--

Clara. I do not accept anonymous gifts.

The King. I see you are on your guard--although I don't admit that the
poems were mine! May I read it to you?

Clara. I don't understand--.

The King. One that I marked--for you. It will prove to you what you
refuse to believe.

Clara. But if the poem is not yours?

The King. The fact that I have marked it shows that its sentiments apply
to me. Will you let me read it to you? (CLARA looks up.) Do not be too
much surprised, Miss Ernst! (Takes a slim volume from his pocket.) I
found this somewhere. (Turns over the leaves.) It won't take long to
read. May I?

Clara. If only I understood--

The King.--why I want to read it? Simply for the reason that you have
forbidden me to speak to you--or to write to you; but not, as yet, to
read to you! (CLARA smiles. A pause.) Do you know--a little event has
just happened in my life?--and yet not such a little one, after all!

Clara. What is that?

The King. I have seen you smile for the first time.

Clara. Your Majesty!

The King. But, Miss Ernst, is it an insult, too, to see you smile?

Clara (smiling). If I consent to hear the poem, shall not the Baroness--

The King.--hear it also? With pleasure; but not at the same time!
Please! Because I am a very bad reader. You can show it to the Baroness
afterwards, if you like. (CLARA smiles.) May I?

Clara. You are sure there is nothing in it that--

The King. You can interrupt me, if you think fit. It is called "The
Young Prince;" and it is about--no, I won't tell you what it is about
unless you will be so good as to sit down, so that I can sit down
too. If I stand up I shall be sure to begin declaiming, and I do that
shockingly badly!--You can get up again when you like, you know! (CLARA
smiles and sits down. The KING sits down beside her.) Now, then! "The
Young Prince." (To himself.) I can scarcely breathe. (He begins to
read.)

 Full fed with early flattery and pride--

(Breaks off.) Excuse me, Miss Ernst! I don't feel--

Clara. Is your Majesty not well?

The King. Quite well! It is only--. Now, then!

 Full fed with early flattery and pride,
 His sated soul was wearied all too young;
 Honour and kingly pomp seemed naught to him
 But whimsies from the people's folly sprung.

 From such pretence he fled to what was real--
 Fair women's arms, laughter and love and pleasure,
 All the mad joy of life; whate'er he craved,
 He found was given him in double measure.

 Whate'er he craved--until one day a maiden
 To whom he whispered, like a drunken sot,
 "I'd give my life to make thee mine, my sweeting!"
 Turned from him silently and answered not.

 He sought by every means to win her to him;
 But when his love with cold _contempt_ was met,
 It was as if a judgment had been spoken
 Upon his life, and doom thereon were set.

 His boon companions left him; in his castles
 None seemed to be awake but he alone,
 Racked with remorse, enshrouded in the darkness
 Of dull despair, yet longing to atone.

 Then through the darkness she appeared! and humbly,
 Emboldend by her gentleness of mien,
 He sued once more: "If only thou wouldst listen!
 If still 'twere not too late--"

(His emotion overcomes him, and he stops suddenly, gets up, and walks
away from CLARA. She gets up, as he comes back to her.) Excuse me! I had
no intention of making a scene. But it made me think of--. (Breaks of
again overcome by emotion, and moves a little way from her. There is a
pause as he collects himself before returning to her.) As you can hear,
Miss Ernst, it is nothing much of a poem--not written by a real poet,
that is to say; a real poet would have exalted his theme, but this is a
commonplace--

Clara. Has your Majesty anything more to say to me? (A pause.)

The King. If I have anything more to say to any one, it is to you.

Clara. I beg your pardon.

The King. No, it is I should beg yours. But I am sure you do not wish me
to lie to you.

Clara (turning her head away). No.

The King. You have no confidence in me. (Control, his emotion.) Will you
ever, I wonder, come to under stand that the only thing I crave for now
is--one person's confidence!

Clara. Any one who speaks as your Majesty has done to-day surely craves
for more than that.

The King. More than that, yes; but, first of all, one person's
confidence.

Clara (turning away). I don't understand--

The King (interrupting her, with emotion). Your life has not been as
empty and artificial as mine.

Clara. But surely you have your task here to fill it with?

The King. I remember reading once about the way a rock was undermined,
and the mine filled with gunpowder with an electric wire leading to
it. Just a slight pressure on a little button and the great rock was
shattered into a thousand pieces. And in the same way everything is
ready here; but the little pressure--to cause the explosion--is what I
am waiting for!

Clara. The metaphor is a little forced.

The King. And yet it came into my mind as unconsciously as you broke
off that twig just now. If I do not get what I lack, nothing can be
accomplished--there can be no explosion! I shall abandon the whole thing
and let myself go under.

Clara. Go under?

The King. Well, not like the hero of a sensational novel--not straight
to the bottom like a stone--but like a dreamer carried off by pixies
in a wood, with one name ever upon my lips! And the world would have to
look after itself.

Clara. But that is sheer recklessness.

The King. I know it is; but I am reckless. I stake everything upon one
throw! (A pause.)

Clara. Heaven send you may win.

The King. At least I am daring enough to hope that I may--and there are
moments when I almost feel certain of victory!

Clara (embarrassed). It is a lovely morning--

The King.--for the time of year; yes. And it is lovelier here than it is
anywhere else!

Clara. I cannot really understand a course of action which implies a
want of all sense of responsibility--

The King. Every one has their own point of view. A scheme of life, to
satisfy me, must have its greatest happiness hidden away at its core; in
my case that would be to have a house of my own--all to myself, like any
other citizen--from which I should go away to my work, and come back
to as to a safe refuge. That is the button on the electric wire, do you
understand? It is the little pressure on it that I am waiting for. (A
pause.)

Clara. Have you read my father's book, _Democratic Monarchy_?

The King. Yes.

Clara. He wrote it when I was a child; and so I may say that I grew up
amongst ideas like--like those I have heard from you to-day. All the
friends that came to our house used to talk to me about it.

The King. Then no doubt you heard the crown prince talked about, too!

Clara. I think I heard his name oftener mentioned at home than any
one's. I believe the book was written expressly for you.

The King. I can feel that when I read it. If only I had been allowed to
read it in those days! Do you remember how in it your father maintains,
too, that all reform depends on the beating down of the hedge that
surrounds royalty?--on a king's becoming, as he says, "wedded to
his people" in the fullest sense of the word, not irregularly or
surreptitiously? No king can share his people's thoughts if he lives
apart from them in a great palace, married to a foreign princess. There
is no national spirit behind a complicated court life of outlandish
ceremonial.

Clara (turning away her head). You should have heard how vehemently my
father used to assert those ideas.

The King. And yet he abandoned them.

Clara. Became a republican, you mean?

The King. Yes.

Clara. He was so disappointed. (A pause.)

The King. I sometimes wonder every one isn't a republican! It must come
to that in the end; I can see that. If only royalties nowadays thought
seriously enough about it to realise it!

Clara. It is made so difficult for them by those who surround them.

The King. Yes, you see, that is another reason why any such reform must
begin at home. Do you think that a king, who went every day to his work
from a home that was in every respect like that of one of his people,
could fail in the long run?

Clara. There are so many different kinds of homes.

The King. I mean a home that holds love instead of subservience--comfort
instead of ceremony-truth instead of flattery; a home where--ah, well, I
need not teach a woman what a home means.

Clara. We make them what they are.

The King. Surely; but they are especially what women make them. (A
pause.)

Clara. The sun is quite strong now.

The King. But it can scarcely pierce through the screen of leaves here.

Clara. When the sun shines down like this and the leaves tremble--

The King. The sunshine seems to tremble too.

Clara. Yes, but it makes one feel as if everything were trembling--even
deep down into our hearts!

The King. That is true.--Yes, its homes are the most precious things a
nation makes. Their national characteristics mean reverence for their
past and possibilities for their future.

Clara. I understand better now what you meant.

The King. When I said I wanted to begin at the beginning?

Clara. Yes. (A pause.)

The King. I cannot do otherwise. My heart must be in my work.

Clara (smiling). My father had his heart in his work, too.

The King. Forgive me--but don't you think it was just the want of
an object in his life that led your father to push his theories too
far?--an object outside himself, I mean?

Clara. Perhaps. If my mother had lived--. (Stops.)

The King.--he might have taken it differently; don't you think so?

Clara. I have sometimes thought so. (A pause.)

The King. How still it is! Not a sound!

Clara. Yes, there is the fountain.

The King. That is true; but one ends by hardly hearing a continuous
sound like that.

Clara. There is a tremulousness in _that_ too. (Looks round her.)

The King. What are you looking for?

Clara. It is time to look for the Baroness.

The King. She is up on that slope. Shall I call her? Or--perhaps you
would like to see a fine view?

Clara. Yes.

The King. Then let us go up to her together! (They go.)




ACT III


SCENE I

(SCENE. An open place in the town. It is evening, and the square is
badly lit. On the right is the club, a large building, standing alone;
lights are shining from all its windows. Steps lead from the door, above
which is a balcony. The square is full of people. In the background,
standing on the lowest step of the pedestal of an equestrian statue,
is a BALLAD SINGER, singing to the accompaniment of his guitar. Cigars,
oranges, and other wares are being sold by hawkers. The singer's voice
is heard before the curtain rises. The crowd gradually joins him in the
refrain which he repeats after each verse of his ballad.)

The Ballad Singer (sings).

 The Princeling begged and begged and begged
 Her love, on bended knee.
 The Maid said craftily, "Nay, nay,
 I doubt your high degree!"

    Refrain.

  She knew the might, the might, the might
  Of love's distracting hour;
  How royalty, with all its pomp,
  Will curtsey to its power.

 The Princeling said: "Consent, my dear,
 And you shall marry me."
 The Maiden answered mockingly,
 "Over the left, maybe!"

 "Nay, as my Queen, enchanting maid,
 And that this very day!"
 The Maiden answered him, "Gadzooks!"
 And fainted right away.

 Recovering, she sighed, "My Lord,
 Princesses will be wroth;
 On every side they sit and wait
 To plight to you their troth."

 He answered, "Bosh!"--"But what of those
 Who counselled you before?"
 "Whom do you mean?"--"Your ministers!"
 "I'll show them to the door!"

 "But think, my dear--your generals,
 Your nobles, court, and priest;
 They'll try to drag you from my side
 Or shun us as the pest."

 "Nay, be not feared! I'll make you more
 By dozens at a word,
 Who'll bow and grovel if they be
 To rank and place preferred."

 "But think of the republicans!
 My father!--what if he--?"
 "The cock that crows the loudest, then,
 Prime minister shall be!"

 "Suppose the people stoutly swear
 They'll none of me?"--"Nay, nay,
 An order here, a title there,
 And all will homage pay."

 "Then I am yours!"--"Hurrah!" He holds
 Her tight his arms between;
 "Nay, not so fast, my kingly love!
 Not till I am your Queen!"

  She knew the might, the might, the might
  Of love's distracting hour;
  How royalty, with all its pomp,
  Will curtsey to its power.

An Old Gentleman (to another). What is going on here?

Second Old Gentleman. I don't know. I have only just come.

A Workman. Why, the King is coming past here with her!

First Old Gentleman. Coming past here with her? To hold a court at the
palace?

The Workman. Yes.

Second Old Gentleman (taking a pinch of snuff). And I suppose those
fellows in the club mean to make a demonstration?--hiss them, or
something of that sort?

The Workman. So they say.

First Old Gentleman. Have they decided not to attend the court then?

A Dandy. Unanimously decided.

A Woman. It's filthy!

The Dandy. I beg your pardon?

The Woman. I say that those fellows in there will condescend to seduce
our daughters, right enough; but they won't condescend to marry them.
But, you see, the King does.

The Workman. I am not sure it wouldn't be better if he didn't.

The Woman. Well, I know people who say that she is quite a respectable
person.

The Dandy. I imagine that you have not read the newspapers?

First Old Gentleman. Hm!--one has to be a little careful as to how far
one believes the newspapers.

Second Old Gentleman (offering him his snuff-box). I am delighted to
hear you say that! There is such a lot of slander flying about. That
bawdy ballad just now; for instance.

The Woman. Yes, that's poking fun at _him_--I know that.

The Dandy. You had better take care what you are saying, my good woman!

The Woman. Ah, I only say what I know.

(FLINK appears on the steps of the statue beside the BALLAD SINGER.)

Flink. Stop your stupid songs! I want to speak!

Voice in the Crowd. Who is that?

Flink. You don't know me. I have never made public speeches--and least
of all to street mobs.

Voice in the Crowd. Why are you doing it now, then?

Flink. Because I have been charged with a message to you! (The members
of the club rush to the windows and on to the balcony and steps.
Uproar.)

Voice in the Crowd. Be quiet! Let us hear him!

Flink. Listen to me, good people! You don't know me. But you used to
know a tall chap, with long white hair and a big hat, who often made
speeches to you. I mean Professor Ernst.

Voice in the Crowd. Three cheers for Professor Ernst. (Cheers.)

Flink. He was sent to prison, as you know, for high treason; escaped
from prison, but broke his legs. Now he is living in exile, hopelessly
crippled.

Voice in the Crowd. He got a pardon.

Another. No one knows where he is.

Flink. I know where he is. He has charged me to deliver a message to you
to-day.

Voices from the Club. Bravo!

Voices from the Crowd. Has he! Bravo, Ernst!

Voices from the Club. Be quiet, down there!

Flink. He made me promise that, on the day on which his daughter was to
be presented at the palace as the King's betrothed, I would stand up
in some public place where she would pass by, and say that it was being
done against her father's will and in spite of his urgent entreaties and
commands. (Loud cries of "Bravo!" from the club. A voice in the crowd:
"That is just what we thought!") I am charged to announce publicly that
he despises her for it and sends her his curse! (Fresh cries of "Bravo!"
from the club. Voices in the crowd: "That's shocking!"--"No, he was
quite right;" etc., etc. Uproar.) Quiet, good people!

A Young Man in the Crowd. May I be allowed to ask a question? (Shouts of
"Yes!" and "No!" and laughter are heard.)

Flink. By all means.

The Young Man. Did not Professor Ernst himself advocate a king's doing
just what our King has done?

Voices in the Crowd. Hear, hear!

Flink. Yes, and in return was thrown into prison and is now an incurable
cripple. No one has been more cruelly treated by the King's hirelings.
And now here is his daughter willing to become Queen!

Count Platen (from the club balcony). I don't see why you want to
blame her! No; what I say is, that it is our dissolute King's fault
altogether! (Renewed uproar. Cries of: "Turn him out!" from the club.)

Flink. I had something more to say about those who--. But make those
fellows at the club be quiet first.

A Voice. They are fighting over there! (Laughter. Wild uproar is heard
from the club, amidst which COUNT PLATEN'S voice is heard shouting: "Let
me be! Let me alone!"--and other voices: "Don't let him go out!"--"He is
drunk!" Eventually COUNT PLATEN comes out on to the steps, hatless and
dishevelled.)

Count Platen. I'm going to make a speech to you! I am better than that
crew in there! (Cries of "Bravo!") What I say is, that the King is
coming past here directly with a woman. (Applause, and laughter. Every
one crowds towards him. The police try to pull him down. A free
fight ensues.) Hiss them when they come! (Cries of "Throw him
down!"--"Bravo!"--"Hurrah!") I, Count Platen, tell you to do so! Hiss
him, howl at him, make a regular hullabaloo when he comes! I, Count
Platen, tell you to! (Cries of "Three cheers for Count Platen!" are
mingled with cries of "Three cheers for the King!" There is a general
tumult. COUNT PLATEN is hustled up and down the steps, and tries to
go on making his speech every time he comes up.) He is defiling the
throne!--He wants to marry a traitor's daughter! Shame! I, Count Platen,
say so! Here I stand--! (A trumpet-call is heard; then cries of "Here is
the King!"--"No, it's the cavalry!"--"The cavalry are coming!"--"Clear
the square!" A shot is heard, followed by a scream; the people take to
their heels as another trumpet-call is heard. Curtain.)


SCENE II

(SCENE.--A room in the BARONESS' house. The BARONESS is sitting reading.
A MAID enters and brings her a card.)

Baroness (looking at the card). The Minister of the Interior!--Show him
in! (GRAN comes in.) I am glad to see you back, your Excellency!--You
have found him, then?

Gran. Yes, we have discovered him.

Baroness. And spoken to him?

Gran. Yes.

Baroness. May I send for his daughter?

Gran. For heaven's sake

Baroness. What is the matter?

Gran. He is a dying man.

Baroness. What!

Gran. The King desires me to tell you that he has ordered a special
train to be ready at 10 o'clock, so that as soon as the court is over
she can go to her father. The King will accompany her.

Baroness. That is kind of him!

Gran. Then you will get ready everything that she needs for a night's
journey?

Baroness. Yes.

Gran. And without her being aware of it? The King does not wish her to
know anything of her father's condition till after the court.

Baroness. The court is to be held, then?

Gran. The court is to be held. After it is over, His Majesty will tell
her the news himself.

Baroness. I am thankful for that.--But what did Professor Ernst say? Why
has he not answered his daughter's letter? Why has he hidden from her?
Is he really irreconcilable?

Gran. Irreconcilable? He hates her!

Baroness. Good heavens!

Gran. And not only her, but every one that has made common cause with
the King--every one!

Baroness. I suppose it was to be expected.--But won't you sit down?

Gran (bows, but remains standing). I had a talk with his doctor before I
saw him. He had some hesitation about letting me in. It was a fortnight
since his patient had been able to move. But when I told him my errand,
and that I had come from the King, he let me see him.

Baroness. How did he look? He was a fine man once.

Gran. He was sitting in a big chair, a mere paralysed wreck of a man.
But when he saw me and realised who I was--and probably, too, what my
errand was--he found the strength not only to move, but to seize both
his crutches and raise himself on them! I shall never forget his gaunt
ashen-grey face, the feverish gleam in his sunken eyes, his unkempt hair
and beard--

Baroness. He must have looked terrible!

Gran. He was like a creature from beyond the grave--with an eternity of
hatred in his eyes!

Baroness. Oh, my God!

Gran. When at last I could find my voice, I gave him his daughter's
greeting, and asked if she might come and see him. A dark look came into
his eyes, and his face flushed for a moment, as he gasped out: "May she
be--." He could not finish the sentence. His crutches slipped from his
grasp and he fell down, blood pouring from his mouth. The doctor rushed
to him; and for a long time we thought he was dead.

Baroness. But he came round?

Gran. I waited an hour or two before I started back. Then the doctor
told me that he had recovered consciousness, but that the end could
certainly not be far off--perhaps not twenty-four hours.

Baroness. It must have been a shock to you.

Gran. It was.

Baroness. But what did he mean by: "May she be--"

Gran. That is what I have been wondering.

Baroness. He cannot do her any harm, can he?

Grad. He may give her the same reception that he gave me; if she goes.

Baroness, Even if the King is with her?

Gran. All the more then!

Baroness. Oh, that would be horrible! But it won't prevent her going.

Gran. Let us hope so!

Baroness. I am certain of it! She has extraordinary strength of
character--just like her father's.

Gran. Yes, that is the one thing I rely on.

Baroness. What do you mean? Your words sound so despondent!

Gran. I mean what is perfectly true--that everything will depend upon
her strength of character.

Baroness. What about the King, then?

Gran. I could say a great deal on that topic, Baroness; but (bows) you
must excuse me--I haven't time now.

Baroness. How are the elections going?

Gran. They are going well--if nothing happens now?

Baroness. What could happen?

Gran. The situation is very strained; one must expect anything.

Baroness. Are you anxious, your Excellency?

Gran. I must beg leave to retire now. (A MAID comes in.)

Maid (to GRAN). The Inspector of Police, who came with your Excellency,
wishes to know if he may speak to your Excellency.

Gran. I will come at once. (To the BARONESS.) There is rioting going on
in the town, not far from here--in front of the club.

Baroness (in alarm). What?--Isn't the King coming along that way?

Gran. Don't be afraid! We have taken our precautions--Good-bye! (Goes
out.)

Baroness.--He has quite alarmed me--everything seems to come at the same
time! She has had a suspicion that there was something amiss with her
father; I have noticed that, but she hasn't wanted to speak about it.
(CLARA comes in, dressed for the court.) Ah, there you are, my dear!
Quite ready?

Clara. Quite.

Baroness (looking at her). Well, I daresay there have been royal brides
more elaborately dressed, but I am sure there has never been one more
charming. (Kisses her.)

Clara. I think I hear a carriage?

Baroness. I expect it is the King!

Clara. I am afraid it is too early yet--but all the same I hope it is
he!

Baroness. Do you feel afraid?

Clara. No, no--it is not that at all; it is something--something that
you don't--a kind of feeling as if--as if some one were haunting me; and
I know who it is. I only feel secure when the King is with me. I hope it
may be he coming. (Goes to the window.)

(The MAID comes in.)

Maid. A lady wishes to speak to you, Miss Ernst--

Baroness. A lady?

Clara. Didn't she give her name?

Maid. She is veiled--and very handsomely dressed.

Clara (with decision). No! I can see no one.

Baroness. No one that we do not know. (To the MAID.) You ought to know
that.

Maid (hesitatingly). But I think it is--. (The door opens and the
PRINCESS comes in.)

Baroness. What does this mean? Clara! leave us, my dear.

Princess (drawing aside her veil). Do you know me?

Clara and Baroness. The Princess!

Princess. Are you Clara Ernst?

Clara. Yes.

Princess (haughtily, to the BARONESS). Leave us alone! (The BARONESS
goes out.) Before going to the palace I wanted to come here--even at the
risk of meeting the King.

Clara. He has not come yet. (A long pause.)

Princess. Have you thought well over what you are going to do?

Clara. I think so.

Princess. I don't think you have. Have you read what the papers say
about it--every one of them--to-day?

Clara. No. The King has advised me not to.

Princess. But the letters that have been sent to you? I know letters
have been written to you.

Clara. The King has advised me not to read them either. He takes all the
letters.

Princess. Do you know that they are rioting in the streets close to
here?

Clara (in alarm). No!

Princess. You will be received with hisses, hooting--perhaps with stone
throwing. You didn't expect anything like that, did you?

Clara. No.

Princess. What shall you do?

Clara (after a moment, quietly). I shall go with the King.

Princess. A nice road you are dragging him along, truly! And I assure
you that the farther you go along it, the worse it will become. You
cannot possibly have prepared yourself for all that you will have to go
through.

Clara. I think I have.

Princess (in surprise). What do you mean? How?

Clara (bending her head). I have prayed to God.

Princess. Pshaw! I mean that you cannot have considered the misery into
which you are dragging the King--and the disgrace and trouble you are
bringing upon all his people. (CLARA is silent.) You are young still;
your heart cannot be altogether hardened yet, whatever your past may
have been.

Clara (proudly). I have no reason to be ashamed of my past.

Princess. Indeed? What sort of a past has it been, then?

Clara. One full of suffering, princess--and of work. (A pause.)

Princess. Do you know what the King's past has been?

Clara (drooping her head). Ah, yes.

Princess. Yours will be tarred with the same brush--no matter what it
really has been.

Clara. I know that. He has told me so.

Princess. Really!--After all, is it a sacrifice you are making for his
sake? Do you love the King?

Clara (faintly). Yes.

Princess. Then listen to me. If you loved the King, you would have made
a _real_ sacrifice for him. We are women, you and I; we can understand
these things without many words. But such a sacrifice does not consist
in consenting to be his queen.

Clara. It is not I that wished it.

Princess. You have allowed yourself to be persuaded?--Well, you are
either deceiving yourself, my girl, or you are deceiving him. Perhaps
you began with the one and are ending with the other. Anyway, it is time
you had your eyes opened as to which of you it is that is making the
sacrifice. Do you not know that, on your account, he is already the
target for general contempt? (CLARA bursts into tears.) If that makes
you repent, show it--show it by your deeds!

Clara. I repent of nothing.

Princess (in astonishment). What state of mind are you in, then?

Clara. I have suffered terribly. But I pray God for strength to bear it.

Princess. Don't talk nonsense! The whole thing is a horrible confusion
of ideas--half remorse and half cant--the one so mixed up with the other
in your mind that you cannot disentangle them. But, believe me, others
feel very sure that sacred things and--and what I won't call bluntly by
its name, go very ill together! So don't waste those airs on me; they
only irritate me!

Clara. Princess, don't be cruel to me. I _am_ suffering, all the same.

Princess. Why on earth do you want to go any farther with the affair?
If you aren't clear about it, take advice! Your father is opposed to it,
isn't he?

Clara. Yes. (Throws herself into a chair.)

Princess. He has hidden himself away from you. You don't know where
he is, or how he is--though you know he is crippled and ill. And,
meanwhile, here you are in full dress, with a rose in your hair, waiting
to set out to a court at the palace! Are you willing to pass through
contemptuous rioting crowds, and over your sick father's body, to become
queen? What callous levity! What a presumptuous mixture of what you
think is love, duty, sacrifice, trial--with an unscrupulous ambition--!
The King? Are you depending on him? He is a poet. He loves anything
unusual or sensational. Resistance stimulates him; and that is what
drives him into believing that his love will be unending. When you
have been married a week, it will be all over. If he had not met with
resistance, it would have been all over before this. I know the
King better than you; for I know his faithlessness. It is like his
love--unending! It hurts you to hear that, does it? Well, it hurts one's
eyes to look at the sun. But I can tell you about these things. The only
reason I had for coming was to tell you what I know. And now that I have
seen you, I can tell you that I know one thing more--and I will tell you
what it is. If you actually allow the King, with his ardent temperament,
to stray into a path which will lead to the ruin of his career, your
action will, in the fullness of time, recoil so appallingly upon
your own head that it will kill you. I know you are one of those
that faithlessness, remorse and contempt _would_ kill.--Don't look so
beseechingly at me; I cannot retract a word of what I have said. But I
can tell you now what I had decided upon before I came. _I_ will look
after your future. I am not rich; but, as sure as I stand here before
you, you shall live free from care--you shall have everything that you
need--for the rest of your life. I want no thanks! I do it for the sake
of the King, and for the sake of the country to which I belong. It is my
duty. Only get up now and come with me to my carriage. (Offers CLARA her
hand.)

Clara. If it were as easy as that, I should have done it long, long ago.

Princess (turns away. Then comes back). Get up. (Pulls her on to her
feet.) Do you love the King?

Clara. Do I love him? I am a motherless child, and have lived alone
with a father who has been constantly persecuted on account of his
principles; I shared his ideals from a very early age, and I have never
abandoned them since. Then one day I was given the chance of making
these ideals real. "What _I_ long to do, _you_ shall accomplish!"
he said. There is something great about that, Princess--something
all-powerful--a call from God Himself. Of that I am certain.

Princess. It is merely a rhapsody of the King's--nothing else!

Clara. Then I will make it real and live it! I have given my whole soul
to it, and have strengthened his to the same end. It has been my ideal
all my life.

Princess. And you believe that it will last?

Clara. Yes.

Princess. Then let me beg you to believe this, too--it will last until
he has attained his end.

Clara. If you mean our marriage, let me tell you that _that_ is not our
end.

Princess (in surprise). What is, then?

Clara. Our end is to accomplish something together. That task shall be
consecrated and ennobled by our love. Yes, you may look at me! Those
were his own words.

Princess. That answer!--That thought!--But what certainty have you?

Clara. Of what?

Princess. That you did not put the thought into his mind?--and that the
fire in his soul may not flicker out?

Clara. If I needed any assurance, I should find it in the fact that he
changed his whole life for my sake; he waited for me for more than a
year. Has he ever done that for any one before? I am sure he has never
needed to! (The PRINCESS winces.) It is those who have seduced that
"ardent" temperament of his--you called it that yourself--that are to
blame, and not I, Princess! (A pause.) I checked him to the best of
my power when he came to me as he was wont to go to others. (A pause.)
Indeed it is no sacrifice to become his wife. When one loves, there is
no question of sacrifice. But the position in which I now stand exposes
me to more suspicion than the humblest of his subjects, to more scorn
than if I were his mistress. Think how you have spoken to me to-day
yourself, Princess! (A pause.) It is no sacrifice to endure such things
for the man one loves. It was not I that used the word "sacrifice,"
either; and as for the sacrifice you implied that I ought to have made,
I don't wish to understand what you meant by that, even though I am a
woman as well as you! But if you knew, Princess, how hard a fight I have
been through before I found the strength to cast in my lot with his,
against my father's wish and against you all--you would not have spoken
to me about making a sacrifice. At all events you would not have spoken
to me as you have done to-day; because you are not cruel, and I know
that at bottom you mean me well. (A longer pause.)

Princess. This is more serious than I knew.--Poor child, your
disappointment will be all the more serious.

Clara. Not with him!

Princess (half to herself). Is it possible he can be so changed? Was
that what was needed to secure a hold on him--? (To CLARA.) Is he coming
here to fetch you?

Clara. Yes.

Princess. What does he want to hold this court for? What is the good
of throwing down this challenge to all the dignitaries of his
kingdom?--especially if, after all, he means to live the life of an
ordinary citizen?

Clara. He wished it.

Princess. An exciting episode in his rhapsody! Why did you not dissuade
him?

Clara. Because I agree with him.

Princess. Perhaps you don't fully realise what it means?--what
humiliation the King will have to undergo?

Clara. I only know that it seems to me that these things should be done
openly, and that he has plenty of courage.

Princess. That is mere bravado. Are you going in that dress?--to court
in that dress? (CLARA is silent.) I say it is mere bravado.

Clara. I have no better dress.

Princess. What do you mean? Surely the King can--? Are you jesting?

Clara (shyly). I do not allow the King to give me anything; not until--.

Princess. Doesn't he pay your expenses here, then? (Looks round the
room.)

Clara. No.

Princess. It is the Baroness?

Clara. She and I. We are both poor.

Princess. Ah, yes--she has lost her post now, hasn't she?

Clara. On my account--yes. And you, Princess, who have known her--for
she was once your governess--can you really suppose that she would
have been faithful to me if she did not trust me and feel that this was
right? You treated her so contemptuously when you came in.

Princess. I seem to have broken in upon the most incomprehensible
romance!--Then you love the King? (CLARA nods her head.) He knows how to
love, and make a woman happy! He is a dazzling creature!--We shall see
now whether you are to suffer for all the hearts he has broken. You are
not the first woman he has loved.

Clara. Princess!

Princess. Yes, let that sink into your mind! Your happiness is
embroidered with tears!

Clara. It is cruel of you to reproach me with it.

Princess. Forgive me! I really did not mean that.--But there is still
time to put on a more suitable dress. If you dare accept no gifts from
the King--you might from some one else? A King's bride is a King's bride
after all, you know!

Clara. He told me I should not need anything more than this.

Princess. Not in his eyes, I dare say. But we women know a little
better!--If it were only a necklace? Will you accept this one? (Begins
to unfasten hers.)

Clara. I knew you were kind.--But I daren't.

Princess. Why not?

Clara. Because--because people would think that--. (Bursts into tears. A
pause.)

Princess. Listen, my child. The whole thing is sheer lunacy; but--as it
cannot be altered--as soon as the court assembles I shall take my place
at your side and not leave you till it is all over. Tell the King that!
Good-bye!

Clara (going towards her). Princess!

Princess (kisses her, and whispers). Haven't you allowed him to kiss
you, either?

Clara (in a whisper). Yes, I have.

Princess (kissing her once snore). Love him! (The sound of carriage
wheels is heard. The BARONESS comes in.)

Baroness. I hear the King's carriage.

Princess. I don't wish to meet him. (Stretches out her hand to the
BARONESS.) Baroness! (Points to the door through which the BARONESS has
come in.) Can I get out that way?

Baroness. Yes. (She takes the PRINCESS out. A moment later the MAID
ushers in the KING, who is dressed in plain clothes and wearing no
decorations.)

The King. Clara!

Clara. My friend! (They embrace.)

The King. What does it mean?

Clara. What?

The King. The Princess' carriage here?

Clara. She told me to greet you. She has just gone, and--

The King. And--?

Clara. She said as soon as the court assembled she would take her place
beside me and stay there till we left the palace.

The King. Is it possible?

Clara. It is _true_.

The King. You have conquered her! I know she could be conquered--she
has a heart, as well as a head! It is a good omen!--So she offered to do
_that_! What will our precious nobility have to say to that?

Clara. They are about the streets, aren't they?

The King. Ah, then you know?

Clara. I know, too, that there has been rioting outside the club.

The King. You know that too?--and are not afraid?

Clara. Perhaps I might have been--but there is something else that I am
more afraid of. (Draws closer to the KING.)

The King. What is that?

Clara. You know. (A pause.)

The King. Have you been uneasy about him to-day too?

Clara. All day--incessantly. Something must have happened.

The King. Well, now I can tell you where he is.

Clara (eagerly). At last! Have you found him?

The King. Gran has been to see him.

Clara. Thank God! Is it far from here?

The King. This evening, immediately after the court, you and I will both
start for there in a special train. We shall be there early to-morrow.

Clara (throwing her arms round his neck). Thanks, thanks! How good you
are! Thanks! How is he? Is he ill!

The King. Yes.

Clara. I knew it? And implacable?

The King. Yes.

Clara. I feel it! (Nestles closer in his arms.)

The King. Are you afraid?

Clara. Yes!

The King. Dear, when you see him perhaps your fear will go.

Clara. Yes, only let me see him! Whatever he says, let me see him!

The King. Within twelve hours from now you shall! And I shall be with
you.

Clara. The finest thing about you is your kindness. Oh, I am so glad you
have come! I could not endure my fears any longer.

The King. There are dissensions going on about you!

Clara. Oh!--(Nestles in his arms again.)

The King. Bear up!--It will soon be over.

Clara. I believe it will. Yes, I know it will.--Let me walk about a
little! (The KING walks up and down with her.)

The King. And turn our thoughts to something else! Do you know where I
have come from?

Clara. Where?

The King. From our little house in the park.

Clara. Why, we drove past it yesterday!

The King. You will feel only _one_ person's presence there! Wherever you
go, you will be surrounded by the thoughts I have had of you there. If
you look out of the window, or go out on to the balcony--on every rock,
by each turn of the stream--on the lawns, under the trees, among the
bushes--everywhere you will find a thousand thoughts of you hidden.
Breathe the words "my darling girl," and they will all come clustering
round you!--Let us sit down.

Clara. It is all like a fairy tale.

The King. And I am the latest fairy prince! (He sits down and draws
her on to his knee.) And you are the little maid who comes, led by good
fairies, to the enchanted castle to wake him. He has been kept asleep by
wicked spells for many, many years.

Clara. For many, many years!

The King. I am not really _I_, nor you _you_. The monarch was bewitched
long ago. He was turned into a wild beast who gave reign to his passion
by night and slept by day. And now the maiden of humble degree has
become a woman and freed him from the spells.

Clara. Really! Ah, you are so clever at inventing things to cheat my
fears away from me. And you always succeed. But after all, you know, I
have no strength and no courage; I am so weak.

The King. You have more strength than I!--more than any one I have ever
known.

Clara. No, don't say that; but--you may be sure of this!--if I did not
feel that I had _some_ strength I would never try to throw in my lot
with yours.

The King. I will explain to you what you are! Some people are
tremendously more spiritual, more delicately constituted than others;
and they are a hundred times more sensitive. And they fancy that is
weakness. But it is just they who draw their strength from _deeper_
sources, through a thousand imperceptible channels. You will often find
them with heads erect and valiant when others have gone under; they
merely bend before the storm, with supple strength, when others break
under it. You are like that!

Clara. You are very ingenious when you start explaining me!

The King. Well, listen to this! At the time when I was behaving so badly
to you, your terror, every time I approached you, was so piteous that it
was always before my eyes and rang in my ears like a cry of agony from
a wounded heart. It is true! It filled me with terror, too. Do you
call that weakness, to feel things so intensely that another person is
influenced by your feelings against his will?

Clara. No.

The King. And then, when I found you again--the way you listened to me--

Clara (stopping him with a kiss). Don't let us talk about it now!

The King. What shall we talk about, then? It is a little too early to
start yet.--Ah, I have it! We will talk about the impression you will
make this evening when you come forward through the brightly lit rooms,
radiant against the background of ugly calumny! That was prettily put,
wasn't it? "Is _that_ she?" they will think. And then something will
come into their eyes that will cheat them into thinking that pearls and
gold are strewn over your hair, over your dress, over your--

Clara (putting her hand over his mouth). No, no, no! Now I am going to
tell you a little story!

The King. Tell away!

Clara. When I was a child, I saw a balloon being filled one day, and
there was a horrible smell from the gas. Afterwards, when I saw the
gleaming balloon rising in the air, I thought to myself: "Ah, that
horrid smell was something burning; they had to burn it for the balloon
to be able to rise." And after that, every time I heard anything horrid
said about my father, I felt as if something was burning inside me, and
I thought of the balloon and imagined I could smell the smell. And then
all at once I imagined I saw it rising; the horrid part was burnt, and
it was able to mount aloft! I assure you that balloon was a good genius
to me. And now, years afterwards, when I have been a target for calumny
myself--and you for my sake--I have felt just the same thing. Every word
has burned; but I have got over it in a moment, and risen high, high
above it all! I never seem to breathe so pure an atmosphere as a little
while after something cruel has been said of me.

The King. I shall certainly set to work and abuse you at once, if it
has such delightful results! I will begin with a selection from to-day's
papers: "You Aspasia! You Messalina! You Pompadour! You Phylloxera, that
are eating into our whole moral vine-crop! You blue-eyed curse of the
country, that are causing panics in the money-market, overthrowing
ministries, and upsetting all calculations in the elections! You
mischievous hobgoblin, who are pouring gall into the printers' ink and
poison into the people's coffee, filling all the old ladies' heads with
buzzing flies, and the King's Majesty with a million lover's follies!"
Do you know that, besides all the harm you are doing to-day, you are
hastening a revolution by ten years? You are! And no one can be sure
whether you haven't been pursuing the same wicked courses for the last
hundred years or more! All our royal and noble ancestors are turning in
their graves because of you! And if our deceased queens have any noses
left--

Clara (interrupting him). The Baroness! (They get up. The BARONESS comes
in wearing a cloak over her court dress and carrying CLARA'S cloak over
her arm.)

Baroness. I must take the liberty of disturbing you. Time is up!

The King. We have been killing it by talking nonsense.

Baroness. And that has put you in a good humour?

The King (taking his hat). In the best of humours! Here, my darling
(fastens CLARA'S cloak about her shoulders), here is the last scandalous
bit of concealment for you! When we take it off again, you shall stand
radiant in the light of your own truth. Come! (Gives her his arm, and
they go trippingly up to the back of the room. Suddenly the phantom of
an emaciated figure leaning on crutches appears in their path, staring
at them. His hair and beard are in wild disorder, and blood is pouring
from his mouth. CLARA gives a terrified scream.)

The King. In Heaven's name, what is it?

Clara. My father!

The King. Where? (To the BARONESS.) Go and see! (The BARONESS opens the
doors at the back and looks out).

Baroness. I can see no one.

The King. Look down the corridor!

Baroness. No--no one there, either! (CLARA has sunk lifelessly into the
KING'S arms. After one or two spasmodic twitchings of her hands, her
arms slip away from him and her head falls back.)

The King. Help, help!

The Baroness (rushing to him with a shriek). Clara!

Curtain.




ACT IV

(SCENE.--A room in GRAN's house; the same as in Act I, Scene II. GRAN
is standing at his desk on the right. FLINK comes in carrying a
pistol-case, which he puts down upon the table.)

Gran. You?

Flink. As you see. (Walks up and down for a little without speaking.)

Gran. I haven't seen you since the day the King was here.

Flink. No.--Have you taken your holidays?

Gran. Yes; but, anyway, I am likely to have perpetual holidays now! The
elections are going against us.

Flink (walking about). So I hear. The clerical party and the
reactionaries are winning.

Gran. That would not have been so, but for her unhappy death--. (Breaks
off, and sighs.)

Flink. A judgment from heaven--that is what the parsons say, and the
women, and the reactionaries--

Gran.--and the landlords. And they really believe it.

Flink (stopping). Well, don't you believe it?

Gran (after a pause). At all events I interpret it differently from--

Flink.--from the parson? Naturally. But can any one doubt the fact that
it was the finger of fate?

Gran. Then fate assumed her father's shape?

Flink. Whether her father appeared to her at the moment of his death or
not (shrugs his shoulders) is a matter in which I am not interested.
I don't believe in such things. But that she was suffering pangs of
conscience, I do believe. I believe it may have brought painful visions
before her eyes.

Gran. I knew her pretty well, and I will answer for it she had no guilty
conscience. She was approaching her task with enthusiasm. Any one
that knew her will tell you the same. With her the King was first and
foremost.

Flink. What did she die of, then? Of enthusiasm?

Gran. Of being overwrought by the force of her emotions. Her task was
too great for her. The time was not ripe for it. (Sadly.) Our experiment
was bound to fail.

Flink. You condemn it when you say that!--But with her last breath she
called out: "My father!" And, just at that moment, he died, fifty miles
away from her. Either she _saw_ him, or she _imagined_ she saw him,
standing before her. But his bloodstained, maltreated, crippled form
standing in the way of her criminal advance towards the throne--is that
not a symbol of maltreated humanity revolting against monarchy at the
very moment when monarchy wishes to atone! Its guilt through thousands
of years is too black. Fate is inflexible.

Gran. But with what result? Are we rid of monarchy yet?

Flink. We are rid of that treacherous attempt to reconcile it with
modern conditions. Thank God it emerges, hand in glove with the parsons
and reactionaries, none the worse for its temporary eclipse.

Gran. So everything is all right, I suppose?

Flink. For the moment--yes. But there used to exist here a strong
republican party, which enjoyed universal respect, and was making
extraordinary progress. Where is it now?

Gran. I knew that was why you came.

Flink. I have come to call you to account.

Gran. If I had been in your place I would not have acted so, towards a
defeated and wounded friend.

Flink. The republican party has often been defeated--but never despised
till now. Who is to blame for that?

Gran. None of us ever think we deserve contempt.

Flink. A traitor always deserves it.

Gran. It is but a step from the present state of things to a republic;
and we shall have to take that step in the end.

Flink. But at least we can do so without treachery.

Gran. I honestly believe that what we did was right. It may have
miscarried the first time, and may miscarry a second and a third; but it
is the only possible solution.

Flink. You pronounced your doom in those words.

Gran (more attentively). What do you mean by that?

Flink. We must make sure that such an attempt will not be made again.

Gran. So that is it.--I begin to understand you now.

Flink. The republican party is broken up. For a generation it will be
annihilated by contempt. But a community without a republican party must
be one without ideals and without any aspirations towards truth in its
political life--and in other respects as well! That is what you are
responsible for.

Gran. You pay me too great a compliment.

Flink. By no means! Your reputation, your personal qualities and
associations are what have seduced them.

Gran. Listen to me for a moment! You used to overrate me in the hopes
you had of me. You are overrating me now in your censure. You are
overrating the effects of our failure--you never seem to be able to do
anything but overshoot your mark. For that reason you are a danger to
your friends. You lure them on. When things go well you lure them on to
excess of activity; when things go ill, you turn their despondency into
despair. Your inordinate enthusiasm obscures your wits. _You_ are not
called upon to sit in judgment upon any one; because you draw the pure
truths that lie hidden in your soul into such a frenzied vortex of
strife that you lose sight of them; and then they have so little of
truth left in them that in your hands they can be answerable for crimes.

Flink. Oh, spare me your dialectics!--because any skill you have in
them, _I_ taught you! You cannot excuse your own sins by running over
the list of mine; that is the only answer I have to make to you! I don't
stand before you as the embodiment of truth; I am no braggart. No; but
simply as one who has loved you deeply and now is as deeply offended by
you, I ask this question of your conscience: What have you done with the
love we had for one another? Where is the sacred cause we both used to
uphold? Where is our honour--our friends--our future?

Gran. I feel respect for your sorrow. Can you not feel any for mine? Or
do you suppose that I am not suffering?

Flink. You cannot act as you have done without bringing unhappiness upon
yourself. But there are others to be considered besides you, and we have
the right to call you to account. Answer me!

Gran. And is it really you--you, my old friend--that propose to do that?

Flink. God knows I would sooner some one else did it! But none can do it
so fitly as I--because no one else has loved you as I have. I expected
too much of you, you say? The only thing I wanted of you was that you
should be faithful! I had so often been disappointed; but in you and
your quiet strength I thought I had splendid security that, as long as
you lived, our cause would bear itself proudly and confidently. It was
your prestige that brought it into being; your wealth that supported it.
It did not cry aloud for the blood of martyrs!--You were the happiness
of my life; my soul renewed its strength from yours.

Gran. Old friend--!

Flink. I was old, and you were young! Your nature was a harmonious
whole--it was what I needed to lean upon.

Gran. Flink, my dear old friend--!

Flink. And now, here you stand--a broken man, and our whole cause broken
with you; all our lives broken--at least mine is--

Gran. Don't say that!

Flink. You have destroyed my faith in mankind--and in myself, for I see
what a mistake I made; but it will be the last I shall make! I took you
to my heart of hearts--and now, the only thing I can do is to call you
to account!

Gran. What do you want me to do? Tell me!

Flink. We must stand face to face--armed! You must die! (A pause.)

Gran (without seeming greatly surprised). Of the two of us, it will go
hardest with you, old friend.

Flink. You think your aim will be the surer of the two? (Goes towards
the table.)

Gran. I was not thinking of that--but of what your life would be
afterwards. I know you.

Flink (opening the pistol-case). You need not be anxious! My life
afterwards will not be a long one. What you have done has robbed me of
anything to live for in this generation, and I don't aspire to live till
the next. So it is all over and done with! (Takes up the pistols.)

Gran. Do you mean _here_--?

Flink. Why not? We are alone here.

Gran. The King is asleep in the next room. (Points to the door near his
desk.)

Flink. The King here?

Gran. He came here to-night.

Flink. Well, it will wake him up; he will have to wake up some time, any
way.

Gran. It would be horrible! No!

Flink. Indeed? It is for his sake you have betrayed me. You did that as
soon as ever you met him again. He has bewitched you. Let him hear and
see what he has done! (Holds out the pistols.) Here!

Gran. Wait. What you have just said brings a doubt into my mind. Is not
revenge, after all, the motive for what you are doing?

Flink. Revenge?

Gran. Yes. Don't misunderstand me; I am not trying to shuffle out of
it. If I were free to choose, I would choose death rather than anything
else. The King knows that, too. But I ask because there ought to be some
serious reason for anything that may happen. I am not going to stand up
and face a sentiment of revenge that is so ill-grounded.

Flink (laying the pistols down). I hate the man who has led you
astray--that is true. When I was giving you the reasons why I took upon
myself the task of calling you to account, perhaps I forgot that. I hate
him. But the instrument that carries out a sentence is one thing; the
sentence itself is quite another. You arc sentenced to death because you
have betrayed our cause--and because you say that you were right to do
so. The world shall learn what that costs. It costs a man's life.

Gran. So be it!

Flink. The pistols are loaded. I loaded them myself. I imagine that you
still have trust in my honour?

Gran (with a smile). Indeed I have.

Flink. One of them has a blank cartridge in it; the other is fully
loaded. Choose!

Gran. But what do you mean? Suppose I were to--?

Flink. Don't be afraid! Heaven will decide! _You_ will not choose the
fully loaded one!--We shall stand face to face.

Gran. You are settling everything--the sentence, the challenge, the
choice of weapons, the regulations for the duel--!

Flink. Are you dissatisfied with that?

Gran. By no means! You are quite welcome! We are to have no seconds? So
be it. But the place?

Flink. The place? Here!

Gran. Horrible!

Flink. Why? (Holds out the two pistols to him. The door to the left is
opened softly. ANNA looks in, sees what is going on, and rushes with
a pitiful attempt at a scream to GRAN, putting her arms round him
protectingly, and caressing him with every sign of the utmost terror.)

Gran (bending down and kissing her). She is right! Why should I die for
the sake of dull theories, when I can hold life in my arms as I do now?
A man who is loved has something left, after all. I won't die!

Flink. If you were not loved, my friend, you might be allowed to live. A
cry of sorrow will be heard throughout the land, from the King's palace
to the meanest hovel, when you have been shot. And that is just why
I must do it! The louder the cry of sorrow, the greater will be the
silence afterwards. And in that silence is to be found the answer to the
question "Why?" The people will not allow themselves to be cheated any
longer.

Gran. Horrible! I won't do it! (Lifts ANNA in his arms as if she were a
child.)

Flink (going up to him). It is no mere theory that you are facing. Look
at me!

Gran. Old friend--_must_ it be?

Flink. It _must_. I have nothing else left to do.

Gran. But not here.

Flink. Since it cannot be here, then come out into the park. (Puts the
pistols into their case.) You owe me that.

Gran (to ANNA). You must go, my dear!

Flink (putting the pistol-case under his arm). No, let her stay here.
But you come! (They all three move towards the door. ANNA will not let
GRAN go, and there is a struggle until he, half commanding and half
entreating, persuades her to stay behind. The two men go out, shutting
the door after them. She throws herself against the door, but it has
been locked on the outside. She sinks down to the floor in despair,
then gets up, as if struck by a sudden idea, rushes into the room on the
right, and almost immediately re-appears, dragging the KING after her.
He is only half-dressed and has no shoes on.)

The King. What is it? (A shot is heard.) What is it? (ANNA pulls him to
the door. He tries to open it, but in vain. She rushes to the window,
with the KING after her. Meanwhile the door is opened from outside, and
FALBE comes in, evidently overcome with emotion.) What is it, Falbe?
(ANNA runs out.)

Falbe. His Excellency the Minister of the Interior--

The King. Well, what of him?

Falbe.--has been assassinated!

The King. The Minister of the Interior?--Gran?

Falbe. Yes.

The King. Gran?--What did you say?

Falbe. He has been assassinated!

The King. Gran? Impossible!--Where? Why? I heard his voice only just
now, here!

Falbe. That fellow shot him--the grey-haired fellow--the republican

The King. Flink? Yes, I heard his voice here too!

Falbe. It was in the park! I saw it myself!

The King. Saw it yourself? Wretch! (Rushes out.)

Falbe. How could I prevent a madman--? (Follows the KING. The door
stands open, and through it a man is seen running past, calling out:
"Where?" Others follow him, and amidst the sound of hurrying feet,
cries are heard of "Good God!"--"In the park, did you say?"--"A doctor!
Fetch a doctor!"--"Who did it?"--"That fellow running towards
the river!"--"After him! After him!"--"Fetch a barrow from the
works!"--After a while the KING returns alone, looking distracted. He
stands motionless and silent for some time.)

The King. What a happy smile there was on his face! Just as she
smiled!--Yes, it must be happiness! (Hides his face in his hands.) And
he died for me too! My two only--. (Breaks down.) So that is the price
they have to pay for loving me!--And at once! At once!--Of course! Of
course! (The sound of the crowd returning is heard, and cries of: "This
way!"--"Into the blue room!" Women and children come streaming in, all
in tears, surrounding ANNA and the men that are carrying GRAN'S body,
and follow them into the room on the left. Cries are heard of: "Why
should he die?"--"He was so good!"--"What had he done to deserve
it!"--"He was the best man in the world!")

The King. "He was the best man in the world!" Yes. And he died for my
sake! That means something good of me!--the best possible! Are they two
together now, I wonder? Oh, let me have a sign!--or is that too much to
ask? (The crowd come out again, sobbing and weeping, and cries are heard
of: "He looks so beautiful and peaceful!"--"I can't bring myself to
believe it!" When they see the KING, they hush their voices, and all go
out as quietly as they can. When they have gone out, the MAYOR's voice
is heard asking: "Is he in here?" and an answer: "No, in the blue room,
over there." Then the GENERAL'S voice: "And the murderer escaped?"--An
answer: "They are looking for him in the river!"--The GENERAL'S voice:
"In the river? Did he jump into the river?"--The PRIEST's voice:
"Shocking!" A few moments later the GENERAL with BANG, the MAYOR, and
the PRIEST come in from the other room. They stop on seeing the KING,
who is standing at the desk with his back to them, and whisper.)

The General. Isn't that the King?

The Others. The King?

The Mayor. Is the King back? He must have come in the night!

Bang. Let me see!--I know him personally.

The General (holding him back). Of course it is the King.

The Mayor. Really?

Bang. I recognise him by his agitation! It is he.

The General. Hush! Let us go quietly out again! (They begin to move
off.)

The Mayor. He is grieved. Naturally.

Bang. First of all her death; and then this--!

The Priest. It is the judgment of heaven!

The King (turning round). Who is that? What? (Comes forward.) Who said
that? (They all stop, take off their hats and bow.) Come back! (They
come back hastily.) Who said: "It is the judgment of heaven"?

The General. Your Majesty must forgive us--we were just taking a little
stroll; I am here to spend Christmas with my friend Mr. Bang, who has a
factory here--a branch of his works--and we happened to meet the Mayor
and the Priest, and we joined company--and were strolling along when we
heard a shot. A shot. We did not think anything more about it till we
came nearer here and saw people running, and heard a great outcry and
disturbance. Great disturbance--yes. We stopped, of course, and came to
see what it was. Came to see what it was, of course. And they told us
that the Minister of the Interior--

The King. What is all that to me! (The GENERAL bows.) Who said: "It is
the judgment of heaven"? (No one speaks.) Come, answer me!

The Mayor. It was the Priest--I fancy.

The King (to the PRIEST). Haven't you the courage to tell me so
yourself?

The General. Probably our reverend friend is unaccustomed to find
himself in the presence of royalty.

The Priest. It is the first time that--that I have had the honour of
speaking to your Majesty--I did not feel self-possessed enough, for the
moment, to--

The King. But you were self-possessed enough when you said it! What did
you mean by saying it was "the judgment of heaven"?--I am asking you
what you meant by it.

The Priest. I really don't quite know--it slipped out--

The King. That is a lie! Some one said: "First of all her death, and
then this." And you said: "It is the judgment of heaven."

The Mayor. That is quite right, your Majesty.

The King. First of all _her_ death? That meant the death of my
betrothed, didn't it?

Bang and The Priest. Yes, your Majesty.

The King. "And then _this_" meant my friend--my dear friend! (With
emotion.) Why did heaven condemn these two to death? (A pause.)

The General. It is most regrettable that we should, quite involuntarily,
have disturbed your Majesty at a moment when your Majesty's feelings
are, naturally, so overcome--

The King (interrupting him). I asked you why heaven condemned these two
to death. (To the VICAR.) You are a clergyman; cudgel your brains!

The Priest. Well, your Majesty, I was thinking that--I meant that--that
heaven had in a miraculous way checked your Majesty--

The General. "Ventured to check" would be more suitable, I think.

The Priest.--from continuing in a course which many people thought so
unfortunate--I mean, so fatal to the nation, and the church; had checked
your Majesty--

The General (in an undertone). Ventured to check.

The Priest.--by taking away from your Majesty the two persons who--the
two persons who--in the first place the one who--

The King. The one who--?

The Priest. Who was--

The King. Who was--? A harlot that wanted to sit on the throne?

The Priest. Those are your Majesty's word, not mine. (Wipes his
forehead.)

The King. Confess that they express what you meant!

The Priest. I confess that I have heard--that people say--that--

The King. Pray to heaven that for a single day your thoughts may be as
pure as hers were every day. (Bursts into tears. Then says impetuously.)
How long have you been a clergyman?

The Priest. Fifteen years, your Majesty.

The King. Then you were already ordained at the time when I was leading
a dissolute life. Why did you never say anything to me then?

The Priest. My most gracious King--

The King. God is the only "most gracious King"! Do not speak blasphemy!

The Priest. It was not my duty to--

The General. Our friend is not a court chaplain. He has merely a parish
in the town here--

The Mayor. And his work lies chiefly among the factory hands.

The King. And so it is not your duty to speak the truth to me--but
to attack my dear dead friends by prating about heaven's judgment and
repeating vile lies? Is that your duty?

The Mayor. I only had the honour to know one of the--the deceased. Your
Majesty honoured him with your friendship; the greatest honour a subject
can enjoy. I should like to say that one would rarely find a nobler
heart, a loftier mind, or more modest fidelity, than his.

The General. I should like, if I may make so bold, to make use of
the opportunity chance has afforded me of associating myself with my
sovereign's sorrow, a sorrow for which his whole people must feel the
deepest respect, but especially those who, in consequence of their high
position, are more particularly called upon to be the pillars of the
monarchy; to use this opportunity, I say--and to do so, I know, as the
representative of many thousands of your Majesty's subjects--to voice
the sympathy, the unfeigned grief, that will be poured forth at the news
of this new loss which has wrung your Majesty's heart--a loss which
will reawaken consternation in the country and make it more than ever
necessary to take the severest possible measures against a party to
which nothing is sacred, neither the King's person nor the highest
dignities of office nor the inviolability of the home--a party whose
very existence depends on sedition and ought no longer to be tolerated,
but ought, as the enemy of the throne and of society, to be visited with
all the terrors of the law, until--

The King. What about compassion, my friend?

The General. Compassion?

The King. Not for the republicans--but for me!

The General. It is just the compassion which the whole nation will feel
for your Majesty that compels me, in spite of everything, to invoke the
intervention of justice at this particular crisis! Terror--

The King.--must be our weapon?

The General. Yes! Can any one imagine a more priceless proof of the care
that a people have for their King, than for the gravely anxious tones
of their voice to be heard, at this solemn moment, crying: Down with the
enemies of the throne!

The King (turning away). No, _I_ haven't thews and sinews for that lie!

The Mayor. I must say I altogether agree with the General. The feeling
of affection, gratitude, esteem--

The General.--the legacy of devotion that your Majesty's ancestors of
blessed memory--

The King (to the Priest). You, sir--what does my ancestors being "of
blessed memory" mean?

The Priest (after a moment's thought). It is a respectful manner of
alluding to them, your Majesty.

The King. A respectful lie, you mean. (A pause. ANNA comes out of the
room on the left and throws herself at the KING'S feet, embracing his
knees in despairing sorrow.) Ah, here comes a breath of truth!--And you
come to me, my child, because you know that we two can mourn together.
But I do not weep, as you do; because I know that for a long time he had
been secretly praying for death. He has got his wish now. So you must
not weep so bitterly. You must wish what he wished, you know. Ah, what
grief there is in her eyes! (Sobs.)

(The GENERAL signs to the others that they should all withdraw quietly,
without turning round. They gradually do so; but the KING looks up and
perceives what they are doing.)

The General. Out of respect for your Majesty's grief, we were going to--

The King. Silence! With my hand on the head of this poor creature, who
used to trust so unassumingly and devotedly to his goodness of heart,
I wish to say something in memory of my friend. (ANNA clings to him,
weeping. The others come respectfully nearer, and wait.) Gran was
the richest man in the country. Why was it that he had no fear of
the people? Why was it that he believed that its salvation lay in the
overthrow of the present state of affairs?

Bang. Mr. Gran, with all his great qualities, was a visionary.

The King. He had not inherited all of his vast fortune; he had amassed a
great part of it himself.

Bang. As a man of business, Mr. Gran was beyond all praise.

The King. And yet a visionary? The two things are absolutely
contradictory.--You once called me "the padlock on your cash-box."

Bang. I allowed myself, with all respect, to make that jest--which,
nevertheless, was nothing but the serious truth!

The King. Why did he, who has met his death, consider that the security
for _his_ cash-box came from those _below_ him, as long as he did what
was right, and not from those above him? Because he understood the
times. No question of selfishness stood in the way of his doing
that.--That is my funeral oration over him!--(To ANNA.) Get up, my dear!
Did you understand what I was saying? Do not weep so! (She clings to
him, sobbing.)

The Priest. He was a very great man! When your Majesty speaks so, I
fully recognise it. But your Majesty may be certain that, though we may
not have been so fortunate as to see so far ahead and so clearly--though
our mental horizon may be narrow--we are none the less loyal to your
Majesty for that, nor less devoted! It is our duty as subjects to say
so, although your Majesty in your heaviness of heart seems to forget
it-seems to forget that we, too, look for everything from your Majesty's
favour, wisdom and justice. (Perspires freely.)

The King. It is very strange! My dear friend never said anything like
that to me. (A pause.) He had the most prosperous business in the
country. When I came to him and asked him to abandon it, he did so at
once. And in the end he died for me. That is the sort of man he was. (To
ANNA.) Go in to him, my dear! You are the very picture of dumb loyalty.
Although I do not deserve to have such as you to watch by my side,
still, for the sake of him who is dead, I shall have you to do so when
I too--. (Breaks off.) Yes, yes, go in there now! I shall come. Do you
understand? I shall come. (ANNA moves towards the other room.) There,
that's it! (He repeats his words to her every time she looks back as she
goes.) Yes, directly!--That's it!--In a very little while! Go now!

Bang. Excuse me, your Majesty, but it is terribly hot in here, and the
affection of my heart which troubles me is attacking me painfully. Will
your Majesty be pleased to allow me to withdraw?

The Mayor. With all respect, I should like to be allowed to make the
same request. Your Majesty is obviously very much upset, and I am sure
we are all unwilling that our presence--which, indeed, was unintentional
and unsought by us--should augment a distress of mind which is so
natural in one of your Majesty's noble disposition, and so inevitable
considering the deep sense of gratitude your Majesty must feel towards a
friend who--

The King (interrupting him). Hush, hush! Let us have a little respect
for the truth in the presence of the dead! Do not misunderstand me--I do
not mean to say that any of you would lie wilfully; but the atmosphere
that surrounds a king is infected. And, as regards that--just a word or
two. I have only a short time. But as a farewell message from me--

The Priest. A farewell message?

The King.--give my greeting to what is called Christianity in this
country. Greet it from me! I have been thinking a great deal about
Christian folk lately.

The Priest. I am glad to hear it!

The King. Your tone jars on me! Greet those who call themselves
Christians--. Oh! come, come--don't crane your necks and bend your backs
like that, as if the most precious words of wisdom were about to drop
from my lips! (To himself.) Is it any use my saying anything serious to
them? (Aloud.) I suppose you are Christians?

The General. Why, of course! Faith is invaluable--

The King.--in preserving discipline? (To the Mayor.) How about you?

The Mayor. I was taught by my parents, of blessed memory--

The King. Oh, so they are "of blessed memory" too, are they? Well, what
did they teach you?

The Mayor. To fear God, honour the King--

The King.--and love the brotherhood! You are a public official, Mr.
Mayor. That is what a Christian is, nowadays. (To BANG.) And you?

Bang. Of late I have been able to go so little to church, because of my
cough. And in that unwholesome atmosphere--

The King.--you go to sleep. But you are a Christian?

Bang. Undoubtedly!

The King (to the Priest). And you are one, of course?

The Priest. By the grace of God I hope so!

The King (snapping his fingers). Yes, that is the regulation formula,
my good fellow! You all answer by the card! Very well, then--you are
a community of Christians; and it is not my fault if such a
community refuses to take any serious interest in what really affects
Christianity. Tell it from me that it ought to keep an eye on the
monarchy.

The Priest. Christianity has nothing to do with such things. It concerns
only the souls of men!

The King (aside). That voice. (Aloud.) I know--it does not concern
itself with the air a patient breathes, but only with his lungs!
Excellent!--All the same, Christianity ought to keep an eye on the
monarchy. Ought to tear the falsehood away from it! Ought not to go in
crowds to stare at a coronation in a church, like apes grinning at a
peacock! I know what I felt at that moment. I had rehearsed it all once
that morning already--ha, ha! Ask your Christianity if it may not be
about time for it to interest itself a little in the monarchy? It
seems to me that it scarcely ought any longer to allow monarchy, like
a seductive harlot, to keep militarism before the people's eyes as
an ideal--seeing that that is exactly contrary to the teachings of
Christianity, or to encourage class divisions, luxury, hypocrisy and
vanity. Monarchy has become so all-pervading a lie that it infects even
the most upright of men.

The Mayor. But I don't understand, your Majesty!

The King. Don't you? You are an upright man yourself, Mr. Mayor--a most
worthy man.

The Mayor. I do not know whether your Majesty is pleased to jest again?

The King. In sober earnest, I say you are one of the most upright of
men.

The Mayor. I cannot tell your Majesty how flattered I am to hear your
Majesty say so!

The King. Have you any decorations?

The Mayor. Your Majesty's government has not, so far, deigned to cast
their eyes on me.

The King. That fault will be repaired. Be sure of that!

The General (to the Mayor). To have that from his Majesty's own mouth
is equivalent to seeing it gazetted. I am fortunate to be able to be the
first to congratulate you!

Bang. Allow me to congratulate you also!

The Priest. And me too! I have had the honour of working hand in hand
with you, Mr. Mayor, for many years; I know how well deserved such a
distinction is.

The Mayor. I feel quite overcome; but I must beg to be allowed to lay my
thanks at your Majesty's feet. I trust I shall not prove unworthy of the
distinction. One hesitates to make such confessions--but I am a candid
man, and I admit that one of the chief aims of my ambition has been to
be allowed some day to participate in--

The King (interrupting him).--in this falsehood. That just points
my moral. As long as even upright men's thoughts run in that mould,
Christianity cannot pretend to have any real hold on the nation. As for
your decoration, you are quite sure to get one from my successor.--In
a word, Christianity must tackle monarchy! And if it cannot tear the
falsehood from it without destroying it, then let it destroy it!

The General. Your Majesty!

The King (turning to him). The same thing applies to a standing army,
which is a creation of monarchy's. I do not believe that such an
institution--with all its temptations to power, all its inevitable vices
and habits--could be tolerated if Christianity were a living thing. Away
with it!

The Priest. Really, your Majesty--!

The King (turning to him). The same applies to an established
church--another of monarchy's creations! If we had in our country a
Christianity worth the name, that salvation trade would stink in men's
nostrils. Away with it!

The Mayor (reproachfully). Oh, your Majesty!

The King (turning on him). The same applies to the artificial disparity
of circumstances that you prate about with tears in your eyes! I heard
you once. Class distinctions are fostered by monarchy.

Bang. But equality is an impossibility!

The King. If _you_ would only make it possible--which it can be
made--even the socialists would cease to clamour for anything else. I
tell you this: Christianity has destroyed ideals. Christianity lives on
dogmas and formulas, instead of on ideals.

The Priest. Its ideals lead us away from earth to heaven--

The King. Not in a balloon, even if it were stuffed full of all the
pages of the Bible! Christianity's ideals will lead to heaven only when
they are realised on earth--never before.

The Priest. May I venture to say that Christianity's ideal is a pious
life.

The King. Yes. But does not Christianity aim at more than that, or is it
going to be content with making some few believers?

The Priest. It is written: "Few are chosen."

The King. Then it has given up the job in advance?

The Mayor. I think our friend is right, that Christianity has never
occupied itself with such things as your Majesty demands of it.

The King. But what I mean is, could it not bring itself to do so?

The Priest. If it did, it would lose sight of its _inner_ aim. The
earliest communities are the model for a Christian people!

The King (turning away from him). Oh, have any model you like, so long
as it leads to something!

The General. I must say I am astonished at the penetration your Majesty
slows even into the deepest subjects.

Bang. Yes, I have never heard anything like it! I have not had the
advantage of a university education, so I don't really understand it.

The King. And to think that I imagined that I should find my allies,
my followers, in Christian people! One is so reluctant to give up _all_
hope! I thought that a Christian nation would storm the strongholds of
lies in our modern, so-called Christian communities--storm them, capture
them!--and begin with monarchy, because that would need most courage,
and because its falsehood lies deepest and goes farthest. I thought that
Christianity would one day prove to be the salt of the earth. No, do
_not_ greet Christianity from me. I have said nothing, and do not mean
it. I am what men call a betrayed man--betrayed by all the most ideal
powers of life. There! Now I have done!

The General. But what does your Majesty mean? Betrayed? By whom? Who are
the traitors? Really--!

The King. Pooh! Think it over!--As a matter of fact I am the only one
that has been foolish.

Bang. Your Majesty, just now you were so full of vigour--!

The King. Don't let that astonish you, my friend! I am a mixture of
enthusiasm and world-weariness; the scion of a decrepit race is
not likely to be any better than that, you know! And as for being a
reformer--! Ha, ha! Well, I thank you all for having listened to me so
patiently. Whatever I said had no significance--except perhaps that,
like the oysters, I had to open my shell before I died.--Good-bye!

The General. I really cannot find it in my heart to leave your Majesty
when your Majesty is in so despondent a humour.

The King. I am afraid you will have to try, my gallant friend!--Don't
look so dejected, Mr. Mayor!--Suppose some day serious-minded men
should feel just as humiliated at such falsehoods existing as you do
now because you have not been allowed to participate in them. I might
perhaps be able to endure being king then! But as things are now, I am
not strong enough for the job. I feel as if I had been shouldered out
of actual life on to this strip of carpet that I am standing on! That is
what my attempts at reform have ended in!

The Mayor. May I be allowed to say that the impression made on my mind
by the somewhat painful scene we have just gone through is that your
Majesty is overwrought.

The King. Mad, you mean?

The Mayor. God forbid I should use such a word of my King!

The King. Always punctilious!--Well, judging by the fact that every one
else considers themselves sane, I must undoubtedly be the mad one. It
is as simple as a sum in arithmetic.--And, in all conscience, isn't
it madness, when all is said and done, to take such trifles so much to
heart?--to bother about a few miserable superannuated forms that are not
of the slightest importance?--a few venerable, harmless prejudices?--a
few foolish social customs and other trumpery affairs of that sort?

The General. Quite so!

The Mayor. Your Majesty is absolutely right!

Bang. I quite agree!

The Priest. It is exactly what I have been thinking all the time.

The King. And probably we had better add to the list certain
extravagant ideas--perhaps even certain dangerous ideas, like mine about
Christianity?

The Priest (hastily and impressively). Your Majesty is mistaken on the
subject of Christianity.

The Mayor. Christianity is entirely a personal matter, your Majesty.

The General. Your Majesty expects too much of it. Now, as a comfort for
the dying--!

The King. And a powerful instrument of discipline.

The General (smiling). Ah, your Majesty!

Bang (confidentially). Christianity is no longer such a serious matter
nowadays, except for certain persons--. (Glances at the PRIEST.)

The King. All I have to say on the head of such unanimous approval
is this: that in such a shallow society, where there is no particular
distinction between lies and truth, because most things are mere
forms without any deeper meaning--where ideals are considered to be
extravagant, dangerous things--it is not so _very_ amusing to be alive.

The General. Oh, your Majesty! Really, you--! Ha, ha, ha!

The King. Don't you agree with me?--Ah, if only one could grapple with
it!--but we should need to be many to do that, and better equipped than
I am.

The General. Better equipped than your Majesty? Your Majesty is the most
gifted man in the whole country!

All. Yes!

The General. Yes--your Majesty must excuse me--I spoke involuntarily!

The Mayor. There was a tone running through all your Majesty said that
seemed to suggest that your Majesty was contemplating--. (Breaks off.)

The King.--going away? Yes.

All. Going away?

The General. And abdicating? For heaven's sake, your Majesty--!

Bang. That would mean handing us over to the crown prince--the pietist!

The Priest (betraying his pleasure in spite of himself). And his mother!

The King. You are pleased at the idea, parson! It will be a sight to
see her and her son prancing along, with all of you in your best clothes
following them! Hurrah!

The General. Ha, ha, ha! Ho, ho, ho!

Bang. Ha-ha-ha! (Coughs.) I get such a cough when I laugh.

The King (seriously). I had no intention of provoking laughter in the
presence of death. I can hear the sounds of mourning through the open
door.

The Mayor. With all due respect to the church--the vast majority of the
nation have no desire for things to come to _that_--to the accession of
a pietist to the throne. If your Majesty threatens to abdicate you will
have us all at your feet.

The General (with decision). The accession of a new king just now would
be universally considered a national calamity. I will wager my life on
that!

Bang. And I too!

The King. My excellent friends--you must take the consequences of your
actions!

The Mayor (despairingly). But _this_! Who ever imagined such a thing?

The General and Bang. No one--no one!

The King. So much the worse. What is it you are asking me to do? To
stay where I am, so as to keep another man down? Is that work for a man?
Shame!

The Mayor (in distress). We ask more than that! Your Majesty is making a
fatal mistake! The whole of your Majesty's dissatisfaction springs from
the fact that you believe yourself to be deserted by your people because
the elections are going contrary to what your Majesty had hoped. Nothing
is further from the truth! The people fight shy of revolutionary ideas;
but they love their King!

Bang. They love their King!

The King. And that white dove, who came confidently to my hand--she had
some experience of what their love was!

The Mayor. The King's associates may displease the people; ideas may
alter; but love for their King endures!

The Others. Endures!

The King. Cease! Cease!

The General (warmly). Your Majesty may command us to do anything except
refrain from giving utterance to a free people's freely offered homage
of devotion, loyalty, and love for its royal house!

The Mayor (emotionally). There is no one who would not give his life for
his King!

Bang, The General, and The Priest. No one!

The General. Try us! (They all press forward.)

The King. Done with you! (Takes a revolver from his pocket.) Since
yesterday I have carried this little thing in my pocket. (They all look
alarmed.)

The Priest. Merciful heavens!

The King (holding out the revolver to him). Will you die for me? If so,
I will continue to be King.

The Priest. I? What does your Majesty mean? It would be a great sin!

The King. You love me, I suppose?

All (desperately). Yes, your Majesty!

The King. Those who love, believe. Therefore, believe me when I say
this: If there is a single one of you who, without thinking twice about
it, will die for his King now--here--at once--then I shall consider that
as a command laid upon me to go on living and working.

The Mayor (in a terrified whisper). He is insane!

The General (whispers). Yes!

The King. I can hear you!--But I suppose you love your King, even if he
is insane?

All (in agitated tones). Yes, your Majesty!

The King. Majesty, majesty! There is only One who has any majesty about
Him--certainly not a madman! But if I have been driven mad by the lies
that surround me, it would be a holy deed to make me sound again. You
said you would die for me. Redeem your words! That will make me well
again!--You, General?

The General. My beloved King, it would be--as our reverend friend so
aptly put it--a most dreadful sin.

The King. You have let slip a splendid opportunity for showing your
heroism.--You ought to have seen that I was only putting you to the
test!--Good-bye! (Goes into the room on the left.)

The General. Absolutely insane!

The Others. Absolutely.

The Mayor. Such great abilities, too! What might not have been made of
him!

Bang. The pity of it!

The Priest. I got so alarmed.

Bang. So did I! (A loud pistol-shot is heard.)

The Priest. Another shot? (A pitiful woman's cry is heard from the other
room.)

The Mayor. What on earth was that?

Bang. I daren't think!

The Priest. Nor I! (An old woman rushes out of the room on the left,
calling out: "Help!--Help!--The King!" and hurries out at the back,
calling: "The King! Help, help!" The GENERAL and the MAYOR rush into
the other room. Voices are heard outside asking: "The King?--Was it the
King?" The confusion and uproar grows. In the midst of it ANNA comes
stumbling out of the other room, her hands stretched out before her, as
if she did not know where she was going. The noise and confusion grows
louder every minute, and crowds of people come rushing into the room
from outside as the Curtain falls.)
﻿THE NEWLY-MARRIED COUPLE

DRAMATIS PERSONAE

     The FATHER.
     The MOTHER.
     LAURA, their daughter.
     AXEL, her husband.
     MATHILDE, her friend.




ACT I

(SCENE.--A handsomely furnished, carpeted room, with a door at the back
leading to a lobby. The FATHER is sitting on a couch on the left-hand
side, in the foreground, reading a newspaper. Other papers are lying on
a small table in front of him. AXEL is on another couch drawn up in a
similar position on the right-hand side. A newspaper, which he is not
reading, is lying on his knee. The MOTHER is sitting, sewing, in an
easy-chair drawn up beside a table in the middle of the room.)

[LAURA enters.]

Laura. Good morning, mother! (Kisses her.)

Mother. Good morning, dear. Have you slept well?

Laura. Very well, thanks. Good morning, dad! (Kisses him.)

Father. Good morning, little one, good morning. Happy and in good
spirits?

Laura. Very. (Passes in front of AXEL.) Good morning, Axel! (Sits down
at the table, opposite her mother.)

Axel. Good morning.

Mother. I am very sorry to say, my child, that I must give up going to
the ball with you to-night. It is such a long way to go, in this cold
spring weather.

Father (without looking up from his paper). Your mother is not well. She
was coughing in the night.

Laura. Coughing again?

Father. Twice. (The MOTHER coughs, and he looks up.) There, do you hear
that? Your mother must not go out, on any account.

Laura. Then I won't go, either.

Father. That will be just as well; it is such raw weather. (To the
MOTHER.) But you have no shawl on, my love; where is your shawl?

Laura. Axel, fetch mother's shawl; it is hanging in the lobby. (AXEL
goes out into the lobby.)

Mother. We are not really into spring yet. I am surprised the stove is
not lit in here.

Laura (to AXEL, who is arranging the shawl over the MOTHER'S shoulders).
Axel, ring the bell and let us have a fire. (He does so, and gives the
necessary instructions to the Servant.)

Mother. If none of us are going to the ball, we ought to send them a
note. Perhaps you would see to that, Axel?

Axel. Certainly--but will it do for us to stay away from this ball?

Laura. Surely you heard father say that mother has been coughing in the
night.

Axel. Yes, I heard; but the ball is being given by the only friend I
have in these parts, in your honour and mine. We are the reason of the
whole entertainment--surely we cannot stay away from it?

Laura. But it wouldn't be any pleasure to us to go without mother.

Axel. One often has to do what is not any pleasure.

Laura. When it is a matter of duty, certainly. But our first duty is to
mother, and we cannot possibly leave her alone at home when she is ill.

Axel. I had no idea she was ill.

Father (as he reads). She coughed twice in the night. She coughed only a
moment ago.

Mother. Axel means that a cough or two isn't illness, and he is quite
right.

Father (still reading). A cough may be a sign of something very serious.
(Clears his throat.) The chest--or the lungs. (Clears his throat again.)
I don't think I feel quite the thing myself, either.

Laura. Daddy dear, you are too lightly clothed.

Mother. You dress as if it were summer--and it certainly isn't that.

Father. The fire will burn up directly. (Clears his throat again.) No,
not quite the thing at all.

Laura. Axel! (He goes up to her.) You might read the paper to us till
breakfast is ready.

Axel. Certainly. But first of all I want to know if we really are not to
go to the ball?

Laura. You can go, if you like, and take our excuses.

Mother. That wouldn't do. Remember you are married now.

Axel. That is exactly why it seems to me that Laura cannot stay at home.
The fact that she is my wife ought to have most weight with her now; and
this ball is being given for us two, who have nothing the matter with
us, besides being mainly a dance for young people--

Mother. And not for old folk.

Laura. Thank you; mother has taken to dancing again since I have grown
up. I have never been to a ball without mother's leading off the dances.

Mother. Axel apparently thinks it would have been much better if I had
not done so.

Father (as he reads). Mother dances most elegantly.

Axel. Surely I should know that, seeing how often I have had the honour
of leading off with mother. But on this occasion forty or fifty people
have been invited, a lot of trouble and expense incurred and a lot of
pleasure arranged, solely for our sakes. It would be simply wicked to
disappoint them.

Father (still reading). We can give a ball for them, in return.

Mother. All the more as we owe heaps of people an invitation.

Laura. Yes, that will be better; we have more room here, too. (A pause.)

Axel (leaning over LAURA'S chair). Think of your new ball dress--my
first present to you. Won't that tempt you? Blue muslin, with silver
stars all over it? Shall they not shine for the first time to-night?

Laura (smiling). No, there would be no shine in the stars if mother were
not at the dance.

Axel. Very well--I will send our excuses. (Turns to go out.)

Father (still reading). Perhaps it will be better for me to write. (AXEL
stops.)

Mother. Yes, you will do it best.

[MATHILDE comes in, followed by a Servant, who throws the doors open.]

Mathilde. Breakfast is ready.

Father (taking his wife's arm). Keep your shawl on, my dear; it is cold
in the hall. (They go out.)

Axel (as he offers LAURA his arm and leads her towards the door). Let me
have a word with you, before we follow them!

Laura. But it is breakfast time.

Axel (to MATHILDE, who is standing behind them waiting). Do you mind
going on? (MATHILDE goes out, followed by the Servant. AXEL turns to
LAURA.) Will nothing move you? Go with me to this dance!

Laura. I thought that was what you were going to say.

Axel. For _my_ sake!

Laura. But you saw for yourself that mother and father do not wish it?

Axel. _I_ wish it.

Laura. When mother and father do not?

Axel. Then I suppose you are their daughter in the first place, and my
wife only in the second?

Laura (with a laugh). Well, that is only natural.

Axel. No, it is not natural; because two days ago you promised to
forsake your father and your mother and follow me.

Laura (laughing). To the ball? I certainly never promised that.

Axel. Wherever I wish.

Laura. But you mustn't wish that, Axel darling--because it is quite
impossible.

Axel. It is quite possible, if you like to do it.

Laura. Yes, but I don't like.

Axel. That same day you also heard that a man is his wife's lord and
master. You must be willing to leave them, if I wish it; it was on those
terms that you gave me your hand, you obstinate little woman.

Laura. It was just so as to be able to be always with father and mother,
that I did it.

Axel. So that was it. Then you have no wish to be always with me?

Laura. Yes--but not to forsake them.

Axel. Never?

Laura. Never? (Softly.) Yes, some day--when I must.

Axel. When must you?

Laura. When? When mother and father--are gone. But why think about such
things?

Axel. Don't cry, darling! Listen to me. Would you never be willing to
follow me--until they have left us?

Laura. No!--how can you think so?

Axel. Ah, Laura, you don't love me.

Laura. Why do you say such a thing? You only want to make me unhappy.

Axel. You don't even know what love is.

Laura. I don't?--That is not kind of you.

Axel. Tell me what it is then, sweetheart!

Laura (kissing him). Now you mustn't talk about it any more; because you
know, if you do, I shall have red eyes, and then father and mother will
want to know why they are red, and I shall not be able to tell them, and
it will be very embarrassing.

Axel. Better a few tears now than many later on.

Laura. But what have I done to cry about?

Axel. You have given your hand without giving your heart with it; your
tongue said "yes," but not your will; you have given yourself without
realising what it means. And so, what ought to be the greatest and
purest happiness in my life begins to turn to sorrow, and the future
looks dark.

Laura. Oh, dear!--and is all this my fault?

Axel. No, it is my own fault. I have been deluding myself with
flattering hopes. I thought it would be so easy a matter for my love
to awaken yours; but I cannot make you understand me. Every way I have
tried has failed. So I must call up my courage, and try the last chance.

Laura. The last chance? What do you mean?

Axel. Laura, I can't tell you how dearly I love you!

Laura. If you did, you wouldn't hurt me. I never hurt you.

Axel. Well, give in to me in just this one thing, and I shall believe it
is the promise of more. Go with me to the ball!

Laura. You know I cannot do that!

Axel. Ah! then I dare not delay any longer!

Laura. You frighten me! You look so angry.

Axel. No, no. But things cannot go on like this any longer. I can't
stand it!

Laura. Am I so bad, then? No one ever told me so before.

Axel. Don't cry, my dainty little fairy. You have nothing to blame
yourself for--except for being so bewitchingly sweet whether you are
laughing or crying. You exhale sweetness like a flower. I want your
influence to pervade every place where I am, to distract me when I am
moody and laugh away my longings. Hush, hush--no red eyes. Let no one
see that. Here is your mother coming--no, it is Mathilde.

[Enter MATHILDE.]

Mathilde. Your coffee is getting cold.

Axel. We are just coming. At least, Laura is. I want to speak to you for
a moment, if I may.

Mathilde. To me?

Axel. If you will allow me.

Mathilde. By all means.

Laura. But you are coming in to breakfast?

Axel. In a moment, darling.

Laura. And you are not angry with me any longer?

Axel (following her). I never was that. I never could be!

Laura. I am so glad! (Runs out.)

Mathilde. What is it you want?

Axel. Can you keep a secret?

Mathilde. No.

Axel. You won't?

Mathilde. No.

Axel. You won't share any more confidences with me? (Takes her hand.)
You used to--

Mathilde (drawing back her hand and moving away from him). Yes, I used
to.

Axel. Why won't you any longer? (Goes up to her.) What is changed?

Mathilde. You. You are married now.

Axel. No, that is just what I am not.

Mathilde. Indeed.

Axel. You have sharp eyes. You must have seen that.

Mathilde. I thought it was all just as you wished.

Axel. You are giving me very abrupt answers. Have I offended you?

Mathilde. What makes you ask that?

Axel. Because lately you have avoided me. Remember how kind you were
to me once--indeed, that I owe you everything. It was through you, you
know, that I got at her. I had to make assignations with you, in order
to meet her. I had to offer you my arm so as to be able to give her the
other, and to talk to you so that she might hear my voice. The little
darling thought she was doing you a service--

Mathilde. When as a matter of fact it was I that was doing her one--

Axel. Yes, and without suspecting it! That was the amusing part of it.

Mathilde. Yes, that was the amusing part of it.

Axel. But soon people began to say that you and I were secretly engaged,
and that we were making a stalking-horse of Laura; so for her sake I had
to bring matters to a head rather quickly.

Mathilde. Yes, you took a good many people by surprise.

Axel. Including even yourself, I believe--not to mention the old folk
and Laura. But the worst of it is that I took my own happiness by
surprise, too.

Mathilde. What do you mean?

Axel. Of course I knew Laura was only a child; but I thought she would
grow up when she felt the approach of love. But she has never felt its
approach; she is like a bud that will not open, and I cannot warm the
atmosphere. But you could do that--you, in whom she has confided all her
first longings--you, whose kind heart knows so well how to sacrifice its
happiness for others. You know you are to some extent responsible, too,
for the fact that the most important event in her life came upon her a
little unpreparedly; so you ought to take her by the hand and guide her
first steps away from her parents and towards me--direct her affections
towards me--

Mathilde. I? (A pause.)

Axel. Won't you?

Mathilde. No--

Axel. But why not? You love her, don't you?

Mathilde. I do; but this is a thing--

Axel.--that you can do quite well! For you are better off than the rest
of us--you have many more ways of reaching a person's soul than we have.
Sometimes when we have been discussing something, and then you have
given your opinion, it has reminded me of the refrains to the old
ballads, which sum up the essence of the whole poem in two lines.

Mathilde. Yes, I have heard you flatter before.

Axel. I flatter? Why, what I have just asked you to do is a clearer
proof than anything else how great my--

Mathilde. Stop, stop! I won't do it!

Axel. Why not? At least be frank with me!

Mathilde. Because--oh, because--(Turns away.)

Axel. But what has made you so unkind? (MATHILDE stops for a moment, as
though she were going to answer; then goes hurriedly out.) What on earth
is the matter with her? Has anything gone wrong between her and Laura?
Or is it something about the house that is worrying her? She is too
level-headed to be disturbed by trifles.--Well, whatever it is, it must
look after itself; I have something else to think about. If the one of
them _can't_ understand me, and the other _won't_, and the old couple
neither can nor will, I must act on my own account--and the sooner the
better! Later on, it would look to other people like a rupture. It must
be done now, before we settle down to this state of things; for if we
were to do that, it would be all up with us. To acquiesce in such
an unnatural state of affairs would be like crippling one's self on
purpose. I am entangled hand and foot here in the meshes of a net
of circumspection. I shall have to sail along at "dead slow" all my
life--creep about among their furniture and their flowers as warily as
among their habits. You might just as well try to stand the house on its
head as to alter the slightest thing in it. I daren't move!--and it is
becoming unbearable. Would it be a breach of a law of nature to move
this couch a little closer to the wall, or this chair further away from
it? And has it been ordained from all eternity that this table must
stand just where it does? _Can_ it be shifted? (Moves it.) It actually
can! And the couch, too. Why does it stand so far forward? (Pushes it
back.) And why are these chairs everlastingly in the way? This one shall
stand there--and this one there. (Moves them.) I will have room for my
legs; I positively believe I have forgotten how to walk. For a whole
year I have hardly heard the sound of my own footstep--or of my own
voice; they do nothing but whisper and cough here. I wonder if I have
any voice left? (Sings.)

            "Bursting every bar and band,
             My fetters will I shatter;
             Striding out, with sword in hand,
             Where the fight"--

(He stops abruptly, at the entrance of the FATHER, the MOTHER,
LAURA and MATHILDE, who have come hurriedly from the breakfast table. A
long pause.)

Laura. Axel, dear!

Mathilde. What, all by himself?

Mother. Do you think you are at a ball?

Father. And playing the part of musician as well as dancer?

Axel. I am amusing myself.

Father. With our furniture?

Axel. I only wanted to see if it was possible to move it.

Mother. If it was possible to move it?

Laura. But what were you shouting about?

Axel. I only wanted to try if I had any voice left.

Laura. If you had any voice left?

Mother. There is a big wood near the house, where you can practise that.

Father. And a waterfall--if you are anxious to emulate Demosthenes.

Laura. Axel, dear--are you out of your mind?

Axel. No, but I think I soon shall be.

Mother. Is there anything wrong?

Axel. Yes, a great deal.

Mother. What is it? Some unpleasant news by post?

Axel. No, not that--but I am unhappy.

Mother. Two days after your wedding?

Father. You have a very odd way of showing it.

Axel. I am taken like that sometimes.

Mother. But what is it? Evidently you are not as happy as we hoped you
would be. Confide in us, Axel; we are your parents now, you know.

Axel. It is something I have been thinking about for a long time, but
have not had the courage to mention.

Mother. Why? Aren't we good to you?

Axel. You are much too good to me.

Father. What do you mean by that?

Axel. That everything is made far too smooth for me here; my faculties
get no exercise; I cannot satisfy my longing for activity and
conflict--nor my ambition.

Father. Dear me! What do you want, if you please?

Axel. I want to work for myself, to owe my position in life to my own
efforts--to become something.

Father. Really.--What a foolish idea! (Moves towards the door.)

Mother. But an idea we must take an interest in. He is our child's
husband now, remember. What do you want to be, my boy? Member of
Parliament?

Axel. No; but my uncle, who has about the largest legal practice in
these parts, offered long ago to hand it over to me.

Mother. But you wouldn't be able to look after it from here, would you,
Axel?

Father (at the door). A ridiculous idea!--Come back to breakfast. (Turns
to go.)

Mother. That is true, isn't it? You couldn't look after it from here?

Axel. No; but I can move into town.

All. Move into town? (A pause. The FATHER turns back from the door.)

Father. That is still more impossible, of course.

Mother. There must be something at the bottom of this. Is anything
worrying you? (Lowering her voice.) Are you in debt?

Axel. No, thanks to the kindness of you two. You have freed me from
that.

Mother. Then what is it, Axel? You have been so, strange lately--what is
it, my dear boy?

Father. Nonsensical ideas--probably his stomach is disordered. Remember
the last time I ate lobster!--Come along in and have a glass of sherry,
and you will forget all about it.

Axel. No, it isn't a thing one can forget. It is always in my
thoughts--more and more insistently. I must have work for my mind--some
outlet for my ambition. I am bored here.

Mother. Two days after your wedding!

Father. Set to work then, for heaven's sake! What is there to hinder
you? Would you like to take charge of one of my farms? Or to start some
improvements on the estate?--or anything you please! I have no doubt you
have ideas, and I will provide the money--only do not let us have any of
this fuss!

Axel. But then I shall be indebted to you for everything, and shall feel
dependent.

Father. So you would rather feel indebted to your uncle?

Axel. He will give me nothing. I must buy it from him.

Father. Really!--How?

Axel. With my work and my--. Oh well, I suppose you would lend me a
little capital?

Father. Not a penny.

Axel. But why?

Father. I will tell you why. Because my son in law must be my
son-in-law, and not a speculating lawyer who sits with his door open and
a sign hung out to beg for custom.

Axel. Is a lawyer's profession a dishonourable one, then?

Father. No, it is not. But you have been received into one of the oldest
and richest families in the country, and you owe some respect to its
traditions. Generation after generation, from time immemorial, the
heads of our family have been lords of the manor--not office seekers
or fortune hunters. The honourable offices I have held have all been
offered to me and not sought by me; and I am not going to have you
chattering about your university degree or your talents. You shall stay
quietly here, and you will be offered more than you want.

Mother. Come, come, my dear, don't get heated over it; that always makes
you so unwell. Let us arrive at some arrangement without wrangling.
Axel, you must be reasonable; you know he cannot stand any
over-exertion. Laura, get your father a glass of water. Come, my dear,
let us go back to the dining-room.

Father. Thanks, I have no appetite left now.

Mother. There, you see!--Axel, Axel!

Laura. For shame, Axel!

Mother. Sit down, dear, sit down! My goodness, how hot you are!

Father. It is so warm in here.

Mother. That is the stove. Shut it down, Mathilde!

Laura (to AXEL). You are a nice one, I must say!

Father. The chairs--put them straight! (They do so.) And the table!
(They do so.) That is better.

Mother. That is the worst of a stranger in the house--something of this
sort may so easily happen.

Father. But a thing like this!--I have never in my life been
contradicted before.

Mother. It is for the first and last time! He will soon learn who you
are and what is due to you.

Father. And to think that, the first time, it should be my son-in-law
that--

Mother. He will regret it for the rest of your life, you may be sure,
and when you are gone he will have no peace of mind. We can only hope
that the atmosphere of affection in this house will improve him. Really,
lately, Axel has behaved as if he were bewitched.

Laura. Yes, hasn't he?

Mother. Good gracious, Laura, do you mean that you--

Laura. No, I didn't mean anything.

Mother. Laura, are you trying to conceal something?

Father. And from us? (Gets up.) Are things as bad as that?

Laura. I assure you, dear people, it is nothing; it is only--

Father and Mother (together). Only--?

Laura. No, no, it is nothing--only you frighten me so.

Father and Mother (together). She is crying!

Mathilde. She is crying!

Father. Now, sir--why is she crying?

Laura. But, father, father--look, I am not crying the least bit.

Mother and Mathilde. Yes, she is crying!

Axel. Yes--and will cry every day until we make a change here! (A pause,
while they all look at him.) Well, as so much has been said, it may as
well all come out. Our marriage is not a happy one, because it lacks the
most essential thing of all.

Mother. Merciful heavens, what are you saying!

Father. Compose yourself; let me talk to him. What do you mean, sir?

Axel. Laura does not love me--

Laura. Yes, that is what he says!

Axel. She hasn't the least idea what love means, and will never learn as
long as she is in her father's house.

Mother and Father. Why?

Axel. Because she lives only for her parents; me, she looks upon merely
as an elder brother who is to assist her in loving them.

Mother. Is that so distasteful to you, then?

Axel. No, no. I am devoted to you and grateful to you, and I am proud of
being your son; but it is only through her that I am that--and she has
never yet really taken me to her heart. I am quite at liberty to go away
or to stay, as I please; _she_ is a fixture here. There is never one
of her requests to me, scarcely a single wish she expresses--indeed,
scarcely a sign of endearment she shows me, that she has not first of
all divided up into three portions; and I get my one-third of it, and
get it last or not at all.

Mother. He is jealous--and of us!

Father. Jealous of us!

Laura. Yes, indeed he is, mother.

Father. This is mere fancy, Axel--a ridiculous idea. Do not let any one
else hear you saying that.

Axel. No, it is neither mere fancy nor is it ridiculous. It colours the
whole of our relations to one another; it gnaws at my feelings, and then
I torment her, make you angry, and lead an idle, empty, ill-tempered
existence--

Father. You are ill, there is no doubt about it.

Axel. I am, and you have made me ill.

Father and Mother (together). We have?

Father. Please be a little--

Axel. You allow her to treat me simply as the largest sized of all the
dolls you have given her to play with. You cannot bear to see her give
away any more of her affection than she might give to one of her dolls.

Father. Please talk in a more seemly manner! Please show us a proper
respect--

Axel. Forgive me, my dear parents, if I don't. What I mean is that a
child cannot be a wife, and as long as she remains with you she will
always be a child.

Mother. But, Axel, did we not tell you she was only a child--

Father. We warned you, we asked you to wait a year or two--

Mother. Because we could not see that she loved you sufficiently.

Father. But your answer was that it was just the child in her that you
loved.

Mother. Just the child's innocence and simplicity. You said you felt
purer in her presence; indeed, that she sometimes made you feel as if
you were in church. And we, her father and mother, understood that, for
we had felt it ourselves.

Father. We felt that just as much as you, my son.

Mother. Do you remember one morning, when she was asleep, that you said
her life was a dream which it would be a sin to disturb?

Father. And said that the mere thought of her made you tread more softly
for fear of waking her.

Axel. That is quite true. Her childlike nature shed happiness upon
me, her gentle innocence stilled me. It is quite true that I felt her
influence upon my senses like that of a beautiful morning.

Father. And now you are impatient with her for being a child!

Axel. Exactly! At the time when I was longing to lead her to the altar,
I daresay I only thought of her as an inspiration to my better self and
my best impulses. She was to me what the Madonna is to a good Catholic;
but now she has become something more than that. The distance between
us no longer exists; I cannot be satisfied with mere adoration, I must
love; I cannot be satisfied with kneeling to her, I need my arms around
her. Her glance has the same delicacy it always had, the same innocence;
but I can no longer sit and gaze at her by the hour. Her glance must
lose itself in mine in complete surrender. Her hand, her arm, her mouth
are the same as they were; but I need to feel her hand stroking my hair,
her arm round my neck, her mouth on mine; her thoughts must embrace mine
and be like sunshine in my heart. She was a symbol to me, but the symbol
has become flesh and blood. When first she came into my thoughts it was
as a child; but I have watched her day by day grow into a woman, whose
shyness and ignorance make her turn away from me, but whom I must
possess. (LAURA moves quickly towards him.)

Mother. He loves our child!

Father. He loves her! (Embraces his wife.) What more is there to say,
then? Everything is as it should be. Come along and have a glass of
sherry!

Axel. No, everything is not as it should be. I can get her gratitude
sometimes in a lucky moment, but not her heart. If I am fond of
a certain thing, she is not. If I wish a thing, she wishes the
opposite--for instance, if it's only a question of going to a ball, she
won't take any pleasure in it unless her mother can go too.

Mother. Good heavens, is it nothing but that!

Laura. No, mother, it is nothing else; it is this ball.

Father. Then for any sake go to the ball! You are a couple of noodles.
Come along, now.

Axel. The ball? It is not the ball. I don't care a bit about the ball.

Laura. No, that is just it, mother. When he gets what he wants, it turns
out that it wasn't what he wanted at all, but something quite different.
I don't understand what it is.

Axel. No, because it is not a question of any one thing, but of our
whole relations to one another. Love is what I miss; she does not know
what it means, and never will know--as long as she remains at home here.
(A pause.)

Mother (slowly). As long as she remains at home?

Father (coming nearer to him, and trembling slightly). What do you mean
by that?

Axel. It will be only when Laura finds she can no longer lean upon her
parents, that she may possibly come to lean upon me.

Mother. What does he mean?

Father. I don't understand--

Axel. If she is to be something more than a good daughter--if she is to
be a good wife--Laura must go away from here.

Mother. Laura go away?

Father. Our child?

Laura (to her MOTHER). Mother!

Axel. It would be wronging her whom I love so deeply, it would be
wronging myself, and wronging you who mean so well, if now, when the
power is in my hands, I had not the spirit to make use of it. Here,
Laura lives only for you; when you die, life will be over for her. But
that is not what marriage means, that is not what she promised at the
altar, and that is what I cannot submit to. To go on like this will only
make us all unhappy; and that is why Laura must go with me! (The MOTHER
starts forward; LAURA goes to MATHILDE.)

Father. You cannot mean what you say.

Axel. I am in deadly earnest, and no one can shake my resolution.

Mother. Then Heaven have mercy on us! (A pause.)

Father. You know, Axel, that God gave us five children; and you know,
too, that He took four away from us again. Laura is now our only child,
our only joy.

Mother. We can't bear to lose her, Axel! She has never been away from us
a single day since she was born. She is the spoilt child of our sorrow;
if death itself claimed her, we should have to hold fast on to her.

Father. Axel, you are not a wicked man; you have not come amongst us to
make us all unhappy?

Axel. If I were to give in now, this state of things would occur again
every week or so, and none of us could stand that. For that reason, my
dear parents, prove yourselves capable of a sacrifice. Let us put an end
to it once for all--and let Laura move into town with me next week.

Father. Good heavens--it is impossible!

Mother. You won't have the heart to do that. Look at her, and then
say that again! (AXEL turns away.) No, I knew you could not. (To the
FATHER.) You talk to him! Tell him the truth, set him right, since he
has broken in upon a good and loving family only to bring misfortune to
it.

Father. In this house, as far back as I can remember, no hard words
have ever been used. It seems to me like some evil dream, that I am
struggling to wake out of and cannot! (A pause.) Mr. Hargaut, when we
gave our daughter to you, we made no conditions. We admitted you into
a happy family, to a position of wealth, to a promising future; and we
expected, in return, some little affection, some little appreciation--at
least some little respect. But you behave like--like a stranger, who is
admitted to one's intimacy and good offices, and then one morning goes
off with the most valuable possessions in the house--like an ungrateful,
cruel--! We have confided our child, the dearest, sweetest child, our
only child, to--a man without a heart! We were two happy parents, rich
in her love--parents whom every one envied and we now are two poor
bereaved wretches, who must creep away together into a corner in their
unhappy disillusionment. (Sits down.)

Mother. And this is the way you can treat the man who has given you
everything! What answer have you to give him?

Axel. It makes my heart bleed. If I had thought it would be as hard as
this, indeed I would never have begun it; but if we leave the matter
unsettled, now that it has been broached, we shall never be on proper
terms with one another again. Of that I am certain. If it is a matter
that pains us all, for that very reason let us go through with it and
get it settled.

Father. Poor confiding fools that we have been!

Mother. Can't you give us some respite, so that we may think things over
quietly? This is simply tearing us apart.

Axel. It would only prolong your pain, and it would end in your hating
me. No, it must be done now--at once; otherwise it will never be done.

Mother. Oh dear, oh dear! (Sits down.)

Father. Axel! Listen to us for a moment! It is quite possible you may be
in the right; but for that very reason I beg you--I, who have never yet
begged anything of any one--I beg you, be merciful! I am an old man, and
cannot stand it--and she (looking at his wife) still less.

Axel. Ah, I am not hard-hearted--but I must try to be resolute. If I
lose now, I shall be losing her for life, I know. Therefore she _shall_
go with me!

Mother (springing up). No, she shall not! If you loved her, as you say
you do, you hypocrite, you would remain where she is--and here she shall
stay!

Laura (who has been standing beside MATHILDE, goes to her MOTHER). Yes,
to my dying day.

Father (getting up). No! We must not alter God's law. It is written: "A
man shall forsake his father and his mother, and cleave only unto his
wife"--and in the same way she must cleave only to him. Laura shall go
when he wishes.

Laura. Father, can you--have you the heart to--?

Father. No, I haven't the heart to, my child. But I shall do it
nevertheless, because it is right. Oh, Laura!--(Embraces her. The MOTHER
joins her embrace to his.)

Mathilde (to AXEL). You Jesuit!--You have no consideration, no mercy;
you trample upon hearts as you would upon the grass that grows in your
path. But you shall not find this so easy as you think. It is true she
is a child--but I shall go with her! I don't know you, and I don't trust
you. (Clenches her fist.) But I shall watch over her!

[Curtain.]




ACT II

(SCENE.--AXEL's house, a year later. The room is arranged almost
identically like that in the first act. Two large portraits of LAURA'S
parents, very well executed, hang in full view. LAURA is sitting at the
table, MATHILDE on the couch on the right.)

Mathilde (reading aloud from a book). "'No,' was the decided answer.
Originally it was he that was to blame, but now it is she. He tore her
from her parents, her home and her familiar surroundings; but since then
he has sought her forgiveness so perseveringly, and her love so humbly,
that it would take all the obstinacy of a spoilt child to withstand him.
Just as formerly he could think of nothing but his love, so now she will
consider nothing except her self-love; but she is so much the more to
blame than he, as her motives are less good than his. She is like a
child that has woke up too early in the morning; it strikes and kicks at
any one that comes to pet it."

Laura. Mathilde--does it really say that?

Mathilde. Indeed it does.

Laura. Just as you read it?

Mathilde. Look for yourself.

Laura (takes the book and looks at it, then lays it down). It is almost
our own story, word for word. I would give anything to know who has
written it.

Mathilde. It is a mere coincidence--

Laura. No, some wicked wretch has seen something like this--some
creature that is heartless enough to be able to mock at a parent's love;
it must be some one who either is worthless himself or has had worthless
parents!

Mathilde. Why, Laura, how seriously you take it!

Laura. Yes, it irritates me, this libelling of all fidelity. What
is fidelity, if it does not mean that a child should be true to its
parents?

Mathilde. But I was just reading to you about that. (Reads.) "The object
of fidelity changes, as we ourselves change. The child's duty is to be
true to its parents; the married, to one another; the aged, to their
children--"

Laura. Don't read any more! I won't hear any more! Its whole train
of thought offends me. (After a pause.) What a horrid book!
(Indifferently.) What happens to them in the end?

Mathilde (in the same tone). To whom?

Laura. That couple--in the book.

Mathilde (still in an indifferent tone). It doesn't end happily. (A
pause.)

Laura (looking up). Which of them suffers?

Mathilde. Which do you think?

Laura (beginning to sew again). She, I should think--because she is
unhappy already.

Mathilde. You have guessed right. She falls in love.

Laura (astonished). Falls in love?

Mathilde. Yes. Sometime or other, love is awakened in the heart of every
woman; and then, if she cannot love her husband, in the course of time
she will love some one else.

Laura (dismayed). Some one else!

Mathilde. Yes. (A pause.)

Laura. That is horrible! (Begins to sew, then lays her hand down on the
table, then begins to sew again.) And what happens to him?

Mathilde. He falls ill, very ill. And then some one finds him out and
comforts him--a woman.

Laura (looking up). How does that happen?

Mathilde. His heart is like an empty house, in an atmosphere of sadness
and longing. Little by little she--the woman who comforts him--creeps
into it; and so in time there comes the day when he can say he is happy.
(A pause.)

Laura (quietly). Who is she?

Mathilde. One of those poor-spirited creatures that can be content with
the aftermath of love.

Laura (after a pause, during which she has been looking fixedly at
MATHILDE). Could you be that?

Mathilde. No!--I must be first or nothing!

Laura. But about her?

Mathilde. The wife?

Laura. Yes. What happens to her?

Mathilde. Directly she realises that love for another has taken
possession of her husband, she turns towards him with all her heart; but
it is too late then. (LAURA sits absorbed for a few moments; then gets
up hurriedly and goes to a little work-table that is standing at the end
of the couch on the left, opens it, looks for something in it, stops to
think, then looks in it again.) What are you looking for?

Laura. A photograph.

Mathilde. Axel's?

Laura. No--but what has become of it?

Mathilde. Don't you remember that one day you took it up and said you
would not have it? So I hid it.

Laura. You?

Mathilde. Yes--till you should ask about it. (Gets up, opens her
work-table that stands by the right-hand couch.) Here it is. (Gives it
to her.)

Laura. So you have got it! (Lays it in her table drawer without looking
at it, shuts the drawer, goes a few paces away, then comes back, turns
the key in the drawer and takes it out.) Has Axel read the new book?

Mathilde. I don't know. Shall I give it to him?

Laura. Just as you like. Perhaps you would like to read it aloud to him.
(A Maid comes in with a letter; LAURA takes it, and the Maid goes out
again.) From my parents! (Kisses the letter with emotion.) The only ones
who love me! (Goes out hurriedly. At the same moment AXEL comes in from
the outer door.)

Axel. She always goes when I come in!

Mathilde (getting up). This time it was an accident, though. (Looks at
him.) How pale you are!

Axel (seriously). I am rather worried.--Have you read the new novel?

Mathilde (putting the book in her pocket). What novel?

Axel. "The Newly-Married Couple"--quite a small book.

Mathilde. Oh, that one--I have just been reading it.

Axel (eagerly). And Laura too? Has Laura read it?

Mathilde. She thinks it is a poor story.

Axel. It isn't that, but it is an extraordinary one. It quite startles
me--it is like coming into one's own room and seeing one's self sitting
there. It has caught hold of unformed thoughts that lie hidden deep in
my soul.

Mathilde. Every good book does that.

Axel. Everything will happen to me just as it does in that book; the
premises are all here, only I had not recognised them.

Mathilde. I have heard of very young doctors feeling the symptoms of all
the diseases they read about.

Axel. Oh, but this is more than mere imagination. My temptations come
bodily before me. My thoughts are the result of what happens, just as
naturally as smoke is the result of fire--and these thoughts (lancing at
MATHILDE) lead me far.

Mathilde. As far as I can see, the book only teaches consideration for a
woman, especially if she is young.

Axel. That is true. But, look here--a young man, brought up among
students, cannot possibly possess, ready-made, all this consideration
that a woman's nature requires. He doesn't become a married man in one
day, but by degrees. He cannot make a clean sweep of his habits and take
up the silken bonds of duty, all in a moment. The inspiration of a first
love gives him the capacity, but he has to learn how to use it. I never
saw what I had neglected till I had frightened her away from me. But
what is there that I have not done, since then, to win her? I have gone
very gently to work and tried from every side to get at her--I have
tempted her with gifts and with penitence--but you can see for yourself
she shrinks from me more and more. My thoughts, wearied with longings
and with the strain of inventing new devices, follow her, and my love
for her only grows--but there are times when such thoughts are succeeded
by a void so great that my whole life seems slipping away into it. It
is then I need some one to cling to--. Oh, Mathilde, you have meant very
much to me at times like that. (Goes up to her.)

Mathilde (getting up). Yes, all sorts of things happen in a year that
one never thought of at the beginning of it.

Axel (sitting down). Good God, what a year! I haven't the courage to
face another like it. This book has frightened me.

Mathilde (aside). That's a good thing, anyway.

Axel (getting up). Besides--the amount of work I have to do, to keep up
everything here just as she was accustomed to have it, is getting to be
too much for me, Mathilde. It won't answer in the long run. If only I
had the reward of thanks that the humblest working-man gets-if it were
only a smile; but when I have been travelling about for a week at a
time, exposed to all sorts of weather in these open boats in winter,
do I get any welcome on my home-coming? When I sit up late, night after
night, does she ever realise whom I am doing it for? Has she as much as
noticed that I have done so--or that I have, at great expense, furnished
this house like her parents'? No, she takes everything as a matter of
course; and if any one were to say to her, "He has done all this for
your sake," she would merely answer, "He need not have done so, I had it
all in my own home."

Mathilde. Yes, you have come to a turning-point now.

Axel. What do you mean?

Mathilde. Nothing particular--here she comes!

Axel. Has anything happened? She is in such a hurry!

[LAURA comes in with an open letter in her hand.]

Laura (in a low voice, to MATHILDE). Mother and father are so lonely
at home that they are going abroad, to Italy; but they are coming here,
Mathilde, before they leave the country.

Mathilde. Coming here? When?

Laura. Directly. I hadn't noticed--the letter is written from the
nearest posting station; they want to take us by surprise--they will be
here in a few minutes. Good heavens, what are we to do?

Mathilde (quickly). Tell Axel that!

Laura. I tell him?

Mathilde. Yes, you must.

Laura (in a frightened voice). I?

Mathilde (to AXEL). Laura has something she wants to tell you.

Laura. Mathilde!

Axel. This is something new.

Laura. Oh, do tell him, Mathilde. (MATHILDE says nothing, but goes to
the back of the room.)

Axel (coming up to her). What is it?

Laura (timidly). My parents are coming.

Axel. Here?

Laura. Yes.

Axel. When? To-day?

Laura. Yes. Almost directly.

Axel. And no one has told me! (Takes up his hat to go.)

Laura (frightened). Axel!

Axel. It is certainly not for the pleasure of finding me here that they
are coming.

Laura. But you mustn't go!

Mathilde. No, you mustn't do that.

Axel. Are they not going to put up here?

Laura. Yes, I thought--if you are willing--in your room.

Axel. So that is what it is to be--I am to go away and they are to take
my place.

Mathilde. Take my room, and I will move into Laura's. I will easily
arrange that. (Goes out.)

Axel. Why all this beating about the bush? It is quite natural that you
should want to see them, and equally natural that I should remove myself
when they come; only you should have broken it to me--a little more
considerately. Because I suppose they are coming now to take you with
them--and, even if it means nothing to you to put an end to everything
like this, at all events you ought to know what it means to me!

Laura. I did not know till this moment that they were coming.

Axel. But it must be your letters that have brought them here--your
complaints--

Laura. I have made no complaints.

Axel. You have only told them how matters stand here.

Laura. Never. (A pause.)

Axel (in astonishment). What have you been writing to them all this
year, then--a letter every day?

Laura. I have told them everything was going well here.

Axel. Is it possible? All this time? Laura! Dare I believe it? Such
consideration--(Comes nearer to her.) Ah, at last, then--?

Laura (frightened). I did it out of consideration for them.

Axel (coldly). For them? Well, I am sorry for them, then. They will soon
see how things stand between us.

Laura. They are only to be here a day or two. Then they go abroad.

Axel. Abroad? But I suppose some one is going with them?--you, perhaps?

Laura. You can't, can you?

Axel. No.--So you are going away from me, Laura!--I am to remain here
with Mathilde--it is just like that book.

Laura. With Mathilde? Well--perhaps Mathilde could go with them?

Axel. You know we can't do without her here--as things are at present.

Laura. Perhaps you would rather I--?

Axel. There is no need for you to ask my leave. You go if you wish.

Laura. Yes, you can do without _me_.--All the same, I think I shall
stay!

Axel. You will stay--with me?

Laura. Yes.

Axel (in a happier voice, coming up to her). _That_ is not out of
consideration for your parents?

Laura. No, that it isn't! (He draws back in astonishment. MATHILDE comes
in.)

Mathilde. It is all arranged. (To AXEL.) You will stay, then?

Axel (looking at LAURA). I don't know.--If I go away for these few days,
perhaps it will be better.

Mathilde (coming forward). Very well, then I shall go away too!

Laura. You?

Axel. You?

Mathilde. Yes, I don't want to have anything to do with what happens. (A
pause.)

Axel. What do you think will happen?

Mathilde. That is best left unsaid--till anything does happen. (A
pause.)

Axel. You are thinking too hardly of your friend now.

Laura (quietly). Mathilde is not my friend.

Axel. Mathilde not your--

Laura (as before). A person who is always deceiving one is no friend.

Axel. Has Mathilde deceived anybody? You are unjust.

Laura (as before). Am I? It is Mathilde's fault that I am unhappy now.

Axel. Laura!

Laura. My dear, you may defend her, if you choose; but you must allow me
to tell you plainly that it is Mathilde's advice that has guided me from
the days of my innocent childhood, and has led me into all the misery I
am suffering now! If it were not for her I should not be married to-day
and separated from my parents. She came here with me--not to help me, as
she pretended--but to be able still to spy on me, quietly and secretly,
in her usual way, and afterwards to make use of what she had discovered.
But she devotes herself to you; because she--no, I won't say it! (With
growing vehemence.) Well, just you conspire against me, you two--and see
whether I am a child any longer! The tree that you have torn up by
the roots and transplanted will yield you no fruit for the first year,
however much you shake its branches! I don't care if things do happen as
they do in that story she has taken such pleasure in reading to me; but
I shall never live to see the day when I shall beg for any one's love!
And now my parents are coming to see everything, everything--and that is
just what I want them to do! Because I won't be led like a child, and
I won't be deceived! I won't! (Stands quite still for a moment, then
bursts into a violent fit of crying and runs out.)

Axel (after a pause). What is the meaning of that?

Mathilde. She hates me.

Axel (astonished). When did it come to that?

Mathilde. Little by little. Is it the first time you have noticed it?

Axel (still more astonished). Have you no longer her confidence, then?

Mathilde. No more than you.

Axel. She, who once believed every one--!

Mathilde. Now she believes no one. (A pause.)

Axel. And what is still more amazing--only there is no mistaking it--is
that she is jealous!

Mathilde. Yes.

Axel. And of you?--When there is not the slightest foundation--. (Stops
involuntarily and looks at her; she crosses the room.)

Mathilde. You should only be glad that this has happened.

Axel. That she is jealous?--or what do you mean?

Mathilde. It has helped her. She is on the high road to loving you now.

Axel. Now?

Mathilde. Love often comes in that way--especially to the one who has
been made uneasy.

Axel. And you are to be the scapegoat?

Mathilde. I am accustomed to that.

Axel (quickly, as he comes nearer to her). You must have known love
yourself, Mathilde?

Mathilde (starts, then says). Yes, I have loved too.

Axel. Unhappily?

Mathilde. Not happily. But why do you ask?

Axel. Those who have been through such an experience are less selfish
than the rest of us and are capable of more.

Mathilde. Yes. Love is always a consecration, but not always for the
same kind of service.

Axel. Sometimes it only brings unhappiness.

Mathilde. Yes, when people have nothing in them, and no pride.

Axel. The more I get to know of you, the less I seem really to know
you. What sort of a man can this fellow be, that you have loved without
return?

Mathilde (in a subdued voice). A man to whom I am now very grateful;
because marriage is not my vocation.

Axel. What is your vocation, then?

Mathilde. One that one is unwilling to speak about, until one knows that
it has been successful.--And I don't believe I should have discovered
it, but for him.

Axel. And is your mind quite at peace now? Have you no longings?

Mathilde (speaking here, and in what follows, with some vehemence). Yes,
a longing to travel--a long, long way! To fill my soul with splendid
pictures!--Oh, if you have any regard for me--

Axel. I have more than that, Mathilde--the warmest gratitude--and more
than that, I--

Mathilde (interrupting him). Well, then, make it up with Laura! Then
I shall be able to go abroad with her parents. Oh, if I don't get
away--far away--there is something within me that will die!

Axel. Go away then, Mathilde--you say so, and therefore I believe you.

Mathilde. But I am not going till you two are reconciled! I don't want
all three of us to be unhappy. No, I am not unhappy; but I shall be if
you are--and if I don't get abroad now!

Axel. What can I do in the matter?

Mathilde (quickly). Stay here and give the old folk a welcome! Behave to
Laura as if there were nothing the matter, and she will say nothing!

Axel. Why do you think she will say nothing?

Mathilde. Because of all I have done to make that likely!

Axel. You?

Mathilde. Yes--no--yes; at least, not as you wanted me to, but
indirectly--

Axel. Even at the beginning of all this?

Mathilde. No, not then, it is true. But forget that, because now I have
made it good! I did not know you then--and there were reasons--

Axel (going nearer to her). Mathilde, you have filled me with an
extraordinary regard for you--as if everything that I have been denied
in another quarter was to be found in you, and as if now for the first
time I--

Mathilde. There is the carriage!

Axel. What shall I do?

Mathilde. Go down and welcome the old folk! Be quick! Look, Laura is
down there already--oh, don't let her miss you just at this moment!
There, that is right. (He goes.) Yes, that was right; this is my first
real victory! (Goes out. Voices are heard without, and soon afterwards
the MOTHER comes in with LAURA, and after her the FATHER with AXEL and
MATHILDE.)

Mother. So here I am in your home, my darling child! (Kisses her.) It is
really worth being separated, for the pleasure of meeting again! (Kisses
her.) And such nice letters from you, every single day--thank you,
darling! (Kisses her again.) And you look just the same--just the same!
Perhaps a trifle paler, but that is natural. (Kisses her.)

Axel (to the FATHER, who is taking off a coat and several comforters).
May I?

Father (bowing). Thank you, I can manage quite well myself.

Axel. But let me hang them up for you?

Father. Much obliged--I will do it myself! (Takes them out into the
hall.)

Mother (to LAURA, in a low voice). It was hard work to get your father
to come, I can tell you. He still cannot forget--. But we had to see
our little girl before we set off on our travels; and we had to travel,
because it was getting so lonely at home.

Laura. Dear mother! (She and MATHILDE help her to take her things off.)

Axel (to the FATHER, who has come in again). I hope you had a pleasant
journey, sir?

Father. Remarkably pleasant.

Axel. Caught no cold, I hope?

Father. Nothing to speak of--just a trifle--a slightly relaxed throat;
out late--and heavy dews. You are well?

Axel. Very well, thank you.

Father. I am extremely pleased to hear it.

Mother (to the FATHER). But, do you see--?

Father. What, my love?

Mother. Do you mean to say you don't see?

Father. No, what is it?

Mother. We are at home again! This is our own room over again!

Father (in astonishment). Upon my word--!

Mother. The carpet, the curtains, the furniture, everything--even down
to their arrangement in the room! (Goes across to AXEL and takes his
hand.) A more touching proof of your love for her we could never have
had! (To the FATHER.) Isn't that so?

Father (struggling with his astonishment). Yes, I must say--

Mother. And you never wrote us a single word about this, Laura?

Mathilde. It is not only this room, but the whole house is arranged like
yours as far as possible.

Mother. The whole house! Is it possible!

Father. It is the most charming way of giving pleasure to a young wife
that I ever heard of!

Mother. I am so astonished, Laura, at your never having mentioned a word
of all this in your letters.

Father. Never a word of it!

Mother. Hadn't you noticed it?

Father. Ah, well--what one sees every day, one is apt to think every one
knows all about--isn't that it, little girl? That is the explanation,
isn't it?

Mother. And Axel has given you all this by his own exertions! Aren't you
proud of that?

Father (clapping her on the back). Of course she is, but it was never
Laura's way to say much about her feelings; although this is really
something so--

Mother (laughing). Her letters lately have been nothing but
dissertations upon love.

Laura. Mother--!

Mother. Oh, I am going to tell! But you have a good husband, Laura.

Laura. Mother--!

Mother (in a lower voice). You have paid him some little attentions in
return, of course?--given him something, or--

Father (pushing in between them). Worked something for him, eh?

(MATHILDE, in the meantime, has brought in wine and filled some
glasses.)

Axel. Now, a glass of wine to welcome you--sherry, your favourite wine,
sir.

Mother. He remembers that! (They each take a glass in their hands.)

Axel. Laura and I bid you heartily welcome here in our house! And we
hope you will find everything here--(with emotion) just as you would
wish it. I will do my best that you shall, and I am sure Laura will too.

Mother. Of course she will!--Drink his health! (AXEL touches her glass
with his; her hand trembles, and she spills come wine.) You have filled
the glasses too full, my dear! (They all clink glasses and drink.)

Father (when the glasses have been filled again). My wife and I--thank
you very much for your welcome. We could not set out on our journey
without first seeing our child--our two children. A good friend of ours
(looking at MATHILDE) advised us to come unexpectedly. At first we
did not want to but now we are glad we did; because now we can see for
ourselves that Laura told the truth in her letters. You are happy--and
therefore we old folk must be happy too, and bury all recollection of
what--what evidently happened for the best. Hm, hm!--At one time we
could not think it was so--and that was why we did not wish to be
parted from our child; but now we can make our minds quite easy about
it--because now we can trust you. I have complete trust in you, Axel,
my dear son--God bless you! (They grasp hands, and drink to each other
again.)

Mother. Do you know what I should like?

All. No!

Mother. I should like Axel to tell us how your reconciliation came
about.

Laura. Mother!

Mother. Why should you be shy about it? Why have you never told us about
it? Good gracious, didn't you think your parents would be only too glad
to hear how lucky their little girl was?

Father. I think it is a very good idea of your mother's. Now let us sit
down and hear all about it. (They sit down; LAURA turns away.) No, come
and sit down beside your mother, Laura! We are going to have a good look
at you while he tells us about it. (Pulls her to him.)

Mother. And don't forget anything, Axel! Tell us of the very first sign
of love, the first little kindness, Laura showed you.

Axel. Yes, I will tell you how it came about.

Laura (getting up). But, Axel--!

Axel. I shall only be supplementing what you told in your letters,
Laura.

Mother. It is all to your credit, my child! Now be quiet and listen to
him, and correct him if he forgets anything. (Pulls her down to her seat
again.)

Axel. Yes, my dear parents. You know, of course, that we did not begin
very well--

Father. Quite so--but you can pass over that.

Axel. As soon as she was left to depend on herself alone, I realised the
great wrong I had done to Laura. She used to tremble when I came near
her, and before long she used to tremble just as much before any one. At
first I felt the humility of a strong man who has triumphed; but after a
time I became anxious, for I had acted too strongly. Then I dedicated my
love to the task of winning back, in a Jacob's seven years of service,
what I had lost in one moment. You see this house--I made everything
smooth in it for her feet. You see what we have round us--I set that
before her eyes. By means of nights of work, by exerting myself to the
uttermost, I got it all together, bit by bit--in order that she should
never feel anything strange or inhospitable in her home, but only what
she was accustomed to and fond of. She understood; and soon the birds of
spring began to flutter about our home. And, though she always ran away
when I came, I was conscious of her presence in a hundred little loving
touches in my room--at my desk--

Laura (ashamed). Oh, it isn't true!

Axel. Don't believe her! Laura is so kind-hearted--her fear of me made
her shy, but she could not withstand her own kind impulses and my humble
faithfulness. When I was sitting late in my room, working for her,
she was sitting up in hers--at any rate I often thought I heard her
footstep; and when I came home late after a wearisome journey, if she
did not run to welcome me, it was not because she was wanting in wifely
gratitude--Laura has no lack of that--but because she did not wish to
betray her happiness till the great day of our reconciliation should
come. (LAURA gets up.)

Father. Then you were not reconciled immediately?

Axel. Not immediately.

Mother (anxiously, in a subdued voice). My goodness, Laura did not say a
word about that!

Axel. Because she loved you, and did not want to distress you
unnecessarily. But does not her very silence about it show that she was
waiting for me? That was her love's first gift to me. (LAURA sits down
again.) After a while she gave me others. She saw that I was not angry;
on the contrary, she saw that where I had erred, I had erred through my
love for her; and she is so loving herself, that little by little she
schooled herself to meet me in gentle silence--she longed to be a good
wife. And then, one lovely morning--just like to-day--we both had
been reading a book which was like a voice from afar, threatening our
happiness, and we were driven together by fear. Then, all at once,
all the doors and windows flew wide open! It was your letter! The room
seemed to glow with warmth--just as it does now with you sitting there;
summer went singing through the house--and then I saw in her eyes that
all the blossoms were going to unfold their petals! Then I knelt down
before her, as I do now, and said: For your parents' sake, that they
may be happy about us--for my sake, that I may not be punished any
longer--for your own sake, that you may be able again to live as the
fulness of your kind heart prompts--let us find one another now! And
then Laura answered--(LAURA throws herself into his arms, in a burst of
tears. All get up.)

Mother. That was beautiful, children!

Father. As beautiful as if we were young again ourselves, and had found
one another!--How well he told it, too!

Mother. Yes, it was just as if it was all happening before our eyes!

Father. Wasn't it?--He's a very gifted man.

Mother (in a low voice). He will do something big!

Father (in the same tones). Ay, a big man--and one of our family!

Axel (who has advanced towards the foreground with LAURA). So that was
your answer, Laura?

Laura. You haven't remembered everything.

Mother. Is there something more? Let us hear some more!

Axel. What did you say, then?

Laura. You know I said that something had held me back a long, long
time! I saw well enough that you were fond of me, but I was afraid it
was only as you would be fond of a child.

Axel. Laura!

Laura. I am not so clever as--as some others, you know; but I am not a
child any longer, because now I love you!

Axel. You are a child, all the same!

Father (to the MOTHER). But what about our arrangements? We were to have
gone on our travels at once.

Axel. No, stay with us a few days now! (LAURA makes a sign to him.) Not?

Laura (softly). I would rather be alone with you, now.

Mother. What are you saying, Laura?

Laura. I?--I was saying that I should like to ask you, if you are going
abroad now, to take Mathilde with you.

Mother. That is very nice of you, Laura, to remember Mathilde. People
generally say that newly-married couples think of no one but themselves.

Father. No, Laura is not like that!

All. No, Laura is not like that!

Laura (gently). Mathilde, forgive me! (They embrace, and LAURA says
softly:) I understand you now for the first time!

Mathilde. Not quite.

Laura. I know that I should never have got Axel, but for you.

Mathilde. That is true.

Laura. Oh, Mathilde, I am so happy now!

Mathilde. And I wish you every happiness.

Axel (taking LAURA'S arm). Now you may go and travel abroad, Mathilde!

Mathilde. Yes!--and my next book shall be a better one.

Axel. Your next--?

[Curtain.]
﻿LEONARDA

A PLAY IN FOUR ACTS

DRAMATIS PERSONAE

     The BISHOP.
     CORNELIA, his sister.
     HAGBART, his nephew.
     The GRANDMOTHER.
     LEONARDA FALK.
     AAGOT, her niece.
     GENERAL ROSEN.
     CHIEF JUSTICE RÖST.
     MRS. RÖST.
     PEDERSEN, agent to Mrs. Falk.
     HANS.
     A Maid.





ACT I

(SCENE.--A large room in LEONARDA FALK's house. At the back, folding
doors which are standing open. Antique furniture. LEONARDA, dressed in a
riding-habit, is standing beside a writing-desk on the left, talking to
her agent PEDERSEN.)

Leonarda. It is a complete loss.

Pedersen. But, Mrs. Falk--

Leonarda. A loss, every scrap of it. I can't sell burnt bricks. How much
is there of it? Two kilns' full, that is 24,000 bricks--at their present
price about thirty pounds' worth. What am I to do with you?--send you
about your business?

Pedersen. Madam, it is the first time--

Leonarda. No, indeed it is not; that is to say, it is certainly the
first time the bricks have been burnt, but your accounts have been wrong
over and over again, so that I have been led into sending out faulty
invoices. What is the matter with you?

Pedersen. Madam, I beg--.

[Enter HANS.]

Hans. Your horse is saddled, madam, and the General is coming up the
avenue.

Leonarda. Very well. (HANS goes out.) Have you taken to drink, Pedersen?

Pedersen. No, madam.

Leonarda. That wouldn't be like you. But what is it? You look quite
changed.--Pedersen! I believe I know! I saw you rowing back across the
river last night, from the summer-house in the wood. Are you in love?
(PEDERSEN turns away.) So that is it. And crossed in love? (She goes up
to him, puts her hand on his shoulder and stands with her back turned to
the audience, as he does.) Are you engaged to her?

Pedersen. Yes.

Leonarda. Then she is not treating you well? She is not true to you?
(Stoops and looks into his face.) And you love her in spite of it?
(Moves away from him.) Then you are a weak man, Pedersen. We cannot
possibly love those who are false to us. (Draws on one of her gloves.)
We may suffer horribly for a while; but love them--no!

Pedersen (still turning away from her). It is easy for those to talk who
have not experienced it.

Leonarda. Experienced it?--You never can tell that. Come to me this
evening at seven o'clock.

Pedersen. Yes, madam.

Leonarda. I will talk things over with you then. We will go for a stroll
together.

Pedersen. Thank you, madam.

Leonarda. I believe I may be able to help you in your trouble, Pedersen.
That is all right--don't think any more about the bricks, or of what I
said. Forgive me! (Holds out her hand to him.)

Pedersen (grasping her hand). Oh, madam!

[Enter GENERAL ROSEN.]

Rosen. Good morning! (PEDERSEN crosses the room.) Bless my soul,
Pedersen, you look like a pat of melting butter! (PEDERSEN goes out.
ROSEN turns to LEONARDA.) Have you been playing father confessor so
early in the morning, and on such a fine day too? That is too bad.--By
the way, have you heard from Aagot?

Leonarda (putting on her hat). No, I don't know what has come over the
child. It is close on a fortnight since--

Rosen. She is enjoying herself. I remember when I was enjoying myself I
never used to write letters.

Leonarda (looking at him). You were enjoying yourself last night, I
rather think?

Rosen. Do I show it? Dear, dear! I thought that after a bath and a
ride--

Leonarda. This sort of thing cannot go on!

Rosen. You know quite well that if I can't be here I have to go to my
club.

Leonarda. But can't you go to your club without--? (Stops, with a
gesture of disgust.)

Rosen. I know what you mean, worse luck. But they always give one a
glass too much.

Leonarda. One glass? Say three!

Rosen. Three, if you like. You know I never was good at counting.

Leonarda. Well, now you can go for your ride alone.

Rosen. Oh, but--

Leonarda. Yes, I am not going for a ride to-day with a man who was tipsy
last night. (Takes off her hat.) Hans! (HANS is heard answering her from
without.) Put my horse up for the present!

Rosen. You are punishing yourself as well as me, you know. You ought to
be out on a day like this--and it is a sin to deprive the countryside of
the pleasure of seeing you!

Leonarda. Will nothing ever make you take things seriously?

Rosen. Yes. When the day comes that you are in need of anything, I will
be serious.

Leonarda. And you propose to hang about here waiting, till I have some
ill luck? You will have to wait a long time, I hope. (Goes to her desk.)

Rosen. I hope so too!--because meanwhile I shall be able to continue
coming here.

Leonarda. Till you get your orders from America.

Rosen. Of course--till I get my orders from Sherman.

Leonarda. You have not had any orders, then?

Rosen. No.

Leonarda. It is beginning to look very suspicious. How long is it since
I made you write to him?

Rosen. Oh, I am sure I forget.

Leonarda. It has just struck me--. I suppose you did write?

Rosen. Of course I did. I always do what you tell me.

Leonarda. You stand there twirling your moustache--and when you do that
I always know there is some nonsense going on--.

Rosen. How can you suppose such a thing?

Leonarda. You have never written! Why on earth did that never strike me
before?

Rosen. I have written repeatedly, I assure you!

Leonarda. But not to Sherman? You have not reported yourself for service
again?

Rosen. Do you remember the Russian cigarettes I have so often spoken
of? I have got some now. I brought a few with me to try; may I offer you
one?

Leonarda. Are you not ashamed to look me in the face?

Rosen. I do everything you tell me--

Leonarda. You have been putting me off with evasions for more than two
months--playing a perfect comedy with me! To think that an officer, who
has been through the American war and won honours, rank, and a definite
position, could throw away his time in this way--and in other ways
too--for a whole year now--

Rosen. Excuse me--only eight months.

Leonarda. And isn't that long enough?

Rosen. Too long. But you know, better than any one, why I have done it!

Leonarda. Did I ask you to come here? Do you think you can tire me out?

Rosen. Leonarda! (She looks at him; he bows formally.) I beg your
pardon. Mrs. Falk.

Leonarda. You shall write the letter here, now, and report yourself for
immediate service.

Rosen. If you order me to.

Leonarda. I shall post it.

Rosen. Many thanks.

Leonarda. You are twirling your moustache again. What are you planning
in your mind?

Rosen. I?--Shall I write here? (Goes to the desk.)

Leonarda. Yes. (He takes up a pen.) Ah, I know what it is! As soon as
you get home, you will write another letter recalling this one.

Rosen. Yes, naturally.

Leonarda. Ha, ha, ha! (Sits down.) Well, I give you up!

Rosen. Thank you!--Then will you try one of my cigarettes?

Leonarda. No.

Rosen. Nor come for a ride?

Leonarda. No.

Rosen. Am I to come here this evening?

Leonarda. I shall be engaged.

Rosen. But you will be riding to-morrow morning?

Leonarda. I don't know.

Rosen. Then I shall take the liberty of coming to ask I wish you a very
good day.

Leonarda. Look, there is a strange man at the door (Gets up.)

Rosen. What? (Turns round.) He? Has he the face to come here? (Looks out
of the open window.) Pst! Pst!--Hans!--Don't you see my horse has got
loose? (Goes hurriedly out past the stranger, who bows to him.) Pst!
Pst!

[Enter HAGBART.]

Hagbart. Madam! (Stops short.)

Leonarda. May I ask--?

Hagbart. You do not know me, then?

Leonarda. No.

Hagbart. I am Hagbart Tallhaug.

Leonarda. And you dare to tell me so--with a smile on your lips?

Hagbart. If you will only allow me to--

Leonarda. How is it you dare to come here?

Hagbart. If you will only allow me to--

Leonarda. Not a word! Or can there be two men of that name?

Hagbart. No.

Leonarda. So it was you who came forward at the Philharmonic concert,
when I was seeking admittance for myself and my adopted daughter, and
spoke of me as "a woman of doubtful reputation"? Is that so?

Hagbart. Yes, madam; and I must--

Leonarda (interrupting him impetuously). Then get out of here!--Hans!
(HANS is heard answering her from without.)

Hagbart. Mrs. Falk, first allow me to--.

[Enter HANS.]

Leonarda. Hans, will you see this gentleman off my premises.

Hans. Certainly, ma'am.

Hagbart. Wait a moment, Hans!

Hans. Shall I, ma'am? (Looks at LEONARDA.)

Hagbart. It concerns your niece, Mrs. Falk.

Leonarda. Aagot! Has anything happened to her? I have had no letter from
her!

Hagbart. Wait outside, Hans!

Hans (to LEONARDA). Shall I, ma'am?

Leonarda. Yes, yes! (HANS goes out.) What is it?

Hagbart. No bad news.

Leonarda. But how is it you are here on her behalf?

Hagbart. It is difficult to avoid people at a watering-place, you
know--although I must admit your niece did her best. She treated me as
contemptuously as possible even went farther than that; but she could
not prevent my talking to people she used to talk to, or my happening to
be where she was; so that--well--she heard them talk about me, and heard
me talk to them--and in the end she talked to me herself.

Leonarda. Talked to you?

Hagbart. Yes, it is no good denying it--she actually talked to me, and
that more than once.

Leonarda. But what is the meaning of this visit to me?

Hagbart. If you will only allow me to--

Leonarda. I want you to deliver your message briefly and concisely--and
not a word more than that.

Hagbart. But I cannot do that until you have allowed me to--

Leonarda. Whether you can or not, I shall allow nothing else. I am
not going to give you an excuse for saying that you have been holding
conversations with me too.

Hagbart. If you have no objection, I am in love with your niece, Mrs.
Falk.

Leonarda. You? With Aagot?--It serves you right!

Hagbart. I know.

Leonarda. Ha, ha! That is how the land lies.

[HANS appears at the open door.]

Hans. Can I go now, ma'am?

Leonarda. Ha, ha!--Yes, you can go. (Exit HANS ) Well, what more have
you to tell me? Have you given Aagot any hint of this?

Hagbart. Yes.

Leonarda. And what answer did you get?--You are silent. Do you find it
difficult to tell me?

Hagbart. I am very glad you take it so well, Mrs. Falk.

Leonarda. Yes, it's funny, isn't it?--Well, what did Aagot say? She
generally has plenty to say.

Hagbart. Indeed she has. We came here to-day by the same boat--

Leonarda. By the same boat? Aagot and you? Have you been persecuting
her?

Hagbart. Mrs. Falk, you cannot possibly understand if you will not allow
me to--

Leonarda. I wish to hear the rest of it from my niece, as I suppose she
will be here directly.

Hagbart. Of course, but still--

Leonarda. There will be no more of that sort of thing here! If you
intend to persecute my niece with your attentions in the same way as you
have persecuted me with your malice, you are at liberty to try. But you
shall not come here! I can forbid it here.

Hagbart. But, my dear Mrs. Falk--

Leonarda. I am really beginning to lose my patience, or rather I have
lost it already. What have you come here for?

Hagbart. As there is no help for it--well, I will tell you straight out,
although it may be a shock to you--I am here to ask for your niece's
hand.

Leonarda (taking up her gloves). If I were a man, so that there should
be nothing "doubtful" about my reply, I would strike you across the face
with my gloves.

Hagbart. But you are a woman, so you will not.

[Enter HANS.]

Hans. Here is Miss Aagot, ma'am.

Aagot (from without). Aunt!

Leonarda. Aagot!

[Enter AAGOT. HANS goes out.]

Aagot. Aunt!--That wretched Hans! I was signalling to him--I wanted to
surprise you. (Throws herself into LEONARDA'S arms.)

Leonarda. Child, have you deceived me?

Aagot. Deceived you? I?

Leonarda. I knew it! (Embraces her.) Forgive me! I had a moment's
horrible doubt--but as soon as I looked at you it was gone!--Welcome,
welcome! How pretty you look! Welcome!

Aagot. Oh, aunt!

Leonarda. What is it?

Aagot. You know.

Leonarda. His shameless persecution of you? Yes! (Meanwhile HAGBART has
slipped out.)

Aagot. Hush!--Oh, he has gone!--Have you been cross with him?

Leonarda. Not as cross as he deserved--

Aagot. Didn't I tell him so?

Leonarda (laughing). What did you tell him?

Aagot. How hasty you could be!--Were you really cruel to him?

Leonarda. Do you mean to say you have any sympathy--with him?

Aagot. Have I any--? But, good heavens, hasn't he told you?

Leonarda. What?

Aagot. That he--that I--that we--oh, aunt, don't look so dreadfully at
me!--You don't know, then?

Leonarda. No!

Aagot. Heaven help me! Aunt--!

Leonarda. You don't mean to say that you--?

Aagot. Yes, aunt.

Leonarda. With him, who--. In spite of that, you--Get away from me!

Aagot. Dear, darling aunt, listen to me!

Leonarda. Go away to him! Away with you!

Aagot. Have you looked at him, aunt? Have you seen how handsome he is?

Leonarda. Handsome? He!

Aagot. No, not a bit handsome, of course! Really, you are going too far!

Leonarda. To me he is the man who made a laughingstock of me in a
censorious little town by calling me "a woman of doubtful reputation."
And one day he presents himself here as my adopted daughter's lover, and
you expect me to think him handsome! You ungrateful child!

Aagot. Aunt!

Leonarda. I have sacrificed eight years of my life--eight years--in this
little hole, stinting myself in every possible way; and you, for whom
I have done this, are hardly grown up before you fly into the arms of a
man who has covered me with shame. And I am supposed to put up with it
as something quite natural!--and to say nothing except that I think he
is handsome! I--I won't look at you! Go away!

Aagot (in tears). Don't you suppose I have said all that to myself, a
thousand times? That was why I didn't write. I have been most dreadfully
distressed to know what to do.

Leonarda. At the very first hint of such a thing you might to have taken
refuge here--with me--if you had had a scrap of loyalty in you.

Aagot. Aunt! (Goes on her knees.) Oh, aunt!

Leonarda. To think you could behave so contemptibly!

Aagot. Aunt!--It was just because he was so sorry for the way he had
behaved to you, that I first--

Leonarda. Sorry? He came here with a smile on his lips!

Aagot. That was because he was in such a fright, aunt.

Leonarda. Do people smile because they are in a fright?

Aagot. Others don't, but he does. Do you know, dear, he was just the
same with me at first--he smiled and looked so silly; and afterwards he
told me that it was simply from fright.

Leonarda. If he had felt any qualms of conscience at all, as you pretend
he did, he would at least have taken the very first opportunity to
apologise.

Aagot. Didn't he do that?

Leonarda. No; he stood here beating about the bush and smiling--

Aagot. Then you must have frightened the sense out of him, aunt. He is
shy, you know.--Aunt, let me tell you he is studying for the church.

Leonarda. Oh, he is that too, is he!

Aagot. Of course he is. You know he is the bishop's nephew, and
is studying for the church, and of course that is what made him
so prejudiced. But his behaviour that day was just what opened his
eyes--because he is very kind-hearted. Dear, darling aunt--

Leonarda. Get up! It is silly to lie there like that. Where did you
learn that trick?

Aagot (getting up). I am sure I don't know. But you frighten me so.
(Cries.)

Leonarda. I can't help that. You frightened me first, you know, child.

Aagot. Yes, but it is all quite different from what you think, aunt.
He is no longer our enemy. He has reproached himself so genuinely for
treating you as he did--it is perfectly true, aunt. We all heard him say
so. He said so first to other people, so that it should come round to
me; and then I heard him saying so to them; and eventually he told me
so, in so many words.

Leonarda. Why did you not write and tell me?

Aagot. Because you are not like other people, aunt! If I had as much
as mentioned he was there, you would have told me to come home again at
once. You aren't like others, you know.

Leonarda. But how in the world did it come about that you--?

Aagot. You know, dear, that if any one sings _your_ praises, that is
enough to make me their friend at once. And when, to crown all, this man
did it who had behaved so unjustly to you, you can well believe that I
went about singing for joy all day. That was the beginning of it--

Leonarda. Yes, tell me the whole story.

Aagot. That would be simply impossible, aunt! It would take me
days!--But I can tell you this, that I had no idea what it was that was
upsetting my nerves in such a manner.

Leonarda. If you felt like that, why did you not come away?

Aagot. That was just what I did! But that was also just what made the
whole thing happen!

Leonarda. How? Try and tell me a little more calmly and consecutively!

Aagot. Thank you, aunt! It is good of you to listen to me! Good heavens,
how I--. (Bursts into tears.)

Leonarda. There--there! Tell me all about it from beginning to end.

Aagot. Yes--I was quite feverish for about a week--I thought I was
ill--and the others kept asking what was the matter with me. And really
I didn't know. There is a whole heap of things I could tell you about
those few days--but you wouldn't be able to understand.

Leonarda. Yes, I should.

Aagot. No, you couldn't possibly! I can't, either. I was so wretched
then--and now I am so happy--

Leonarda. Well, tell me about it another time. But how did things come
to a head?

Aagot. He spoke to me--straight out!

Leonarda. Proposed to you?

Aagot. Yes.--Oh, I feel I am blushing again at the very thought of it.

Leonarda. And you looked foolish?

Aagot. I don't know what I looked like!

Leonarda. What did you do?

Aagot. I gave one scream--a real good scream--and ran; ran home, packed
my trunk, and got on board the boat as quick as I could.

Leonarda. And was that all?

Aagot. All? It happened out of doors amongst all the people.

Leonarda. Aagot!

Aagot. It happened so frightfully unexpectedly. I never was so
frightened in my life--and so ashamed of myself afterwards. I did
nothing but cry on the boat, all the way.

Leonarda. But he must have come by the same boat.

Aagot. Just fancy, he had travelled overland across the promontory and
caught the boat on the other side. And I knew nothing about it till
I saw him before my eyes! I thought I should sink through the deck. I
wanted to run away then, but--oh, aunt, I couldn't! He looked at me with
such a wonderful look in his eyes, and took hold of my hands. He spoke
to me, but I don't know what he said; everything seemed to be going
round and round. And his eyes, aunt! Ah, you haven't looked at them, and
that is why you took it so--so--

Leonarda. No, dear.

Aagot. There is something about his mere presence--something so true.
And when he looks at me and says--not in words, you know, but still says
all the same "I love you so much," I tremble all over. Oh, aunt, kiss
me!--There! Thank heaven!--Do you know what he said to-day?

Leonarda. No.

Aagot. That the woman who had fostered--that was the word he used--such
a solemn word, but then he is studying for the church--well, that the
woman who had fostered such a girl--he meant me, you know--I thought of
all my faults, but he will get to know them soon enough--

Leonarda. Well? That the woman who had fostered such a girl as you--

Aagot.--as me, could not have her equal anywhere!

Leonarda. You must have been praising me up nicely?

Aagot. On the contrary. It was afterwards when he said he would come
here first, before me--it was his duty, he said, to stand the first
shock. "For heaven's sake don't," I said; "you don't know her, she will
crush you!"

Leonarda. Oh, Aagot!

Aagot. It was then that he said, "No, the woman who has fostered such a
girl," etcetera, etcetera. Ah, now I see you have been horrid to him.

Leonarda. I had been worried all the morning--and I misunderstood--

Aagot. You shall have no more worries after this. Because people are so
kind, you know, and you are going to move about among them again. You,
who are so good yourself--

Leonarda. No, that is just what I am not.

Aagot. You? You are only so very difficult to understand, aunt!--Oh,
what is it, dear?

Leonarda. I am unhappy, Aagot!

Aagot. Why, aunt? About me?

Leonarda. You are the sunshine of my life; you have brought light and
warmth and gentleness into it--but it is just because of that--

Aagot. Because of that? Aunt, I don't understand you.

Leonarda. I am clumsy, I am hard, I am suspicious--wicked. I am a
savage, with no more self-restraint than I ever had. What sort of a
figure must I cut in his eyes--and in yours? Tell me! Am I not a clumsy,
ugly--

Aagot. You are the sweetest woman in the whole work! It is only your
indomitable strength and courage and youthfulness--

Leonarda. No, no--tell me the truth! I deserve it! Because, you know, it
has been for your sake that for eight years I have only associated with
work-people. All that I have will be yours. So have some respect for me,
Aagot--tell me the truth! Am I not--what shall I say? Tell me what I am!

Aagot. Adorable!

Leonarda. No, no! I have never realised as strongly as I do now how
I have buried myself all these eight years. All the books I have read
about the great movements going on in the world outside have not really
enlightened me. All that I have read and thought fades away before
the first gleam of life that reaches me from the real world of men and
women. I see new beauty merely in your new clothes, your fashionable
hat--the colours you are wearing--the way they are blended. They mean
something that I know nothing of. You bring a fragrance in with you--a
breath of freshness; you are so dainty and full of life; whereas
everything here has become so old, so heavy, so disjointed--and my life
most of all.

Aagot. Well, I must tell you what he said, since you won't believe what
I say.

Leonarda. But he knew nothing about me?

Aagot. No--it only indirectly referred to you. He said he had never
wanted so much to get to know any one, as he wanted to get to know you,
because seeing much of me had made him discover you--that was the very
expression he used! And it was an extraordinary chance that--

Leonarda. Stop! I can't bear to think of it!--To think it should be the
very man whom we--we--

Aagot. Hated so!--yes, isn't it extraordinary?

Leonarda. The very first time you have been away from me!

Aagot. Yes!

Leonarda. And you come back in a halo of reconciliation and affection
for him!

Aagot. But who is responsible for that, I should like to know! And you
talk about your life here having made you clumsy and ugly--you, who can
manufacture a goddess of victory like me!

Leonarda. No, I don't complain when I see you and hear you--when I have
you with me! That is worth paying a price for. It was selfish of me
to think for a moment that the price was too high. You are in the
springtime of your life--while I--

Aagot. You? What is wrong with your life?

Leonarda. I am beginning to think my life is over.

Aagot. Yours? Your life over? Oh, you pain me by saying such a thing.

Leonarda. I am very happy--very happy about all this! Believe me that is
so. But you know--

Aagot. I know how tremendously and incomprehensibly you have changed!

Leonarda. Go, my child--and bring him back!

Aagot. How delicious that sounds! Bring him back! (Gets up, then stops.)
Thank you, my dear, sweet, darling aunt! (She runs out. LEONARDA falls
into a chair by the table and buries her head in her hands. AAGOT'S
voice is heard without: "Yes, come along!" and HAGBART'S, answering: "Is
it true?")

Aagot (coming in with HAGBART). Come along! (LEONARDA gets up, dries her
eyes, and meets them with a smile.) Aunt, here he is!

Hagbart. Mrs. Falk!

Leonarda. Forgive me!

Hagbart. What?--No, you must forgive me! I haven t been able to ask you
to! I--

Aagot. We can talk about that another time! Let aunt look at you now!

Leonarda. You two won't disappoint one another. I can see that.

Aagot. It is wonderfully sweet of you, aunt!

Leonarda. Yes, love one another! Bring some beauty, some warmth, some
colour into this cold house!

Aagot. Oh, aunt--!

Leonarda. Have you kissed her yet? (AAGOT moves a little away from
HAGBART.) Go on! (They embrace.)

Aagot (running from him to LEONARDA). But, dearest aunt, are you crying?

Leonarda. Don't bother about me!--Have you told your uncle, the bishop,
about it?

Hagbart. Not yet.

Leonarda. You haven't?--Well, you have the worst of it before you yet, I
am afraid.

Hagbart. No; now that I have got as far as this, nothing shall stand in
my way!

Aagot. Do you hear that, aunt?

[Curtain.]




ACT II

(SCENE.--A room in the BISHOP's house, some weeks later. A door at
the back of the room leads to another large room. Another door in
the right-hand wall; windows in the left. Well forward, by one of the
windows, a large easy-chair. Farther back, a writing-desk and chair.
On the right, near the door, a couch, and chairs ranged along the wall.
Chairs also alongside the door at the back. The Bishop is sitting on the
couch, talking to HAGBART.)

Bishop. My dear Hagbart, you keep on telling me that you have acted up
to your convictions. Very well, do you want to forbid my acting up to
mine?

Hagbart. You know that all I ask, uncle, is that you will see her and
talk to her first.

Bishop. But if that is exactly what I don't wish to do? You have made
things difficult for us, you know, by choosing a wife out of your own
class--although at the same time we have grown fonder of her every day,
and are ready to do anything for _her_. But farther than that we cannot
go. Do you want to read my letter?

Hagbart. No.

Bishop. I think you should. It is quite a polite letter.

Hagbart. I know you can put things politely enough. But it is the fact,
uncle--the fact of your doing it!

Bishop. Yes--I cannot alter that.

Hagbart. Could you not at all events postpone sending the letter?

Bishop. It is sent.

Hagbart. Sent?

Bishop. This morning. Yes. So there is nothing more to be done.

Hagbart. Uncle, you are cruel!

Bishop. How can you say that, Hagbart? I have acquiesced in your giving
up your clerical career--and Heaven alone knows what a grief that is to
me. (Gets up.) But I will not acquiesce in your bringing into my house
a woman who does not even bear her husband's name. Do we as much as know
who her husband was? She was both married and divorced abroad. And
we don't know anything more about her life since then; it is scarcely
likely it has been blameless. Since she came here she has never once
been to church. She has led a most eccentric life, and lately has been
allowing a man of very evil reputation to visit her.

Hagbart. General Rosen?

Bishop. Yes, General Rosen. He is next door to a drunkard. And he is a
dissolute fellow in other ways, too.

Hagbart. He goes everywhere, all the same. He even comes here.

Bishop. Well, you see, he distinguished himself on military service; he
has many sociable qualities, and he is well connected. It is the way of
the world.

Hagbart. But Mrs. Falk is not to be received?

Bishop. She is a woman.

Hagbart. How long will this sort of thing be endured?

Bishop. Come, come--are you getting those ideas into your head too? You
seem to have imbibed a lot of new doctrines lately!

Hagbart. You should have seen her and talked to her once at least,
before making up your mind.

Bishop. I will tell you something in confidence, Hagbart. Justice Röst,
who lives out there in the country, has often seen General Rosen coming
away from her house at most unseemly hours. I will have nothing to do
with women of that sort.

Hagbart. What about men of that sort?

Bishop. Well, as I said, that is quite another matter.

Hagbart. Quite so.--Mrs. Falk takes compassion on the General; she
interests herself in him. That is all.

Bishop. Did she know him previously, then?

Hagbart. Very likely.

Bishop. Then she has her own private reasons for acting as she does.

Hagbart. Shall I tell you what it is? She has a kinder heart than any of
us, and can make a sacrifice more willingly.

Bishop. So you know that?

Hagbart. Yes. Hers is a finer nature than any of ours; it is more
completely developed, intellectually and morally.

Bishop. I am listening to you with the profoundest amazement!

Hagbart. Oh, don't misunderstand me! She has her faults.

Bishop. Really, you admit that!--I want to beg something of you
earnestly, Hagbart. Go away for a little while.

Hagbart. Go away!

Bishop. Yes, to your uncle's, for instance. Only for a week or a
fortnight. You need to clear your thoughts, badly--about all sorts of
things. Your brain is in a whirl.

Hagbart. That is true; but--

Bishop. Speak out!

Hagbart. My brain has been in a whirl much longer than you have had any
idea of. It has been so ever since that day in winter when I did Mrs.
Falk such a horrible injustice.

Bishop. Not exactly an injustice, but--

Hagbart. Yes, an injustice! It was a turning point in my life. To think
that I should have given way to such a fanatical outburst! It ended
in my being terrified at myself--well, I won't bore you with the whole
story of my long fight with myself. You saw nothing of it, because I was
not here. But at last, when I got ill and had to go away and take the
waters, and then happened to see Aagot--the effect on me was more than
anything I could have imagined. I seemed to see the truth; mankind
seemed different, and I seemed to hear the voice of life itself at last.
You cannot imagine the upheaval it caused in me. It must be that she had
something within her that I lacked, and had always lacked! It was her
wonderful naturalness; everything she did was done with more charm and
gaiety than I found in any one else, and she was quite unconscious of it
herself. I used to ask myself what was the reason of it--how it could
be that it had been her lot to grow up so free and wholesome. I realised
that it was because I had been oblivious to what I lacked myself, that I
had been so fanatically severe upon others. I knew it is humiliating
to confess it, but it is true. I have always been blundering and
impetuous.--But what was I going to say?

Bishop. You were going to speak about Mrs. Falk, I presume.

Hagbart. Yes!--My dear uncle, don't take it amiss. But all this time I
have never been able to keep away from her.

Bishop. Then it is she you have been talking to?

Hagbart. Of course!--and of course, that is to say, to Aagot too. You
propose my going away. I cannot! If I could multiply myself by two, or
if I could double the length of the days, I should never have enough
of being with her! No, I have seen daylight now. On no account can I go
away.

Bishop. And you call that seeing daylight! Poor boy!

Hagbart. I cannot discuss it with you. You would no more understand than
you did that day when you took away those books of grandmother's from me
and put them in the lumber-room.

Bishop. Oh, you are bringing that up again? Well, you are at liberty to
do as you please. You shall not have the right to say I have exercised
any compulsion.

Hagbart. No, uncle, you are very good--to me.

Bishop. But there is a new fact to be taken into consideration. I have
noticed it for some days.

Hagbart. What do you mean?

Bishop. In all this conversation we have just had, you have only
mentioned Aagot's name twice, at most.

Hagbart. But we were not talking about Aagot.

Bishop. Are you not in love with her any longer?

Hagbart. Not in love with Aagot? (Laughs.) Can you ask that? Do you mean
to say--?

Bishop. Yes, I mean to say--

Hagbart (laughing again). No, that is quite a misunderstanding on your
part, uncle.

Bishop. Well, I say it again: go away for a week or a fortnight,
Hagbart! Consider the situation from a distance--both your own position
and that of others!

Hagbart. It is impossible, absolutely impossible, uncle. It would be
just as useful to say to me: "Lie down and go to sleep for a week or a
fortnight, Hagbart; it will do you good"! No. All my faculties are awake
at last--yes, at last--so much so, that sometimes I can scarcely control
myself.

Bishop. That is the very reason.

Hagbart. The very reason why I must go straight ahead, for once in my
life! No, I must stay here now.--Well, good morning, uncle! I must go
out for a turn.

Bishop. Go to call on Mrs. Falk, you mean.

Hagbart (laughing). Unfortunately I haven't the face to do that
till this afternoon; I was there the whole day yesterday. But our
conversation has set all my thoughts agog again, and when I have no
means of appeasing them I have to go out and walk. Thank you, uncle, for
being so indulgent to me!

Bishop. Then you don't wish to read my letter?

Hagbart. Ah, that is true--the letter! That upsets the whole thing
again. I don't know how I came to forget that.

Bishop. You see for yourself how confused and distracted you are. You
need to pull yourself together. Go away for a little!

Hagbart. It is impossible!--Good-bye, uncle!

Bishop. Here is grandmother!

[Enter the GRANDMOTHER and CORNELIA.]

Hagbart. Good morning, grandmother! Have you slept well?

Grandmother (coming forward on CORNELIA's arm). Excellently!

Cornelia. She slept well into the morning.

Bishop. I am delighted, grandmother. (Takes her other arm.)

Grandmother. You needn't shout so loud. It is a fine day to-day and
I can hear very well. (To HAGBART.) You didn't come in to see me last
night.

Hagbart. I came in too late, grandmother.

Grandmother. I tell you, you needn't talk so loud.

Cornelia. She always wants to make out that she can hear.

Grandmother (as they settle her in the big chair by the window). This is
a nice seat--

Bishop. And I am always delighted to see you sitting there.

Grandmother. The window--and the mirror over there.

Cornelia. Yes, it enables you to see everything.

Grandmother. How you do shout, all you good people!

Bishop. I must go and change my things, if you will excuse me. (Goes out
to the right.)

Cornelia. Do you want anything more?

Grandmother. No, thank you. (CORNELIA goes out at the back.)

Hagbart. Dear, good grandmother! You are the only one here who
understands me!

Grandmother (trying to look round the room). Are we alone?

Hagbart. Yes.

Grandmother. Has your uncle called on Mrs. Falk?

Hagbart. No, worse luck; he has written her a letter.

Grandmother. I thought as much.

Hagbart. Isn't it shameful, grandmother! He won't see her once, or talk
to her, before judging her.

Grandmother. They are all alike, these--. Are we alone?

Hagbart. Yes, grandmother.

Grandmother. You must have patience, Hagbart! You used to be patient.

Hagbart. Yes, grandmother.

Grandmother. I have seen so many generations--so many different ways of
behaving. In my day we were tolerant.

Hagbart. I enjoyed reading your books so much, grand mother!

Grandmother. Of course you did.--Are we alone?

Hagbart. Yes, grandmother.

Grandmother. I am quite in love with your fiancée, Hagbart. She is like
what girls were in my day.

Hagbart. Courageous, weren't they?

Grandmother. Yes, and independent. They seem quite different
nowadays.--Are we alone?

Hagbart. Yes.

Grandmother. You get married--and I will come and live with you and her.
Hush!

Hagbart. Do you mean it?

Grandmother. Hush! (Looks out of the window.) There is Justice Röst
coming, with his wife. Go and tell your uncle!

Hagbart. Yes.

Grandmother. I might have expected it. They came up from the country
yesterday.

Hagbart. Good-bye, then, grandmother!

Grandmother. Good-bye, my boy! (HAGBART goes out to the right. The door
at the back is opened. CORNELIA ushers in RÖST and MRS. RÖST.)

Cornelia. Please walk in!

Mrs. Röst. Thank you! You must excuse us for calling so early. We came
up from the country yesterday, and my husband has to go to the courts
for a little while!

Röst. I have to go to the courts to-day. (The BISHOP conies in from the
right.)

Bishop. Welcome!

Röst and Mrs. Röst. Thank you!

Mrs. Röst. You must excuse our calling so early; but we came up from the
country yesterday, and my husband has to go to the courts to-day.

Röst. I have to go to the courts for a little while.

Bishop. I know.

Mrs. Röst. And there is the old lady in her chair already!

Röst. Good morning, my dear madam!

Mrs. Röst. Good morning!--No, please don't get up!

Grandmother. Oh, I can get up still.

Röst. Ah, I wish I were as active as you!

Mrs. Röst. My husband was saying to Miss Cornelia only last night--

Grandmother. You need not strain yourself so. I can hear perfectly well.
(The others exchange glances.)

Röst. I was saying to Miss Cornelia only last night--we met for a few
moments after the service--

Grandmother. I know, I know.

Röst. I said I had never known any one of over ninety have all their
faculties so remarkably clear--

Mrs. Röst.--so remarkably clear as yours! And such good health, too! My
husband has suffered a great deal from asthma lately.

Röst. I have suffered a great deal from asthma lately.

Mrs. Röst. And I from a heart trouble, which--

Grandmother. We did not know anything about such ailments in my day.

Mrs. Röst. Isn't she sweet! She doesn't remember that people were
sometimes ill in her day.

Bishop. Lovely weather we are having!

Röst. Delightful weather! I cannot in the least understand how it is
that I--. (The BISHOP brings a chair forward for him.) Oh, please don't
trouble, my lord! Allow me.

Mrs. Röst. My husband must have caught cold. (RÖST sits down.)

Cornelia. It certainly was draughty in church last night.

Röst. But we sat in the corner farthest from the door.

Mrs. Röst. We sat in the corner farthest from the door. That was why we
were not able to bid your lordship good evening afterwards.

Bishop. There was such a crowd.

Röst, Mrs. Röst, and Cornelia. Such a crowd!

Mrs. Röst. These services must be a great help in your lordship's
labours.

Röst. Yes, every one says that.

Bishop. Yes, if only the result were something a little more practical.
We live in sad times.

All three (as before). Sad times!

Mrs. Röst. We only just heard yesterday and we met so many friends that
I was prevented from asking your sister about it--we have only just
heard--

Röst. And that is why we have come here to-day. We believe in being
straightforward!

Mrs. Röst. Straightforward! That is my husband's motto.

Bishop. Probably you mean about Hagbart's engagement?

Röst and Mrs. Röst. To Miss Falk?

Cornelia. Yes, it is quite true.

Mrs. Röst. Really?

Cornelia. My brother came to the conclusion that he had no right to
oppose it.

Röst. Quite so. It must have been a difficult matter for your lordship
to decide.

Bishop. I cannot deny that it was.

Mrs. Röst. How Mr. Tallhaug has changed!

Röst. Yes, it seems only the other day he--

Bishop. We must not be too severe on young people in that respect
nowadays, Mrs. Röst.

Röst. It is the spirit of the time!

Bishop. Besides, I must say that the young lady is by no means
displeasing to me.

Cornelia. My brother has a very good opinion of her--although he finds
her manner perhaps a little free, a little too impetuous.

Mrs. Röst. But her adoptive mother?

Röst. Yes, her adoptive mother!

Cornelia. My brother has decided not to call on her.

Röst and Mrs. Röst. Really!

Mrs. Röst. We are extremely glad to hear that!

Röst. It was what we wanted to know! Everybody we met yesterday was
anxious to know.

Mrs. Röst. Everybody! We were so concerned about it.

Cornelia. My brother has written to her, to make it quite clear to her.

Röst. Naturally!

Mrs. Röst. We are very glad to hear it!

Grandmother (looking out of the window). There is a carriage stopping at
the door.

Cornelia. I thought I heard a carriage, too. (Gets up.)

Grandmother. There is a lady getting out of it.

Mrs. Röst. A lady?--Good heavens, surely it is not--? (Gets up.)

Röst. What do you say? (Gets up.)

Cornelia. She has a veil on.

Mrs. Röst. I really believe--! (To her husband.) You look, my dear--you
know her.

Röst. It is she; I recognise her coachman Hans.

Bishop (who has got up). But perhaps it is Miss Aagot?

Cornelia. No, it is not Miss Aagot.--She is in the house by this time.
What are we to do?

Mrs. Röst. Has she not had your lordship's letter?

Bishop. Yes, this morning.

Röst. And in spite of that--?

Bishop. Perhaps for that very reason. Ahem!--Cornelia, you must go down
and--

Cornelia. Not on any account! I refuse!

Mrs. Röst (to her husband). Come, dear! Be quick, let us get away.
(Looks for her parasol.) Where is my parasol?

Bishop (in a low voice). Won't you wait a little while Mr. Röst?

Röst. Oho!

Mrs. Röst. My parasol! I can't find my parasol.

Röst. Because you have got it in your hand, my love!

Mrs. Röst. So I have! You see how upset I am. Make haste--come along!
Can we get out this way?

Röst. Through the Bishop's bedroom!

Mrs. Röst. Oh!--But if you come with me, my dear!--Are we to meet this
woman? Why do you stand still? Surely you don't want to--?

Röst. Let us wait a little.

Mrs. Röst. Wait? So that you may talk to her? Oh, you men--you are all
alike!

Bishop. But, you know, some one must--. Cornelia!

Cornelia. Not for worlds! I am not going to stir an inch.

Grandmother. Gracchus!

Bishop. Yes, grandmother?

Mrs. Röst. Now the old lady is going to interfere. I thought as much!

Grandmother. Courtesy is a duty that every one must recognise.

Bishop. You are quite right. (Goes towards the back of the room; at the
same time a knock is heard on the door). Come in! (The door opens, and
LEONARDA enters.)

Mrs. Röst. It is she!

Röst. Be quiet!

Mrs. Röst. But wouldn't you rather--?

Leonarda. Excuse me, am I speaking to the Bishop?

Bishop. Yes, madam. Whom have I the honour to--?

Leonarda. Mrs. Falk.

Bishop. Allow me to introduce my sister--and Mr. Justice Röst and Mrs.
Röst--and this is--

Leonarda. "Grandmamma" of whom I have heard, I think!

Bishop. Yes. Let me present Mrs. Falk to you, grandmother.

Grandmother (getting up). I am very glad to see you, ma'am.

Mrs. Röst and Cornelia. What does she say?

Grandmother. As the oldest of the family--which is the only merit I
possess--let me bid you welcome. (LEONARDA gives a start, then kneels
down and kisses her hand.)

Mrs. Röst. Good gracious!

Cornelia. Well!

Mrs. Röst. Let us go away!

Röst (in a low voice). Does your lordship wish--?

Bishop (in the same tone). No, thank you--I must go through with it now.

Röst. Good morning, then!

Bishop. Many thanks for your visit and for being so frank with me.

Mrs. Röst. That is always our way, your lordship. Good morning!

Cornelia (as they advance to take leave of her). I will see you out.

Röst (to the GRANDMOTHER). I hope I shall always see you looking as
well, madam!

Mrs. Röst. Good-bye, madam! No, please don't disturb yourself. You have
over-exerted yourself just now you know.

Grandmother. The same to you.

Röst and Mrs. Röst. I beg your pardon?

Bishop. She thought you were wishing her good day--or something of that
sort.

Röst and Mrs. Röst. Oh, I see! (They laugh. They both ceremoniously in
silence to LEONARDA as they pass her; CORNELIA and the BISHOP go with
them to see them out, the BISHOP turning at the door and coming back
into the room.)

Bishop (to LEONARDA). Won't you sit down?

Leonarda. Your lordship sent me a letter to-day. (She pauses for
an answer, but without effect.) In it you give me to understand,
as politely as possible, that your family does not wish to have any
intercourse with me.

Bishop. I imagined, Mrs. Falk, that you had no such desire, either
previously or now.

Leonarda. What it rally means is that you want me to make over my
property to the two young people, and disappear.

Bishop. If you choose to interpret it in that way, Mrs. Falk.

Leonarda. I presume your nephew has told you that my means are not such
as to allow of my providing for one establishment here and another for
myself elsewhere.

Bishop. Quite so. But could you not sell your property?

Leonarda. And all three of us leave here, your lordship means? Of course
that would be possible; but the property is just now becoming of some
value, because of the projected railway--and, besides, it has been so
long in our family.

Bishop. It is a very fine property.

Leonarda. And very dear to us.

Bishop. It pains me deeply that things should have taken this turn.

Leonarda. Then may I not hope that the fact may influence your
lordship's decision in some degree?

Bishop. My decision, madam, has nothing to do with your property.

Leonarda. During all these eight years have I offended you in any
way--or any one here?

Bishop. Mrs. Falk, you know quite well that you have not.

Leonarda. Or is it on account of the way I have brought up my niece--?

Bishop. Your niece does you the greatest credit, madam.

Leonarda. Then perhaps some of my people have been laying complaints
about me?--or some one has been complaining of them?

Bishop. Not even the most censorious person, my dear madam, could
pretend that you have been anything but exemplary in that respect.

Leonarda. Then what is it?

Bishop. You can scarcely expect me to tell a lady--

Leonarda. I will help you out. It is my past life.

Bishop. Since you say it yourself--yes.

Leonarda. Do you consider that nothing can expiate a past--about which,
moreover, you know nothing?

Bishop. I have not seen in you any signs of a desire to expiate it, Mrs.
Falk.

Leonarda. You mean that you have not seen me at confession or in church?

Bishop. Yes.

Leonarda. Do you want me to seek expiation by being untrue to myself?

Bishop. No; but the way I refer to is the only sure one.

Leonarda. There are others. I have chosen the way hard work and duty.

Bishop. I said the only sure way, Mrs. Falk. Your way does not protect
against temptation.

Leonarda. You have something definite in your mind when you say that,
have you not?--Shall I help you out again? It is General Rosen.

Bishop. Precisely.

Leonarda. You think I ought to send him away?

Bishop. Yes.

Leonarda. But it would be all up with him if I did. And there is a good
deal of ability in him.

Bishop. I have neither the right nor the desire to meddle in affairs
I know nothing of; but I must say that only a person of unimpeachable
reputation should attempt the rescue of such a man as General Rosen.

Leonarda. You are quite right.

Bishop. You are paying too high a price for it, Mrs. Falk, and without
any certainty of achieving anything.

Leonarda. Maybe. But there is one aspect of the matter that you have
forgotten.

Bishop. And that is?

Leonarda. Compassion.

Bishop. Quite so.--Yes.--Of course, if you approach the matter from that
point of view, I have nothing to say.

Leonarda. You don't believe it?

Bishop. I only wish the matter depended upon what I myself believe. But
it does not, Mrs. Falk.

Leonarda. But surely you will admit that one ought to do good even at
the risk of one's reputation?

Bishop. Undoubtedly.

Leonarda. Well, will your lordship not apply that maxim to yourself?
It is quite possible that for a while your congregation's faith in you
might be a little disturbed if you were to call upon me; but you know
now, from my own lips, that the rumours you have heard are false, and
that you ought rather to be all the more anxious to support me in what
I am trying to do. And in that way you will do a good turn to these two
young people, and to me, without driving me away. For some years now
I have lived only for others. One does not do that without making some
sacrifices, my lord--especially when, as in my case, one does not feel
that one's life is quite over.

Bishop. You look the picture of youth, Mrs. Falk!

Leonarda. Oh, no--still I have not done it without a struggle. And now I
want a little reward for it. Who would not? I want to spend my life with
those for whom I have sacrificed myself; I want to see their happiness
and make it mine. Do not rob me of that, my lord! It depends upon you!

Bishop. I do not quite see how it depends upon me.

Leonarda. It depends upon you for this reason; if my exile is to be the
price paid for her marriage, my niece will never consent to wed your
nephew.

Bishop. That would be very distressing to me, Mrs. Falk.

Leonarda. I made haste to come to you, before she should know anything
about it. I have brought your letter with me. Take it back, my lord!
(Searches in her pocket for the letter.)

Bishop (noticing her growing anxiety). What is wrong?

Leonarda. The letter!--I laid it on my desk while I dressed to come
out, meaning to bring it with me--but in my hurry and anxiety I have
forgotten it! And now Aagot is making out accounts at that very desk. If
she sees your handwriting she will suspect something at once, because of
course we have been expecting you every day.

Bishop. Well, I suppose there is nothing to be done?

Leonarda. Indeed there is. When she comes here--for she will understand
everything and come straight here--could not your lordship meet her
yourself, and say to her--. (Stops short.)

Bishop. Say what?

Leonarda. "I have been mistaken. People should be judged, not by their
mistakes, but by what they have achieved; not by their beliefs, but
by their efforts towards goodness and truth. I mean to teach my
congregation that lesson by calling upon your aunt next Sunday." (The
GRANDMOTHER nods at her approvingly. LEONARDA sees this, takes her hand,
and turns again towards the BISHOP.) This venerable lady pleads for
me too. She belongs to a day that was more tolerant than ours--at all
events than ours is in this little out-of-the-way place. All the wisdom
of her long life is summed up in these two words: Have forbearance!

Bishop. There is one kind of forbearance, Mrs. Falk, that is forbidden
us--the forbearance that would efface the distinction between good and
evil. That is what the "toleration" of my grandmother's day meant; but
it is not an example to be followed.

Leonarda (leaving the GRANDMOTHER's side). If I have erred--if I seem
of no account, from the lofty standpoint from which you look upon
life--remember that you serve One who was the friend of sinners.

Bishop. I will be your friend when I see you seeking your soul's
salvation. I will do all I can then.

Leonarda. Help me to expiate my past! That means everything to me--and
is not much for you to do. I only ask for a little show of courtesy,
instead of indignities! I will contrive that we shall seldom meet. Only
don't drive me away--because that means exposing me to contempt. Believe
me, I will give you no cause for shame; and your good deed will be
rewarded by the gratitude of the young people.

Bishop. I am deeply distressed at having to take up this attitude
towards you. You are bound to think me hardhearted; but that is not the
case. I have to consider that I am the guardian of thousands of anxious
consciences. I dare not for my nephew's sake offend the respect they
feel for me, the trust they put in me; nor dare I disregard the law we
all must follow. For a bishop to do as I have done in opening my doors
to your niece, is in itself no small thing, when you consider the
dissensions that are going on in the Church nowadays. I cannot, I
dare not, go farther and open my doors to a woman whom my whole
congregation--albeit unjustly--well, I won't wound your feelings by
going on.

Leonarda. Really?

Bishop. Believe me, it gives me great pain. You have made a remarkable
impression upon me personally. (Meanwhile the GRANDMOTHER has got up to
go out of the room.)

Leonarda. Are you going away? (The BISHOP goes to the wall and rings a
bell.)

Grandmother. Yes--I am too old for these scenes. And, after what I have
just heard, I am sure I have no right to sit here either. (CORNELIA
comes in, takes her arm, and assists her out.)

Leonarda (coming forward). Now I can say this to your lordship: you have
no courage. Standing face to face with me here, you know what you ought
to do, but dare not do it.

Bishop. You are a woman--so I will not answer.

Leonarda. It is because I am a woman that you have said things to
me to-day that you would not have said to--to General Rosen, for
instance--a man who is allowed to come to your lordship's house in spite
of his past life, and his present life too.

Bishop. He shall come here no more in future. Beside, you cannot deny
that there is a difference between your two cases.

Leonarda. There is indeed a difference: but I did not expect the
distinction to be made on these lines. Nor did I imagine, my lord, that
your duty was to protect, not the weaker vessel, but the stronger--to
countenance open vice, and refuse help to those who are unjustly
accused!

Bishop. Do you think there is any use in our prolonging this
conversation?

[AAGOT opens the door at the back and calls from the doorway.]

Aagot. Aunt!

Leonarda. Aagot! Good heavens!

Aagot (coming forward). Aunt!

Leonarda. Then you know? (AAGOT throws herself into her arms.) My child!

Aagot. I felt sure you would be here, heaven help me!

Leonarda. Control yourself, my child!

Aagot. No, I cannot. This is too much.

Bishop. Would you ladies rather be alone?

Aagot. Where is Hagbart?

Bishop. He has gone out for a walk.

Aagot. It makes me boil with rage! So this was to be the price of my
being received into your family--that I was to sell the one who has
been a mother to me! Sell her, whom I love and honour more than all the
world!

Bishop. Mrs. Falk, do you wish to continue?--or--

Aagot. Continue what? Your negotiations for the sale of my dear one?
No. And if it were a question of being admitted to heaven without her, I
should refuse!

Bishop. Child! Child!

Aagot. You must let me speak! I must say what is in my heart. And this,
at any rate, is in it--that I hold fast to those I love, with all the
strength that is in my being!

Bishop. You are young, and speak with the exaggeration of youth. But I
think we should do better to put an end to this interview; it can lead
to nothing.

Leonarda. Let us go.

[HAGBART appears at the door.]

Aagot (seeing him before the others). Hagbart!

Hagbart. I heard your voice from outside. Mrs. Falk--

Aagot. Hagbart! (She goes towards him, but as he hastens to her side she
draws back.) No--don't touch me!

Hagbart. But, Aagot--?

Aagot. Why did you not manage to prevent this? You never said a word to
me about it!

Hagbart. Because really I knew nothing about it.

Aagot. One becomes conscious of such things as that without needing to
be told. It hasn't weighed much on your mind!--Did you not know of it
just now?

Hagbart. Yes, but--

Aagot. And you didn't fly to tell us?

Hagbart. It is true I--

Aagot. Your mind was taken up with something else altogether. And my
only aim in life has been that everything should be made right for her!
I thought you were going to do that.

Hagbart. You are unjust, Aagot. What can I do--?

Aagot. No, you are too much of a dreamer. But this you must
realise--that I am not going to buy an honoured position at the price of
insults to my aunt; that is the very last thing possible.

Hagbart. Of course! But need there be any question of that? I will come
and live with you two, and--

Aagot. You talk like a fool!

Leonarda. Aagot! Aagot!

Aagot. Oh, I feel so hurt, so deceived, so mortified--I must say it out.
Because to-day is not the first of it--nor is this the only thing.

Leonarda. No, I can understand that. But what is it? You are wounding
his love for you.

Aagot (bitterly). His love for me!

Leonarda. Are you out of your mind? You are talking wildly!

Aagot. No, I am only telling the truth!

Leonarda (earnestly, and lowering her voice). Angry words, Aagot? You,
who have seen into the bottom of his heart in quiet sacred moments! You
who know how true, how steadfast he is! He is different from other men,
Aagot--

Aagot (drawing away from her). Stop! stop! You don't see!

Leonarda. You are out of your senses, my child! Your behaviour is
disgracing us.

Aagot. The greatest disgrace is his, then--because it is not me he
loves! (Bursts into tears and rushes to the back of the room.)

Bishop (to HAGBART, in a low voice). I hope now you will go away for a
little while.

Hagbart. Yes.

Bishop. Come away, then. (Goes out to the left, HAGBART follows him.)

Aagot (coming forward to LEONARDA). Can you forgive me?

Leonarda. Let us go home.

Aagot. But say something kind to me.

Leonarda. No.

Aagot. I won't let you go away till you do.

Leonarda. I cannot.

Aagot. Aunt, I am not jealous of you.

Leonarda. Be quiet!

Aagot. Only you must let me go away for a few days--I must get things
straight in my mind. (Bursts into tears.) Oh, aunt--for pity's sake--do
you love him? (LEONARDA tries to get away from her.) I don't love him
any longer! If you love him, aunt, I will give him up!

Leonarda. At least hold your tongue about it, here in another person's
house!--If you are not coming with me, I am going home by myself.

Aagot. Then I shall never follow you.

Leonarda. You are completely out of your senses!

Aagot. Yes; I cannot live, unless you speak to me gently and look at me
kindly.--God keep you, aunt, now and always!

Leonarda (turning to her). My child!

Aagot. Ah! (Throws herself into her arms.)

Leonarda. Let us go home!

Aagot. Yes.

[Curtain.]




ACT III

(SCENE--The garden at LEONARDA FALK'S house some days later. On the
left, a summer-house with table and chairs. A large basket, half full of
apples, is on the table. LEONARDA is standing talking to PEDERSEN.)

Leonarda. Very well, Pedersen; if the horses are not needed here, we may
as well send to fetch Miss Aagot home. Can we send to-day?

Pedersen. Certainly, ma'am.

Leonarda. Then please send Hans as soon as possible with a pair of
horses to the hill farm for her. It is too cold for her to be up there
now, anyway.

Pedersen. I will do so. (Turns to go.)

Leonarda. By the way, Pedersen, how has that little affair of yours been
going?

Pedersen. Oh--

Leonarda. Come to me this evening. We will see if we can continue our
little talk about it.

Pedersen. I have been wishing for that for a long time, ma'am.

Leonarda. Yes, for the last eight or ten days I have not been able to
think of anything properly.

Pedersen. We have all noticed that there has been something wrong with
you, ma'am.

Leonarda. We all have our troubles. (PEDERSEN waits; but as LEONARDA
begins to pick apples carefully from a young tree and put them in
a small basket that is on her arm, he goes out to the left. HAGBART
appears from the right, and stands for a minute without her seeing him.)

Hagbart. Mrs. Falk! (LEONARDA gives a. little scream.) I beg your
pardon, but I have been looking for you everywhere. How are you? I have
only just this moment got back.

Leonarda. Aagot is not at home.

Hagbart. I know. Has she been away the whole time?

Leonarda. Yes.

Hagbart. Will she be away long?

Leonarda. I am sending the horses up to-day, so she should be here by
the day after to-morrow.

Hagbart. It was you I wanted to speak to, Mrs. Falk.

Leonarda. About Aagot?

Hagbart. Yes, about Aagot--amongst other things.

Leonarda. But couldn't you wait--till some other time?

Hagbart. Mrs. Falk, I came straight here from the steamer; so you can
see for yourself--

Leonarda. But if it concerns Aagot, and she is not here?

Hagbart. The part of it that concerns Aagot is soon said. She was
perfectly right--only I did not know it at the time.

Leonarda. Good God!

Hagbart. I do not love Aagot.

Leonarda. But if Aagot loves you?

Hagbart. She has showed me lately that she does not. Did she not tell
you so, plainly?

Leonarda. She was--how shall I put it?--too excited for me to attach
much importance to what she said.

Hagbart. Then she did tell you so. I thought she had--indeed I was sure
of it. Aagot does not love me, but she loves you. She wants you to be
happy.

Leonarda. If you do not love Aagot, it seems to me you ought not to have
come here.

Hagbart. Perhaps you are right. But I am not the same man as I was when
I used to come here before; nor do I come for the same reason.

Leonarda. If you do not love Aagot, I must repeat that you have no right
to be here. You owe that much consideration both to her and to me.

Hagbart. I assure you that it is from nothing but the sincerest
consideration for you that I am here now.

Leonarda (who up to this point has been standing by the tree). Then I
must go!

Hagbart. You won't do that!

Leonarda. You seem to me completely changed.

Hagbart. Thank goodness for that!--because I don't feel any great
respect for the man I was before. Many people can decide such things in
a moment, but it has taken me time to see my course clearly.

Leonarda. I don't understand you.

Hagbart (almost before the words are out of her mouth, coming close to
her). You do understand me!

Leonarda. It would be wicked! Take care!

Hagbart. Your hand is trembling--

Leonarda. That is not true!

Hagbart. They say there is a devil in every one that should not be
waked. It is a foolish saying, because these devils are our vital
forces.

Leonarda. But we ought to have them under control. That is the lesson my
life has taught me; it has cost me dear, and I mean to profit by it.

Hagbart. If I did not believe that it was the impulse of truth itself
that guided me to you, I should not be standing here. I have had a long
struggle. I have had to give up one prejudice after another, to enable
my soul to find itself fully and go forward confidently. It has brought
me to you--and now we will go forward together.

Leonarda. That might have been, without this.

Hagbart. I love you! It is you I have loved in her--since the very first
day. I love you!

Leonarda. Then have respect for me--and go!

Hagbart. Leonarda!

Leonarda. No, no! (Shrinks away from him.) Oh, why did this happen?

Hagbart. It has come upon us step by step. The cruel obstacles in
our way have only proved friends to us, in bringing us together. Give
yourself up to happiness, as I do now!

Leonarda. I do not deserve happiness. I have never expected that.

Hagbart. I don't know what you have gone through to make you what you
are now--so beautiful, so good, so true; but this I do know, that if the
others had not judged you by your failures, I should not have loved you
for what you have achieved. And I thought that might give me some value
in your eyes.

Leonarda. Thank you for that, from my heart!--But the world disapproves
of such things. It disapproves of a young man's making love to an older
woman, and if--

Hagbart. I have never cared much about the world's opinion, even in
the days when I was most hidebound in prejudice. It is your opinion I
want--yours only!

Leonarda. And my answer is that one who is alone can get along without
the world's sympathy--but it is different with a couple. They will soon
feel the cold wind of the world's displeasure blowing between them.

Hagbart. When you answer me, it makes what I have said seem so formal
and ceremonious--so clumsy. But I must just be as I am; I cannot alter
myself. Dearest, from the moment I felt certain that it was you I loved,
only one thing seemed of any importance to me--everything else was
blotted out. And that is why I do not understand what you say. Do you
suppose they will try to make me tire of you? Do you suppose that is
possible?

Leonarda. Not now, but later on. There will come a time--

Hagbart. Yes, a time of work--self-development! It has come now. That
is why I, am here! Perhaps a time of conflict may come too--heaven send
that it may! Are we to pay any heed to that? No! You are free, and I am
free; and our future is in our own hands.

Leonarda. Besides, I have grown old--

Hagbart. You!

Leonarda.--and jealous, and troublesome; while you are the incarnation
of youth and joy.

Hagbart. You have more youth in you than I. You are an enchantress! All
your life you will be showing me new aspects of yourself--as you are
doing now. Each year will invest you with a new beauty, new spiritual
power. Do you think I only half understand you, or only half love you?
I want to sit close in your heart, warmed by its glow. It is the
irresistible power of truth that has drawn me to you. My whole life will
not be long enough for me to sound the unfathomable depths of your soul.

Leonarda. Your words are like the spring breezes, alluring and
intoxicating, but full of deadly peril too.

Hagbart. You love me! I knew it before I came here to-day. I saw it
the moment I stood here. Love is the very breath of life to you,
surpassingly more than to any one else I have ever seen; and that is why
you have suffered so terribly from the disappointments and emptiness
of life. And now, when love is calling to you--love that is true and
sincere--you are trembling!

Leonarda. You understand me in a way I thought impossible! It takes away
all my resolution; it--

Hagbart. Surely you saw it in all the many talks we love had?

Leonarda. Yes.

Hagbart. Then is that not a proof that we two--?

Leonarda. Yes, it is true! I can hide nothing from you. (Bursts into
tears.)

Hagbart. But why this unhappiness?

Leonarda. I don't know! It pursues me all day, and all through the
sleepless night. (Weeps helplessly.)

Hagbart. But it has no real existence. It might, in the case of others;
but not in our case--not for us.

Leonarda. I spoke in my distress, without thinking. I threw out the
first thing that came into my head, to try and stop you. But it is not
that--oh, God! (Sways as if half swooning.)

Hagbart (rushing to her side). Leonarda!

Leonarda. No, no! Let me be!

Hagbart. You know your love is too strong for you--will you not give way
to it?

Leonarda. Hagbart, there is something about it that is not right--

Hagbart. Do you mean in the way it has come about? In Aagot's having
been the means of leading me to you? Think of it, and you will see that
it could not have happened otherwise.

Leonarda. Talking about it will not help me. I must see Aagot; I must
speak to Aagot.

Hagbart. But you have done that! You know it is you that love me, and
not she. You know it is you that I love, and not her. What more do you
need?

Leonarda. I want time. I want not to lose the self-control I have won
for myself by years of renunciation and self-sacrifice, and was so proud
of. But it won't obey me when you speak to me. Your words possess me in
spite of myself. If there is any happiness on earth, it is to find one's
every thought faultlessly understood. But that happiness brings a pain
with it--for me, at any rate. No, don't answer! You are too strong for
me; because I love you--love you as only one can who has never believed
such joy could exist or could possibly come to her--and now the depths
of my peace are troubled with the thought that it is treachery to my
child.

Hagbart. But you know that it is not!

Leonarda. I don't know. Let me have time to think! I am afraid, and
my fear revives forgotten memories. More than that--I am afraid of the
immensity of my love for you, afraid of dragging you with me into a
whirlpool of disaster!--No, don't answer! Don't touch me!--Hagbart, do
you love me?

Hagbart. Can you ask that?

Leonarda. Then help me! Go away!--Be generous. Let my heart know this
triumph and see you in its glorious rays! Other women do not need that,
perhaps--but I need it--go!

Hagbart. Leonarda!

Leonarda. Wait till you hear from me. It will not be long. Whatever
happens, be patient--and remember, I love you!--No, don't say anything!
I have neither courage nor strength for anything more. (Her voice sinks
to a whisper.) Go! (He turns to go.) Hagbart! (He stops.) What you have
said to me to-day has given me the greatest happiness of my life. But
your going away now without a word will be more to me than all you have
sail. (He goes out.)

Leonarda (stands for some moments in a kind of ecstasy, moves, and
stands still again. Suddenly she calls out): Aagot!

Aagot (from without). Are you there?

Leonarda. My dear child! (Goes out, and cones in again with AAGOT in her
arms.) Did you walk?

Aagot. The whole way! (She is carrying her hat in her hand, appears hot
and sunburnt, and bears evident signs of laving made a long journey on
foot. She takes off a knapsack which she has been carrying on her back.)
I washed in a brook to-day and used it as a looking-glass as well!

Leonarda. Have you been walking all night?

Aagot. No; I slept for a little while at Opsal, but I was out by
sunrise. It was lovely!

Leonarda. And I have just been arranging to send and fetch you.

Aagot. Really? Well, they can fetch my things. I could not wait any
longer.

Leonarda. You look so well.

Aagot. Oh, that is because I am so sunburnt.

Leonarda. You are feeling all right again, then--now?

Aagot. Splendid, aunt! All that is over, now.--I have had a letter from
grandmother.

Leonarda. Was that letter from her that I sent on to you? I could not
make out whom it was from.

Aagot. Yes, it was from her. Here it is. You must hear it.

Leonarda. Yes.

Aagot (reads). "My dear child. I have not written a letter for many
years, so I do not know what this will be like. But Hagbart is away, so
I must tell you myself. Do not be distressed any longer. As soon as you
are married, I will come and live with you." Isn't that glorious, aunt?
(She is trembling with happiness, and throws her arms round LEONARDA'S
neck.)

Leonarda. But--

Aagot. But what? There is no more "but" about it, don't you see! It is
on your account.

Leonarda. On my account? Yes, but--what about you? How do you
stand--with Hagbart?

Aagot. Oh, that?--Well, I will tell you the whole story! I can do that
now.--Oh, don't take it all so seriously, aunt! It really is nothing.
But let us sit down. (Brings forward a seat, as she speaks.) I really
feel as if I wanted to sit down for a little while, too!--Well, you see,
it came upon me like an unexpected attack--a blow from behind, as it
were. Now, my dear aunt, don't look so troubled. It is all over now. As
a matter of fact, the beginning of it all was a play I saw.

Leonarda. A play?

Aagot. We saw it together once, you and I, do you remember? Scribe's
Bataille de Dames.

Leonarda. Yes.

Aagot. And I remember thinking and saying to you: That fellow Henri,
in the play, was a stupid fellow. He had the choice between a
strong-natured, handsome, spirited woman, who was ready to give her life
for him, and a child who was really a stupid little thing--for she was,
it is no use denying it, aunt--and he chose the insignificant little
person. No, I would rather sit down here; I can rest better so. Ah, that
is good! And now you mustn't look me in the face oftener than I want to
let you, because you take it too dreadfully solemnly, and I am going to
tell you something foolish now.--All of a sudden it flashed across my
mind: Good heavens! the woman was--, and the little hussy with the curly
hair was--, and he? But Hagbart is a man of some sense: he had chosen
otherwise! And I did not know; but I realised at the same time that
almost from the first day Hagbart used always to talk to you, and only
to you, and hardly at all to me except to talk about you. I got so
miserable about it that I felt as if some one had put a knife into my
heart; and from that moment--I am so ashamed of it now--I had no more
peace. I carried an aching pain in my heart night and day, and I thought
my heart itself would break merely to see him speak to you or you to
him. I am ashamed of myself; because what was more natural than that he
should never be tired of talking to you? I never should, myself!

Leonarda. But still I don't see--I don't understand yet--

Aagot. Wait a bit! Oh, don't look so anxiously at me! It is all over
now, you know.

Leonarda. What is all over?

Aagot. Bless my soul, wait! Aunt, dear, you are more impatient than I am
myself! I do not want you to think me worse than I am, so I must first
tell you how I fought with myself. I lay and cried all night, because
I could not talk to you about it, and in the daytime I forced myself
to seem merry and lively and happy. And then, aunt, one day I said to
myself quite honestly: Why should you feel aggrieved at his loving her
more than you? What are you, compared with her? And how splendid it
would be, I thought, for my dear aunt to find some one she could truly
love, and that it should be I that had brought them together!

Leonarda. That was splendid of you, Aagot!

Aagot. Yes, but now I mustn't make myself out better than I am, either.
Because I did not always manage to look at it that way; very often
something very like a sob kept rising in my throat. But then I used
to talk to myself seriously, and say: Even supposing it is your own
happiness you are giving up for her sake, is that too much for you to
do for her? No, a thousand times no! And even supposing he does not love
you any more, ought you not to be able to conquer your own feelings?
Surely it would be cowardly not to be able to do that! Think no more of
him, if he does not love you!

Leonarda. Aagot, I cannot tell you how I admire you, and love you, and
how proud I am of you!

Aagot. Oh, aunt, I never realised as I did then what you have been to
me! I knew that if I were capable of any great deed, anything really
good or really fine, it was you that had planted the impulse in me. And
then I sought every opportunity to bring this about; I wanted to take
ever so humble a part in it, but without your hearing a word or a sigh
from me. Besides, I had you always before me as an example; because I
knew that you would have done it for me--indeed that you had already
done as much. Your example was like a shining beacon to me, aunt!

Leonarda. Aagot!

Aagot. But you don't seem to be as happy about it as I am! Don't you
understand yet how it all happened?

Leonarda. Yes, but--about the result of it?

Aagot. Dearest, you know all about that!--No, it is true, you don't!
I must not forget to tell you that; otherwise you won't be able to
understand why I behaved so stupidly at the Bishop's.

Leonarda. No.

Aagot. Well, you see, when I was full of this splendid determination to
sacrifice myself so as to make you happy, I used to feel a regular fury
come over me because Hagbart noticed no change in me--or, to be more
correct, did not understand it in the least. He used to go about as
if he were in a dream. Isn't it extraordinary how one thing leads to
another? My feeling was stronger than I had any idea of; because when
the Bishop wanted to slight you--and that was like a stab from behind,
too!--I absolutely lost my head with Hagbart because of his not
having prevented that, instead of going about dreaming. I don't
know--but--well, you saw yourself what happened. I blurted out the first
thing that came into my head and was abominably rude; you were angry;
then we made friends again and I went away--and then, aunt--

Leonarda. And then--?

Aagot. Then I thought it all over! All the beautiful things you said
to me about him, as we were going home, came back to me more and more
forcibly. I saw you as I had always known you, noble and gentle.--It was
so wonderful up there, too! The air, the clearness, the sense of space!
And the lake, almost always calm, because it was so sheltered! And the
wonderful stillness, especially in the evening!--And so it healed, just
as a wound heals.

Leonarda. What healed?

Aagot. The pain in my heart, aunt. All the difficulties vanished. I
know Hagbart to be what you said--noble and true. And you too, aunt!
You would neither of you have wished to give me a moment's pain,
even unconsciously, I knew. It was so good to realise that! It was so
restful, that often while I was thinking of it, I went to sleep where
I sat--I was so happy!--Ah, how I love him! And then came grandmother's
letter--.

[HANS comes in, but does not see AAGOT at first.]

Hans. Then I am to fetch Miss Aagot--why, there she is!

Aagot (getting up). You quite frightened me, Hans!

Hans. Welcome back, miss!

Aagot. Thank you.

Hans. Well, you have saved me a journey, miss, I suppose?

Aagot. Yes. But someone must go and fetch my things.

Hans. Of course, miss.--But what is the matter with the mistress?

Aagot. Aunt!--Heavens, what is the matter?

Hans. The mistress has not looked well lately.

Aagot. Hasn't she? Aunt, dear! Shall I--? Would you like to--? Aunt!

Hans. Shall I fetch some one to--

Leonarda. No, no!--But you, Aagot--will you-. Oh, my God!--Will you run
in--and get--

Aagot. Your bottle of drops?

Leonarda. Yes. (AAGOT runs out.) Hans, go as quickly as you can to the
General's--ask him to come here! At once!

Hans. Yes, ma'am.

Leonarda. Hans!

Hans. Yes, ma'am.

Leonarda. Go on horseback. You may not find the General at home--and
have to go elsewhere after him.

Hans. Yes, ma'am. (Goes out. AAGOT re-enters.)

Aagot. Here it is, aunt!

Leonarda. Thank you. It is over now.

Aagot. But what was it, aunt?

Leonarda. It was something, dear--something that comes over one
sometimes at the change of the year.

[Curtain.]

(The interval between this act and the next should be very short.)




ACT IV

(SCENE.--A room in the BISHOP'S house, the same evening. The lights are
lit. The BISHOP comes in with LEONARDA, who is in travelling dress, with
a shawl over her arm and a bag in her hand. The BISHOP makes a movement
as though to relieve her of them, but she puts them down herself.)

Leonarda. Your lordship must excuse me for troubling you so late
as this; but the reason of it is something over which I have no
control.---Is your nephew here?

Bishop. No, but I expect him. He has been here twice this afternoon
already to see me, but I was out.

Leonarda. I will make haste then, and do what I have to do before he
comes.

Bishop. Shall I give instructions that we are to be told when he comes
in?

Leonarda. If you please.

Bishop (ringing the bell). Grandmother says that as soon as he came back
to-day, he went at once to see you.

Leonarda. Yes.

[Enter a Maid.]

Bishop (to the Maid). Be so good as to let me know when Mr. Hagbart
comes in. (Exit Maid.)

Leonarda. Has he had a talk with his grandmother?

Bishop. Yes.

Leonarda. After he--? (Checks herself.)

Bishop. After he had been to see you.

Leonarda. Did he tell her anything?

Bishop. He was very much agitated, apparently. I did not ask grandmother
any further questions; I can imagine what passed between them.--Has he
spoken to you?

Leonarda. Yes.

Bishop. And you, Mrs. Falk?

Leonarda. I--? Well, I am here.

Bishop. Going on a journey, if I am not mistaken?

Leonarda. Going on a journey. Things are turning out as you wished after
all, my lord.

Bishop. And he is to know nothing about it?

Leonarda. No one--except the person who will accompany me. I am sailing
for England by to-night's boat.

Bishop (looking at his watch). You haven't much time, then.

Leonarda. I only want to entrust to your lordship a deed of gift of my
property here.

Bishop. In favour of your niece?

Leonarda. Yes, for Aagot. She shall have everything.

Bishop. But last time, Mrs. Falk, you said--

Leonarda. Oh, I have enough for my journey. Later on I shall want
nothing; I can provide for myself.

Bishop. But what about Aagot? Will you not wait until she comes home?

Leonarda. She came home to-day. She is resting now. But I have sent back
my carriage to bring her here immediately. I want to ask you to take her
in--I know no one else--and to comfort her--

Bishop. Indeed I will, Mrs. Falk. I understand what this must cost you.

Leonarda. And will you try--to--to bring those two together again?

Bishop. But they don't love each other!

Leonarda. Aagot loves him. And--as they both love me--my idea was that
when I am gone, and they know that it was my wish, the love they both
have for me may bring them together again. I hope so--they are both so
young.

Bishop. I will do all I can.

Leonarda. Thank you. And I want to make bold to beg you to let
grandmother go and live in the country with Aagot--or let Aagot come and
live here, whichever they prefer. It would divert Aagot's mind if she
had the care of grandmother; and she is very fond of her.

Bishop. And grandmother of her.

Leonarda. And wherever the grandmother is, Hagbart will be too. Very
likely the old lady would help them.

Bishop. I think your idea is an excellent one; and I am amazed that you
have had time and strength to think it all out in this manner.

Leonarda. Is grandmother still up?

Bishop. Yes; I have just come from her room. Hagbart has excited her;
she can stand so little.

Leonarda. Then I expect I had better not go and bid her good-bye. I
should have liked to, otherwise.

Bishop. I don't think I ought to allow it.

Leonarda. Then please say good-bye to her from me--and thank her.

Bishop. I will.

Leonarda. And ask her--to help--

Bishop. I will do everything I possibly can.

Leonarda. And your lordship must forgive me for all the upset I have
caused here. I did not intend it.

Bishop. I am only sorry that I did not know you sooner. Many things
might have been different.

Leonarda. We won't talk about that now.

[Enter Maid.]

Maid. I was asked to bring you this card, ma'am.

Leonarda. Thank you. Is the General in the hall?

Maid. Yes.

Bishop. General Rosen--here?

Leonarda. I took the liberty of asking him to call for me here when the
boat was signalled.

Bishop. Ask the General to come in. (Exit Maid.) Then it is General
Rosen that is to--. (Checks himself.)

Leonarda (searching in her bag).--that is to accompany me? He is my
husband.

Bishop. The husband you divorced.

Leonarda. Yes.

Bishop. I see I have done you a great injustice, Mrs. Falk.

Leonarda. Yes. (GENERAL ROSEN comes in, dressed in a smart travelling
suit and looking very spruce.)

General Rosen. I beg your lordship's pardon--but, time is up.--Mrs.
Falk, is this yours? (Gives her a letter.)

Leonarda. Yes.--When Aagot comes, will your lordship give her this?--and
help her?

Bishop. I will, Mrs. Falk. God bless you!

[Enter Maid.]

Maid. Mr. Hagbart has just come in.

Leonarda. Good-bye!--Say good-bye to--

Bishop (taking her hand). What you are doing is more than any one of us
could have done.

Leonarda. It all depends on how deeply one loves.--Thank you, and
good-bye!

Bishop. Good-bye! (GENERAL ROSEN offers LEONARDA his arm. She takes
it, and they go out. The BISHOP follows them. HAGBART comes in from the
right, looks round in astonishment, then goes towards the back of the
room and meets the BISHOP in the doorway.)

Bishop. Is that you? (Both come forward without speaking.)

Hagbart (in a low voice, but evidently under the influence of great
emotion). I can tell by your voice--and your face--that you know about
it.

Bishop. You mean that you think I have had a talk with grandmother?

Hagbart. Yes.

Bishop. Well, I have. She told me nothing definite, but I see how things
stand. I saw that sooner than you did yourself, you know.

Hagbart. That is true. The fight is over now, as far as I am concerned.

Bishop. Scarcely that, Hagbart.

Hagbart. Oh, you won't admit it, I know. But I call it the most decisive
victory of my life. I love Mrs. Falk--and she loves me.

Bishop. If you were not in such an excited condition--

Hagbart. It is not excitement, it is happiness. But here, with you--oh,
I have not come to ask for your blessing; we must do without that! But
I have come to tell you the fact, because it was my duty to do so.--Does
it grieve you so much?

Bishop. Yes.

Hagbart. Uncle, I feel hurt at that.

Bishop. My boy--!

Hagbart. I feel hurt both on her account and on my own. It shows that
you know neither of us.

Bishop. Let us sit down and talk quietly, Hagbart.

Hagbart. I must ask you to make no attempt to persuade me to alter my
decision.

Bishop. Make your mind easy on that score. Your feelings do you
honour--and I know now that she is worthy of them.

Hagbart. What--do you say that? (They sit down.)

Bishop. My dear Hagbart, let me tell you this at once. I have gone
through an experience, too, since the last time we met. And it has
taught me that I had no right to treat Mrs. Falk as I did.

Hagbart. Is it possible?

Bishop. I judged her both too quickly and too harshly. That is one of
our besetting sins. And I have paid too much heed to the opinion of
others, and too little to the charity that should give us courage to do
good. She, whom I despised, has taught me that.

Hagbart. You do not know how grateful and how happy you have made me by
saying that!

Bishop. I have something more to say. At the time we held that unjust
opinion of her, we misled you--for you relied on our opinion then--until
you ended by sharing our views and being even more vehement in the
matter than we, as young people will. That created a reaction in you,
which in the end led to love. If that love had been a sin, we should
have been to blame for it.

Hagbart. Is it a sin, then?

Bishop. No. But when you felt that we were inclined to look upon it
in that light, that very fact stirred up your sense of justice and
increased your love. You have a noble heart.

Hagbart. Ah, how I shall love you after this, uncle!

Bishop. And that is why I wanted you to sit down here just now,
Hagbart--to beg your pardon--and hers. And my congregation's, too. It
is my duty to guide them, but I was not willing to trust them enough.
By far the greater number among them are good people; they would have
followed me if I had had the courage to go forward.

Hagbart. Uncle, I admire and revere you more than I have ever done
before--more than any one has ever done!

Bishop (getting up). My dear boy!

Hagbart (throwing himself into his arms). Uncle!

Bishop. Is your love strong enough to bear--

Hagbart. Anything!

Bishop. Because sometimes love is given to us to teach us
self-sacrifice.

[The GRANDMOTHER comes in.]

Grandmother. I heard Hagbart's voice.

Hagbart. Grandmother! (He and the BISHOP go to help her.) Grandmother!
You don't know how happy I am! (Takes her by the arm.)

Grandmother. Is that true?

Bishop (taking her other arm). You should not walk about without help.

Grandmother. I heard Hagbart's voice. He was talking so loud, that I
thought something had happened.

Hagbart. So it has--something good! Uncle consents! He is splendid!
He has made everything all right again, and better than ever! Oh,
grandmother, I wish you were not so old! I feel as if I should like to
take you up in my arms and dance you round the room.

Grandmother. You mustn't do that, my dear. (They put her into her
chair.) Now! What is your last bit of news?

Hagbart. My last bit of news? I have no fresh news! There is nothing
more to tell!

Bishop. Yes, Hagbart, there is.

Hagbart. Why do you say that so seriously?--You look so serious--and
seem agitated! Uncle! (The noise of wheels is heard outside.)

Bishop. Wait a little, my dear boy. Wait a little! (Goes out by the door
at the back.)

Hagbart. Grandmother, what can it be?

Grandmother. I don't know.--But happiness is often so brief.

Hagbart. Happiness so brief? What do you mean?--Good God, grandmother,
don't torture me!

Grandmother. I assure you, I know nothing about it--only--

Hagbart. Only--what?

Grandmother. While your uncle was with me, Mrs. Falk was announced.

Hagbart. Mrs. Falk? Has she been here? Just now?

Grandmother. Yes, just now.

Hagbart. Then something must have happened! Perhaps it was she that
uncle--. (Rushes to the door, which opens, and the BISHOP comes in with
AAGOT on his arm, followed by CORNELIA.) Aagot!

Aagot. Hagbart!--(Anxiously.) Is aunt not here!

Cornelia. What, grandmother here! (Goes to her.)

Bishop. My dear Aagot, your aunt entrusted this letter to me to give to
you.

Hagbart. A letter--?

Grandmother. What is the matter? Let me see! (CORNELIA moves her chair
nearer to the others.)

Hagbart. Read it aloud, Aagot!

Aagot (reads). "My darling. When you receive this letter I shall
have--gone away. I love the man you--." (With a cry, she falls swooning.
The BISHOP catches her in his arms.)

Grandmother. She has gone away?

Cornelia. She loves the man you--? Good God, look at Hagbart!

Bishop. Cornelia! (She goes to him, and they lay AAGOT on the couch.
CORNELIA stays beside her. The BISHOP turns to HAGBART.) Hagbart!
(HAGBART throws himself into his arms.) Courage! Courage, my boy!

Grandmother (getting up). It is like going back to the days of great
emotions!

[The Curtain falls slowly.]
﻿A GAUNTLET

A PLAY IN THREE ACTS

DRAMATIS PERSONAE

     RIIS.
     MRS. RIIS.
     SVAVA, their daughter.
     MARGIT, their maid.
     CHRISTENSEN.
     MRS. CHRISTENSEN.
     ALFRED, their son, betrothed to Svava.
     DR. NORDAN.
     THOMAS, his servant.
     HOFF.

The action of the play passes in Christiania.




ACT I

(SCENE.--A room in RIIS' house. An open door at the back leads into a
park and gives a glimpse of the sea beyond. Windows on each side of the
door. Doors also in the right and left walls. Beyond the door on the
right is a piano; opposite to the piano a cupboard. In the foreground,
to the right and left, two couches with small tables in front of them.
Easy-chairs and smaller hairs scattered about. MRS. RIIS is sitting on
the couch to the left, and DR. NORDAN in a chair in the centre of the
room. He is wearing a straw hat pushed on to the back of his head, and
has a large handkerchief spread over his knees. He is sitting with his
arms folded, leaning upon his stick.)

Mrs. Riis. A penny for your thoughts!

Nordan. What was it you were asking me about?

Mrs. Riis. About that matter of Mrs. North, of course.

Nordan. That matter of Mrs. North? Well, I was talking to Christensen
about it just now. He has advanced the money and is going to try and get
the bank to suspend proceedings. I have told you that already. What else
do you want to know?

Mrs. Riis. I want to know how much gossip there is about it, my dear
friend.

Nordan. Oh, men don't gossip about each other's affairs.--By the way,
isn't our friend in there (nodding towards the door on the right) going
to be told about it? This seem, a good opportunity.

Mrs. Riis. Let us wait.

Nordan. Because Christensen will have to be repaid, you know. I told him
he would be.

Mrs. Riis. Naturally. What else would you suppose?

Nordan (getting up). Well, I am going away for my holidays, so
Christensen must look after it now.--Was it a very grand party
yesterday?

Mrs. Riis. There was not much display.

Nordan. No, the Christensens' parties are never very luxurious. But I
suppose there were a lot of people?

Mrs. Riis. I have never seen so many at a private entertainment.

Nordan. Is Svava up?

Mrs. Riis. She is out bathing.

Nordan. Already? Did you come home early, then?

Mrs. Riis. At about twelve, I think. Svava wanted to come home. My
husband was late, I think.

Nordan. The card tables. She looked radiant, I suppose, eh?

Mrs. Riis. Why didn't you come?

Nordan. I never go to betrothal parties, and I never go to
Weddings--never! I can't bear the sight of the poor victims in their
veils and wreaths.

Mrs. Riis. But, my dear doctor, you surely think--as we all do--that
this will be a happy marriage?

Nordan. He is a fine lad. But, all the same--I have been taken in so
often.--Oh, well!

Mrs. Riis. She was so happy, and is just as happy to-day.

Nordan. It is a pity I shall not see her. Good-bye, Mrs. Riis.

Mrs. Riis. Good-bye, doctor. Then you are off to-day?

Nordan. Yes, I need a change of air.

Mrs. Riis. Quite so. Well, I hope you will enjoy yourself--and, many
thanks for what you have done!

Nordan. It is I ought to thank you, my dear lady! I aim vexed not to be
able to say good-bye to Svava. (Goes out. MRS. RIIS takes up a magazine
from the table on the left and settles herself comfortably on a couch
from which she can see into the park. During what follows she reads
whenever opportunity allows. RIIS comes in through the door to the
right, in his shirt sleeves and struggling with his collar.)

Riis. Good morning! Was that Nordan that went out just now?

Mrs. Riis. Yes. (RIIS crosses the room, then turns back and disappears
through the door on the right. He comes back again immediately and goes
through the same proceeding, all the tine busy with his collar.) Can I
help you at all?

Riis. No--thanks all the same! These new-fangled shirts are troublesome
things. I bought some in Paris.

Mrs. Riis. Yes, I believe you have bought a whole dozen.

Riis. A dozen and a half. (Goes into his room, comes out again in
apparently the same difficulties, and walks about as before.) As a
matter of fact I am wondering about something.

Mrs. Riis. It must be something complicated.

Riis. It is--it is. No doubt of it!--This collar is the very--Ah,
at last! (Goes into his room and comes out again, this time with his
necktie in his hand.) I have been wondering--wondering--what our dear
girl's character is made up of?

Mrs. Riis. What it is made up of?

Riis. Yes--what characteristics she gets from you and what from me, and
so forth. In what respects, that is to say, she takes after your family,
and in what respect after mine, and so forth. Svava is a remarkable
girl.

Mrs. Riis. She is that.

Riis. She is neither altogether you nor altogether me nor is she exactly
a compound of us both.

Mrs. Riis. Svava is something more than that.

Riis. A considerable deal more than that, too. (Disappears again; then
comes out with his coat on, brushing himself.) What did you say?

Mrs. Riis. I did not speak.--I rather think it is my mother that Svava
is most like.

Riis. I should think so! Svava, with her quiet pleasant ways! What a
thing to say!

Mrs. Riis. Svava can be passionate enough.

Riis. Svava never forgets her manners as your mother did.

Mrs. Riis. You never understood mother. Still, no doubt they are unlike
in a great many things.

Riis. Absolutely!--Can you see now how right I was in chattering to her
in various languages from the beginning, even when she was quite tiny?
Can you see that now? You were opposed to my doing it.

Mrs. Riis. I was opposed to your perpetually plaguing the child, and
also to the endless jumping from one thing to another.

Riis. But look at the result, my dear! Look at the result! (Begins to
hum a tune.)

Mrs. Riis. You are surely never going to pretend that it is the
languages that have made her what she is?

Riis (as he disappears). No, not the languages; but--(His voice is heard
from within his room)--the language have done a wonderful lot! She has
savoir vivre--what? (Comes out again.)

Mrs. Riis. I am sure that is not what Svava is most admired for.

Riis. No, no. On the boat, a man asked me if I were related to the Miss
Riis who had founded the Kindergartens in the town. I said I had the
honour to be her father. You should have seen his face! I nearly had a
fit.

Mrs. Riis. Yes, the Kindergartens have been a great success from the
very first.

Riis. And they are responsible for her getting engaged, too--aren't
they? What?

Mrs. Riis. You must ask her.

Riis. You have never even noticed my new suit.

Mrs. Riis. Indeed I have.

Riis. I didn't hear as much as the tiniest cry of admiration from you.
Look at the harmony of it all!--the scheme of colour, even down to the
shoes!--what? And the handkerchief, too!

Mrs. Riis. How old are you, dear?

Riis. Hold your tongue!--Anyway, how old do you think people take me to
be?

Mrs. Riis. Forty, of course.

Riis. "Of course"? I don't see that it is so obvious. This suit is a
kind of Bridal Symphony, composed at Cologne when I got the telegram
telling me of Svava's engagement. Just think of it! At Cologne--not ten
hours' journey from Paris! But I could not wait ten hours; I had risen
too much in my own estimation in view of my approaching relationship
with the richest family in the country.

Mrs. Riis. Is that suit all you have to show for it, then?

Riis. What a question! Just you wait till I have got my luggage through
the custom-house!

Mrs. Riis. We shall be quite out of it, I suppose?

Riis. You out of it! When a very lucky daddy finds himself in Paris at a
most tremendous moment--

Mrs. Riis. And what did you think of the party yesterday?

Riis. I was quite delighted with the boat for being late so that I was
landed in the middle of a fête champêtre as by magic. And Naturally one
had a tremendous welcome as the party was in honour of one's own only
daughter!

Mrs. Riis. What time did you come in last night?

Riis. Don't you understand that we had to play cards yesterday, too? I
could not get out of it; I had to make a fourth with Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob--that is to say, with our host, a cabinet minister, and old Holk.
It was a tremendous honour to lose one's money to grand folk like that.
Because I always lose, you know.--I came home about three o'clock, I
should think.--What is that you are reading?

Mrs. Riis. The Fortnightly.

Riis. Has there been anything good in it while I have been away? (Begins
to hum a tune.)

Mrs. Riis. Yes--there is an article here on heredity that you must read.
It has some reference to what we began to talk about.

Riis. Do you know this tune? (Goes over to the piano.) It is all the
rage now. I heard it all over Germany. (Begins to play and sing, but
breaks off suddenly.) I will go and fetch the music, while I think of
it! (Goes into his room and comes out again with the music. Sits down
and begins to play and sing again. SVAVA comes in by it, door on the
left. RIIS stops when he sees her, and jumps up.) Good morning, my
child! Good morning! I have hardly had a chance to say a word to you
yet. At the party everyone took you away from me! (Kisses her, and comes
forward with her.)

Svava. Why were you so long of coming back from abroad?

Riis. Why don't people give one some warning when they are going to get
engaged?

Svava. Because people don't know anything about it themselves, till it
happens! Good morning again, mother. (Kneels down beside her.)

Mrs. Riis. There is a delicious freshness about you, dear! Did you have
a walk in the wood after your swim?

Svava (getting up). Yes, and just as I got home a few minutes ago Alfred
passed the house and called up to me. He is coming in directly.

Riis. To tell you the truth--and one ought always to tell the truth--I
had quite given up the hope of such happiness coming to our dear girl.

Svava. I know you had. I had quite given it up myself.

Riis. Until your fairy prince came?

Svava. Until my fairy prince came. And he took his time about it, too!

Riis. You had been waiting for him a long time, though--hadn't you?

Svava. Not a bit of it! I never once thought of him.

Riis. Now you are talking in riddles.

Svava. Yes, it is a riddle to understand how two people, who have seen
each other from childhood without even giving each other a thought,
suddenly--! Because that was really how it happened. It all dates from a
certain moment--and then, all at once, he became quite another man in my
eyes.

Riis. But in every one else's, I suppose, he is the same us before?

Svava. I hope so!

Riis. He is more lively than he was, at any rate--in my eyes.

Svava. Yes, I saw you laughing together last night. What was it?

Riis. We were discussing the best way of getting through the world. I
gave him my three famous rules of life.

Mrs. Riis and Svava (together). Already!

Riis. They were a great success. Do you remember them, you bad girl?

Svava. Rule number one: Never make a fool of yourself.

Riis. Rule number two: Never be a burden to any one.

Svava. Rule number three: Always be in the fashion. They are not very
hard to remember, because they art neither obscure nor profound.

Riis. But all the harder to put into practice! And thus is a great
virtue in all rules of life.--I congratulate you on your new morning
frock. Under the circumstances it is really charming.

Svava. "Under the circumstances" means, I suppose, considering that you
have had no hand in it.

Riis. Yes, because I should never have chosen that trimming. However,
the "under the circumstances" is not so bad. A good cut, too--yes. Aha!
Just you wail till my portmanteau comes!

Svava. Some surprises for us?

Riis. Big ones!--By the way, I have something here. (Goes into his
room.)

Svava. Do you know, mother, he seems to me more restless than ever.

Mrs. Riis. That is happiness, dear.

Svava. And yet father's restlessness has always something a little sad
about it. He is--. (RIIS comes out of his room again.) Do you know what
I heard a cabinet minister say about you yesterday?

Riis. A man of that stamp is sure to say something worth hearing.

Svava. "We all always look upon your father, Miss Riis, as our
Well-dressed man par excellence."

Riis. Ah, a bien dit son excellence! But I can tell you something better
than that. You are getting your father a knighthood.

Svava. I am?

Riis. Yes, who else? Of course the Government has once or twice made
use of me to some small degree in connection with various commercial
treaties; but now, as our great man's brother-in-law, I am going to be
made a Knight of St. Olaf!

Svava. I congratulate you.

Riis. Well, when it rains on the parson it drips on the clerk, you know.

Svava. You are really most unexpectedly modest in your new position.

Riis. Am I not!--And now you shall see me as a modest showman of
beautiful dresses--that is to say, of drawings of dresses--still more
modest than the showman, from the latest play at the Français.

Svava. Oh no, dad--not now!

Mrs. Riis. We won't start on that till the afternoon.

Riis. One would really think I were the only woman of the lot!
However, as you please. You rule the world! Well, then, I have another
proposition to make, in two parts. Part one, that we sit down!

Svava. We sit down! (She and her father sit.)

Riis. And next, that you tell your newly-returned parent exactly how it
all happened. All about that "riddle," you know!

Svava. Oh, that!--You must excuse me; I cannot t you about that.

Riis. Not in all its sweet details, of course! Good heavens, who would
be so barbarous as to ask such a thing in the first delicious month of
an engagement! No, I of only I want you to tell us what was the primum
mobile in the matter.

Svava. Oh, I understand. Yes, I will tell you that because that really
means teaching you to know Alfred's true character.

Riis. For instance--how did you come to speak to him?

Svava. Well, that was those darling Kindergartens of ours--

Riis. Oho!--Your darling Kindergartens, you mean?

Svava. What, when there are over a hundred girls there--?

Riis. Never mind about that! I suppose he came to bring a donation?

Svava. Yes, he came several times with a donation--

Riis. Aha!

Svava. And one day we were talking about luxury saying that it was
better to use one's time and money in our way, than to use them in
luxurious living.

Riis. But how do you define luxury?

Svava. We did not discuss that at all. But I saw that he considered
luxury to be immoral.

Riis. Luxury immoral!

Svava. Yes, I know that is not your opinion. But it is mine.

Riis. Your mother's, you mean, and your grand mother's.

Svava. Exactly; but mine too, if you don't object?

Riis. Not I!

Svava. I mentioned that little incident that happened to us when we were
in America--do you remember? We had gone to a temperance meeting, and
saw women drive up who were going to support the cause of abstinence,
and yet were--well, of course we did not know their circumstances--but
to judge from their appearance, with their carriages and horses, their
jewellery and dresses--especially their jewellery--they must have been
worth, say--

Riis. Say many thousands of dollars! No doubt about it.

Svava. There is no doubt about it. And don't you think that is really
just as disgraceful debauchery, in its town way, as drink is in its?

Riis. Oh, well--!

Svava. Yes, you shrug your shoulders. Alfred did not do that. He told me
of his own experiences--in great cities. It was horrible!

Riis. What was horrible?

Svava. The contrast between poverty and wealth--between the bitterest
want and the most reckless luxury.

Riis. Oh--that! I thought, perhaps--. However, go on!

Svava. He did not sit looking quite indifferent and clean his nails.

Riis. I beg your pardon.

Svava. Oh, please go on, dear!--No, he prophesied a great social
revolution, and spoke so fervently about it--and it was then that he
told me what his ideas about wealth were. It was the greatest possible
surprise to me--and a new idea to me, too, to some extent. You should
have seen how handsome he looked!

Riis. Handsome, did you say?

Svava. Isn't he handsome? I think so, at all events. And so does mother,
I think?

Mrs. Riis (without looking up from her book). And so does mother.

Riis. Mothers always fall in love with their daughters' young men--but
they fall out again when they become their mothers-in-law!

Svava. Is that your experience?

Riis. That is my experience. So Alfred Christensen has blossomed into a
beauty? Well, we must consider that settled.

Svava. He stood there so sure of himself, and looking so honest and
clean--for that is an essential thing, you know.

Riis. What exactly do you mean by "clean," my dear?

Svava. I mean just what the word means.

Riis. Exactly--but I want to know what meaning attach to the word.

Svava. Well--the meaning that I hope any one would attach to it if they
used the word of me.

Riis. Do you attach the same meaning to it if it is used' of a man, as
you would if it were used of a girl?

Svava. Yes, of course.

Riis. And do you suppose that Christensen's son--

Svava (getting up). Father, you are insulting me!

Riis. How can the fact of his being his father's son I an insult to you?

Svava. In that respect he is not his father's son! I am not likely to
make any mistake in a thing of that sort!

Mrs. Riis. I am just reading about inherited tendencies. It is Not
necessary to suppose that he has inherited all his father's.

Riis. Oh, well--have it as you please! I am afraid all these superhuman
theories of yours. You will never get through the world with them.

Svava. What do you mean?--Mother, what does father mean?

Mrs. Riis. I suppose he means that all men are alike. And one must allow
that it is true.

Svava. You do not really mean that?

Riis. But why get so excited about it?--Come and sit down! And, besides,
how can you possibly tell?

Svava. Tell? What?

Riis. Well, in each individual case--

Svava.--whether the man I see standing before me or walking past me is
an unclean, disgusting beast--or a man?

Riis. Etcetera, etcetera!--You may make mistakes, my dear Svava?

Svava. No--not any more than I should make a mistake about you, father,
when you begin to tease me with your horrid principles! Because, in
spite of them, you are the chastest and most refined man I know.

Mrs. Riis (laying down her book). Are you going to keep that morning
frock on, dear child? Won't you change your dress before Alfred comes?

Svava. No, mother, I am not going to be put off like that.--By this time
I have seen so many of my girl friends giving themselves trustfully to
their "fairy prince," as they think, and waking in the arms of a beast.
I shall not risk that! I shall not make that mistake!

Mrs. Riis. Well, as it is, there is no occasion for you to get heated
about it. Alfred is a man of honour.

Svava. He is. But I have heard of one shocking experience after another.
There was poor Helga, only a month ago! And I myself--I can speak about
it now, for I am happy now and feel secure--I can tell you now why I
have been so long about it. For a long time I did nut dare to trust
myself; because I too have been on the brink of being deceived.

Riis and Mrs. Riis (together, starting up from their chairs). You,
Svava?

Svava. I was quite young at the time. Like most young girls, I was
looking for my ideal, and found it in a young, vivacious man--I won't
describe him more accurately. He had--oh, the noblest principles and the
highest aims--the most complete contrast to you in that respect father!
To say I loved him, is much too mild; I worshipped him. But I never can
tell you what I discovered or how I discovered it. It was the time when
you all thought I had--

Mrs. Riis.--something wrong with your lungs? Is it possible, child? Was
it then?

Svava. Yes, it was then.--No one could endure or forgive being deceived
like that!

Mrs. Riis. And you never said a word to me?

Svava. Only those who have made such a mistake as I did can understand
the shame one feels.--Well, it is all over now. But this much is
certain, that no one who has had such an experience once will make the
same mistake again. (Meanwhile RIIS has gone into his room.)

Mrs. Riis. Perhaps it was a good thing for you, after all?

Svava. I am sure it was.--Well, it is all done with now. But it was not
quite done with till I found Alfred. Where is father?

Mrs. Riis. Your father? Here he comes.

Riis (coming out of his room, with his hat on, and drawing on his
gloves). Look here, little girl! I must go and see what has happened to
my luggage at the Customs. I will go to the station and telegraph. You
must have all your things looking very nice, you know, because the King
is coming here in a day or two--and so it is worth it! Good-bye, then,
my dear girl! (Kisses her.) You have made us very happy--so very happy.
It is true you have certain ideas that are not--. Well, never mind!
Goodbye! (Goes out.)

Mrs. Riis. Good-bye!

Riis (drawing off his gloves). Did you notice the tune I was playing
when you came in? (Sits down at the piano.) I heard it everywhere in
Germany. (Begins to play and sing, but stops short.) But, bless my soul,
here is the music! You can play it and sing it for yourself. (Goes out,
humming the air.)

Svava. He is delightful! There is really something so innocent about
him. Did you notice him yesterday? He was simply coruscating.

Mrs. Riis. You did not see yourself, my dear!

Svava. Why? Was I sparkling, too?

Mrs. Riis. Your father's daughter--absolutely!

Svava. Yes, it is no use denying, mother, that however great one's
happiness is, the friendliness of others increases it. I was thinking
to-day over all the things that gave me so much happiness yesterday, and
felt--oh, I can't tell you what I felt! (Nestles in her mother's arms.)

Mrs. Riis. You are a very lucky girl!--Now I must go and do my
housekeeping.

Svava. Shall I help you?

Mrs. Riis. No, thank you, dear. (They cross the room together.)

Svava. Well, then, I will run through father's song once or twice--and
Alfred should be here directly. (MRS. RIIS goes out by the door on the
left. SVAVA sits down at the piano. ALFRED comes in softly from the
left, and bends over her shoulder so that his face comes close to hers.)

Alfred. Good morning, darling!

Svava (jumping up). Alfred! I did not hear the door!

Alfred. Because you were playing. Something very pretty, too!

Svava. I enjoyed myself so much yesterday!

Alfred. I do not believe you have any idea what an impression you made!

Svava. Just a suspicion. But you must not talk about that, because it
would be most improper for me to confess it!

Alfred. Every one was singing your praises to me, and a mother and
father too. We are all very happy at how, to-day.

Svava. So we are here!--What is that you have got in your hand? A
letter?

Alfred. Yes, a letter. Your maid who opened the door gave it to me.
Someone has been clever enough to count upon my coming here some time
this morning.

Svava. You don't think that was difficult to guess?

Alfred. Not particularly. It is from Edward Hansen.

Svava. But you can take a short cut to his house through our park.
(Points to the right.)

Alfred. Yes, I know. And as he says it is urgent, and underlines the
word--

Svava.--you can have my key. Here it is. (Gives it to him.)

Alfred. Thank you, dear, very much.

Svava. Oh, it is only selfishness; we shall have you back again all the
sooner.

Alfred. I will stay here till lunch time.

Svava. You will stay here a great deal longer than that. We have a
frightful lot to talk about--all about yesterday, and--

Alfred. Of course we have!

Svava. And lots of other things as well.

Alfred. I have a most important question to ask you.

Svava. Have you?

Alfred. Perhaps you will find the answer by the time I come back.

Svava. It can't be so very difficult, then!

Alfred. Indeed it is. But sometimes you have inspirations.

Svava. What is it?

Alfred. Why did we two not find each other many years ago?

Svava. Because we were not ready for it, of course!

Alfred. How do you know that?

Svava. Because I know that at that time I was quite another girl from
what I am now.

Alfred. But there is a natural affinity between those that love one
another. I am sure of it. And it was just its much the case at that
time, surely?

Svava. We do not feel the natural affinity as long as we are developing
on different lines.

Alfred. Have we been doing that? And nevertheless we--

Svava. Nevertheless we love one another. Our paths may be as unlike as
they please, if only they lead together in the end.

Alfred. To the same way of thinking, you mean?

Svava. Yes, to our being such comrades as we are now.

Alfred. Such true comrades?

Svava. Such true comrades!

Alfred. Still, it is just at moments like this, when I hold you in my
arms as I do now, that I ask myself over and over again why I did not do
this long ago.

Svava. Oh, I don't think about that--not the least bit! It is the safest
place in the world--that is what I think!

Alfred. Perhaps before this year it would not have been so.

Svava. What do you mean?

Alfred. I mean--well, I mean practically the same as you; that I have
not always been the man I am now.--But I must hurry away. The letter
says it is something urgent. (They cross the room together.)

Svava. One minute won't make any difference, will it?--because there is
something I must say to you first.

Alfred (standing still). What is it?

Svava. When I saw you standing amongst all the others yesterday, I felt
for the first moment as if I did not know you. Some change seemed to
have come over you--the effect of the others, perhaps--anyway you really
_were_ actually different.

Alfred. Of course. People always are that, among strangers. When you
came in with the ladies, it just seemed to me as if I had never observed
you carefully before. Besides, there are certain things one cannot know
till one sees a person amongst others. It was the first time I realised
how tall you are--and your way of bending just a tiny bit to one side
when you bow to any one. And your colouring! I had never properly seen--

Svava. Do be quiet, and let me get a word in!

Alfred. No, no! Here we are, back in the room--and I _must_ be off now!

Svava. Only just a moment. You interrupted me, you know! When I saw you
standing there among the men for the first moment I felt just as if
I did not know you. But at the same moment you caught sight of me and
nodded. I don't know what sort of a transformation came over us both;
but I felt myself blushing as red as fire. And it was some time before I
had the courage to look at you again.

Alfred. Well, do you know what happened to me? Every time any one came
to dance with you, didn't I envy him! Oh, not at all!--To tell you
the truth, I cannot bear any one else to touch you. (Clasps her in his
arms.) And I have not told you the best part of it yet.

Svava. What is that?

Alfred. That when I see you amongst other people, and catch--say--a
glimpse of your arm, I think to myself: That arm has been round my neck
and round no one else's in the whole world! She is mine, mine, mine--and
no one else's!--There, that is the best part of it all!--Look here, here
we are back again in the room! It is witchcraft! Now I must go. (Crosses
the room.) Good-bye! (Lets her go, then catches hold of her again.) Why
didn't I find my happiness many years ago?--Good-bye!

Svava. I think I will come with you.

Alfred. Yes, do!

Svava. No, I forgot--I must learn this song before father comes back. If
I don't learn it now, I expect you will take care I don't do so to-day.
(A ring is heard at the front door.)

Alfred. Here is some one coming! Let me get away first. (Hurries out to
the right. SVAVA stands waving her hand to him, then turns to the piano.
The maid MARGIT enters.)

Margit. A gentleman has called, miss, who wants to know if--

Svava. A gentleman? Don't you know who he is?

Margit. No, miss.

Svava. What is he like?

Margit. He looks rather--

Svava. Rather suspicious?

Margit. No, far from it, miss--a very nice gentleman.

Svava. Tell him my father is not at home; he has gone down to the
station.

Margit. I told him so, miss, but it is you he wants to see.

Svava. Ask my mother to come in here!--Oh, no, why should she! Let him
come in. (MARGIT shows in HOFF, and goes out.)

Hoff. Is it Miss Riis I have the honour to--? Yes, I see it is. My name
is Hoff--Karl Hoff. I am a commercial traveller--travel in iron.

Svava. But what has that to do with me?

Hoff. Just this much, that if I had been an ordinary stay-at-home man, a
great many things would not have happened.

Svava. What would not have happened?

Hoff (taking a large pocket-book out of his docket, and extracting a
letter from it). Will you condescend to read this? Or perhaps you would
rather not?

Svava. How can I tell?

Hoff. Of course, you must first--Allow me. (Gives her the letter.)

Svava (reading). "To-night between ten and eleven that is to say, if the
booby has not come home. I love you so dearly! Put a light in the hall
window."

Hoff. "The booby" is me.

Svava. But I don't understand--?

Hoff. Here is another.

Svava. "I am full of remorse. Your cough frightens me; and now, when you
are expecting--" But what in the world has this to do with me?

Hoff (after a moment's thought). What do you suppose?

Svava. Is it some one you want me to help?

Hoff. No, poor soul, she doesn't need help any more. She is dead.

Svava. Dead? Was she your wife?

Hoff. That's it. She was my wife. I found these and come other things
in a little box. At the bottom were these notes--there are more of
them--and some cotton wool on the top of them. On the top of that lay
some earrings and things that had been her mother's. And also (producing
some bracelets) these bracelets. They are certainly much too costly to
have been her mother's.

Svava. I suppose she died suddenly, as she did not--

Hoff. I cannot say. Consumptives never think they are going to die.
Anyway she was very delicate and weak.--May I sit down?

Svava. Please do. Are there any children?

Hoff (after a moment's thought). I believe not.

Svava. You believe not? I asked because I thought you wanted our Society
to help you. This really is all very distressful to me.

Hoff. I thought it would be--I thought as much. Besides, I am not really
sure if I--. You cannot understand this, then?

Svava. No, I cannot.

Hoff. No, you cannot.-I have heard so much good spoken of you for many
years. My wife used to sing your praises, too.

Svava. Did she know me?

Hoff. She was Maren Tang--who used to be companion to--

Svava.--to Mrs. Christensen, my future mother-in-law? Was it she? She
was such a well-bred, quiet woman. Are you sure you are not mistaken?
One or two notes, unsigned and undated--what?

Hoff. Did you not recognise the handwriting?

Svava. I? No. Besides, isn't it a disguised hand?

Hoff. Yes, but not much disguised.

Svava. I presume you had some more definite errand with me?

Hoff. Yes, I had--but I think I will let it alone. You do not understand
anything about this, I can see Perhaps you think I am a little crazy? I
am not so sure you would not be right.

Svava. But there was something you wanted to say to me?

Hoff. Yes, there was. You see, these Kindergartens--

Svava. Oh, so it was them, all the time?

Hoff. No, it was not them. But they are responsible for my having for a
long time thought very highly of you, Miss Riis. If you will excuse my
saying so, I had never before seen fashionable young ladies trying to
do anything useful--never. I am only a little broken-down tradesman
travelling for a firm--a worthless sort of chap in many ways, and one
that very likely deserves what he has got--but anyway I wanted you to be
spared. Indeed thought it was my duty--absolutely my duty. But now when
I see you sitting there before me--well, now I only I feel miserably
unhappy. So I won't trouble you at all (Gets up.) Not at all.

Svava. I really cannot understand--

Hoff. Please don't bother about me! And please forgive my disturbing
you.--No, you really must not give me another thought! Just imagine that
I have not been here--that is all. (As he reaches the door, he meets
ALFRED coming in. As soon as he sees that SVAVA is watching them, he
goes hurriedly out. SVAVA sees the meeting between the two and gives a
little scream, then rushes to meet ALFRED. But as soon as she is face
to face with him, she seems terrified. As he comes nearer to take her in
his arms she cries out: "Don't touch me!" and hurries out by the door
on the left. She is heard locking and bolting it on the inside. Then a
violent outburst of weeping is heard, the sound being somewhat deadened
by the distance, but only for a few moments. Then the sound of singing
is heard outside, and a few seconds later RIIS comes into the room. The
curtain falls as he enters.)




ACT II

(SCENE.--The same as in Act I. SVAVA is lying on the couch to the right,
resting her head on one hand, looking out towards the park. Her mother
is sitting beside her.)

Mrs. Riis. Decisions as hasty as yours, Svava, are not really decisions
at all. There is always a great deal more to be taken into consideration
than one realises at first. Take time to think it over! I believe he is
a fine fellow. Give him time to show it; don't break it off immediately!

Svava. Why do you keep on saying that to me?

Mrs. Riis. Well, dear, you know I have never had the chance of saying
anything to you till to-day.

Svava. But you keep harping on that one string.

Mrs. Riis. What note do you want me to strike, then?

Svava. The note your dear good mother would have struck--quite a
different one altogether.

Mrs. Riis. It is one thing to teach your child how to make a proper
choice in life, but--

Svava. But quite another thing to put into practice what you teach?

Mrs. Riis. No; I was going to say that life itself is quite another
thing. In daily life, and especially in married life, it is sometimes
advisable to make allowances.

Svava. Yes, on points that do not really matter.

Mrs. Riis. Only on points that do not matter?

Svava. Yes--personal peculiarities, and things like that, which after
all are only excrescences; but not on points that concern one's moral
growth.

Mrs. Riis. Yes, on those points too.

Svava. On those points too?--But isn't it just for the sake of our own
self-development that we marry? What else should we marry for?

Mrs. Riis. Oh, you will see!

Svava. No, indeed I shall not; because I do not intend to marry on such
conditions.

Mrs. Riis. You should have said that sooner. It is too late now.

Svava (sitting upright). Too late? If I had been married twenty years, I
would have done just the same! (Lies down again.)

Mrs. Riis. Heaven help you, then!--You haven't an idea, not the smallest
idea, what a net you are entangled in! But you will find it out, as soon
as you begin to struggle in earnest. Or do you really want your father
and me to throw away all that we have worked for here?--to begin all
over again in a foreign country? Because he has repeatedly said, during
the last day or two, that he will not be mixed up in the scandal that
would be the result of your breaking this off. He would go abroad, and I
should have to go with him. Ah, you wince at the thought of that!--Think
of all your friends, too. It is a serious matter to have been set on
such an eminence as you were at your betrothal party. It is like
being lifted up high on a platform that others are carrying on their
shoulders; take care you do not fall down from it! That is what you will
do, if you offend their principles of right behaviour.

Svava. Is that sort of thing a principle of right behaviour?

Mrs. Riis. I do not say that. But undoubtedly, one their principles of
right behaviour--and perhaps the most important--is that all scandal
must be avoided. No one relishes being disgraced, Svava--particularly
the most influential people in a place. And least of all, by a long way,
do people relish their own child being disgraced.

Svava (half raising herself). Good Lord! is it _I_ that am disgracing
him?

Mrs. Riis. No, of course, it is he himself--

Svava. Very well, then! (Sinks down upon the couch again.)

Mrs. Riis. But you will never get them to understand that. I assure you,
you won't. As long as what he has done is only whispered about in
his family and amongst his intimate friends, they don't consider him
disgraced at all. There are too many that do just the same. It is only
when the knowledge of it becomes common property, that they consider
it a disgrace. And if it became known that there was a formal breach
between you--the Christensens' eldest son ignominiously refused because
of his past life--they would consider it the most shocking scandal that
could possibly overtake them! And we should feel the effect of it, in
particular. And so would those that are dependent on us--and they are
not so few in number, as you know, because you have interested yourself
in them, particularly in the children. You would have t. give up all the
interests you have made for Yourself here--because you would have to go
with us. I am certain your father is in earnest about that.

Svava. Oh! Oh!

Mrs. Riis. I almost wish I could tell you why I am so certain of that.
But I cannot--at all events not now. No, you must not tempt me to.--Here
comes your father. Only take time to reflect, Svava! No breaking of it
off, no scandal! (RIIS comes in from outside, with an opened letter in
his hand.)

Riis. Oh, there you are! (Goes into his room, lays down his hat and
stick, and comes out again.) You have taken no serious step yet, I
hope--eh?

Mrs. Riis. No, but--

Riis. Very well. Now here is a letter from the Christensens. If you
won't receive either your dance or his letters, you will have to put up
with his family's interference in the matter. Everything must come to an
end sooner or later. (Reads.) "My wife, my son and I will do ourselves
the honour of paying you a visit between eleven and twelve o'clock." The
only wonder is, that I have not had some such letter before this! I am
sure they have been patient enough.

Mrs. Riis. Well, we have got no farther to-day, either.

Riis. What are you thinking of, child? Can't you see what it must all
lead to? You are a good-hearted girl, I know--I am sure you don't want
to ruin us all absolutely? I certainly consider, Svava, that you have
acted quite severely enough now in this matter. They have suffered a
nasty shock to their self-confidence, both of them; you may be quite
sure of that. What more do you want? If you are really determined to
carry the matter farther--well--make your conditions! There is no doubt
they will be agreed to.

Svava. For shame! For shame!

Riis (despairingly). What is the use of taking it in this way!

Mrs. Riis. What, indeed! You ought rather to try and make things a bit
easier, Svava.

Riis. And you really might condescend, too, to consider who it is that
you are throwing over--a member of one of the richest families in the
country, and, I venture to say, one of the most honourable too. I have
never heard of anything so idiotic! Yes, I repeat--idiotic, idiotic!
What if he have made a false step--or two--well, good heavens--

Svava. Yes, bring heaven into it, too!

Riis. Indeed I well may! There is good need. As I was saying, if he have
made a false step, surely the poor fellow has been sufficiently punished
for it now. Beside it is certainly our duty to be a little reasonable
with one another--it is a commandment, you know, that we are to be
reasonable and forgiving. We must be forgiving! And more than that, we
must help the erring--we must raise up the fallen and set them in
the right way. Yes, set them in the right way. You could do that so
splendidly! It is exactly in your line. You know very well, my dear
child, it is very seldom I talk about morals and that sort of thing. It
doesn't sit well on me at all; I know that only too well. But on this
occasion I cannot help it. Begin with forgiveness, my child; begin with
that! After all, can you contemplate living together with anyone for any
length of time without--without--well, without _that_?

Svava. But there is no question of living with anyone, for any length of
time, or of forgiveness--because I do not mean to have anything more to
do with him.

Riis. Really, this is beyond all bounds! Because he has dared to fall in
love with some one before you--?

Svava. Some one?

Riis. Well, if there was more than one, I am sure I know nothing about
it. No, indeed I do not! Besides, the way people gossip and backbite is
the very devil! But, as I was saying, because he dared to look at some
one before he looked at you--before he ever _thought_ of you--is that a
reason for throwing him over for good and all? How many would ever get
married under those circumstances, I should like to know? Everybody
confirms the opinion that he is an honourable, fine young fellow, to
whom the proudest girl might confidently entrust herself--you said so
yourself, only a day or two ago! Do not deny it! And now he is suddenly
to be thrown over, because you are not the first girl he has ever met!
Pride should have some limits, remember! I have never heard of anything
more preposterous, if you ask me.

Mrs. Riis. Men are not like that.

Riis. And what about girls? Are they like that? I am quite sure they do
not ask whether their fiancés have been married before--observe, I said
"married." You can imagine he has been married. Well, why not? That is
what other girls do--you cannot deny it. I know you know it. You have
been to dances; who are most in request there? Precisely those who have
the reputation of being something of a Don Juan. They take the wind out
of all the other fellows' sails. You have seen it yourself a hundred
times. And it is not only at dances that this applied. Don't you suppose
they get married--and as a rule make the very best matches?

Mrs. Riis. That is true.

Riis. Of course it is true. And as a rule they make the very best
husbands, too!

Mrs. Riis. Hm!

Riis. Oh, indeed they do!--with some exceptions, of course, naturally.
The fact is, that marriage has an ennobling influence, and provides a
beautiful vocation for a woman--the most beautiful vocation possible!

Svava (who has got up). I can just manage to listen to such things from
you--because I expected no better from you.

Riis. Thank you very much!

Svava (who has come forward). One would really think that marriage were
a sort of superior wash-house for men--

Riis. Ha, ha!

Svava.--and that men could come there and take a dip when they
please--and in what state they please!

Riis. Oh, really--!

Svava. I mean it! And it is flattering--very flattering--for me, as your
daughter, to feel that you look upon me as so peculiarly suited for the
washerwoman's post! None of that for me, thank you!

Riis. But this is--

Svava. No, just listen to me for a little! I don't think I have said too
much, the last day or two.

Riis. No, we have not been allowed to say a word to you.

Svava. Look here, father. You have a fine supply of principles, for show
purposes.

Riis. For--?

Svava. I do not mean by that, that they are not your own. But you are
so good and so honourable, your whole life is so refined, that I do not
attach the least importance to your principles. But to mother's I do
attach importance, for hers are what have formed mine. And now just when
I want to act up to them, she deserts me.

Riis and Mrs. Riis (together). Svava!

Svava. It is mother I am angry with! It is mother I cannot have patience
with!

Riis. Really, Svava--!

Svava. Because if there has been one point on which mother and I have
been agreed, it has been on the subject of the unprincipled way men
prepare themselves for marriage, and the sort of marriages that are the
result. We have watched the course of it, mother and I, for many years;
and we had come to one and the same conclusion, that it is _before_
marriage that a marriage is marred. But when, the other day, mother
began to turn round--

Mrs. Riis. No, you have no right to say that! I am convinced that Alfred
is as honourable--

Svava. But when, the other day, mother began to turn round--well, I
could not have been more amazed if some one had come in and told me they
had met her out in the street when she was actually sitting here talking
to me.

Mrs. Riis. I only ask you to take time to consider! I am not
contradicting you!

Svava. Oh, let me speak now! Let me give you just one instance. One day,
before I was really grown up, I came running into this room from the
park. We had just bought the property, and I was so happy. Mother was
standing over there leaning against the door and crying. It was a lovely
summer's day. "Why are you crying, mother?" I said. For some time
she seemed as if she did not see me. "Why are you crying, mother?" I
repeated, and went nearer to her, but did not like to touch her. She
turned away from me, and walked up and down once or twice. Then she came
to me. "My child," she said, drawing me to her, "never give in to what
is not good and pure, on any account whatever! It is so cowardly, and
one repents it so bitterly; it means perpetually giving in, more and
more and more." I do not know what she referred to, and I have never
asked. But no one can imagine what an effect it all had on me--the
beautiful summer day, and mother crying, and the heartfelt tones of her
voice! I cannot give in; do not ask me to. Everything that made marriage
seem beautiful to me is gone--my faith, my feeling of security--all
gone! No, no, no! I can never begin with that, and it is wicked of you
to want to make me believe I can. After such a disillusionment and such
a humiliation? No! I would rather never be married--even it I have to go
away from here. I daresay I shall find something to fill my life; it is
only for the moment that I am so helpless. And anything is better
than to fill it with what is unclean. If I did not refuse that without
hesitation, I should be an accomplice to it. Perhaps some people could
put up with that. I cannot--no, I cannot. Do you think it is arrogance
on my part? Or because I am angry? If you knew what we two had planned
and schemed, you would understand me. And if you knew what I have
thought of him, how I have admired him--you did the same yourselves--and
how wretched I feel now, how utterly robbed of everything!--Who is it
that is crying? Is it you, mother? (She runs to her mother, kneels down
and buries her head in her lap. A pause. RIIS goes into his room.) Why
cannot we three hold together? If we do, what have we to be afraid of?
What is it that stands in the way? Father, what is it that stands in
the way?--But where is father? (Sees NORDAN outside the window.) Uncle
Nordan! This is a surprise! (Hurries across the room, throws herself
into NORDAN's arms as he enters, and bursts into tears.)

Nordan. Oh, you goose! You great goose!

Svava. You must come and talk to me!

Nordan. Isn't that what I am here for?

Svava. And I thought you were up in the mountains and could not hear
from us.

Nordan. So I was. But when I got telegram after telegram, as long as
they could reach me, and then one express letter after another--and now
the end of it all is--well, I don't suppose I dare even mention his name
here now? (RIIS comes in from his room.)

Riis. At last! We have been so anxious for you to come!

Mrs. Riis (who has at last risen and come forward). Thank you for
coming, dear doctor!

Nordan (looking at her). There is something serious up, then?

Mrs. Riis. I have something I want to say to you.

Nordan. Yes, but just now away you go, you two! Let me talk to this
booby. (MRS. RIIS goes out to the left. SVAVA follows her for a minute.)

Riis. I just want to tell you that in a little while--

Nordan.--the whole pack of Christensens will be here? I know that. Go
away now.

Riis. Nordan! (Whispers to him.)

Nordan. Yes, yes!--Quite so!--No, of course not! (Tries to stop his
whispering.) Do you suppose I don't know what I am about? Be off with
you! (SVAVA comes in, as her father goes out.)

Svava. Dear Uncle Nordan! At last, somebody that will agree with me!

Nordan. Am I?

Svava. Oh, Uncle Nordan, you don't know what these days have been like!

Nordan. And the nights too, I expect?--although, with all that, you
don't look so bad.

Svava. The last night or two I have slept.

Nordan. Really? Then I see how things stand. You are a tough customer,
you are!

Svava. Oh, don't begin saying a lot of things you don't mean, uncle.

Nordan. Things I don't mean!

Svava. You always do, you know. But we haven't time for that now. I am
all on fire!

Nordan. Well, what is this you have been doing?

Svava. Ah, you see, you are beginning again!

Nordan. Beginning again? Who the devil has put the idea into your head
that I ever say anything but what I mean? Come and let us sit down.
(Brings a chair forward.)

Svava (bringing her chair close to his). There now!

Nordan. Since I was here last, I believe you have promulgated a
brand-new law on the subject of love? I congratulate you.

Svava. Have I?

Nordan. A superhuman, Svava-woven one--derived from seraphic heights,
I should imagine! "There shall be only one love in a man's life, and it
shall be directed only to one object." Full stop!

Svava. Have I said anything like that?

Nordan. Is it not you that have thrown over a young man because he has
had the audacity to fall in love before he saw you?

Svava. Do you take it in that way, too?

Nordan. In that way? Is there any other way for a sensible man to take
it? A fine young fellow honesty, adores you; a distinguished family
throw their doors wide open to you, as if you were a princess; and then
you turn round and say: "You have not waited for me ever since you were
a child! Away with you!"

Svava (springing up). What, you too! You too! And the same talk! The
same stupid talk!

Nordan. I can tell you what it is; if you do not give consideration to
everything that can be said on the other side, you are stupid.--No, it
is no use going away from me and marching up and down! I shall begin and
march up and down too, if you do! Come here and sit. Or _daren't_ you go
thoroughly into the question with me?

Svava. Yes, I dare. (Sits down again.)

Nordan. Well, to begin with, do you not think there must certainly be
two sides to a question that is discussed by serious men and women all
over the world?

Svava. This only concerns me! And as far as I am concerned there is only
one side to it.

Nordan. You do not understand me, child! You shall settle your own
affairs ultimately, and nobody else--of course. But suppose what you
have to settle is not quite so simple as you think it? Suppose it is a
problem that at the present moment is exercising the minds of thousands
and thousands of people? Do you not think it is your duty to give some
consideration to the usual attitude towards it, and to what is generally
thought and said about it? Do you think it is conscientious to condemn
in a single instance without doing that?

Svava. I understand! I think I have done what you are urging me to do.
Ask mother!

Nordan. Oh, I daresay you and your mother have chattered and read a lot
about marriage and the woman question, and about abolishing distinctions
of class--now you want to abolish distinctions of sex too. But as
regards this special question?

Svava. What do you consider I have overlooked?

Nordan. Just this. Are you right in being equally as strict with men as
with women? Eh?

Svava. Yes, of course.

Nordan. Is it so much a matter of course? Go out and ask any one you
meet. Out of every hundred you ask, ninety will say "no"--even out of a
hundred women!

Svava. Do you think so? I think people are beginning to think otherwise.

Nordan. Possibly. But experience is necessary if one is to answer a
question like that.

Svava. Do you mean what you say?

Nordan. That is none of your business. Besides, I always mean what I
say.--A woman can marry when is sixteen; a man must wait till he is
five-and-twenty, or thirty. There is a difference.

Svava. There _is_ a difference! There are many, many times more
unmarried women than men, and they exhibit self-control. Men find it
more convenient to make a law of their want of self-control!

Nordan. An answer like that only displays ignorance. Man is a polygamous
animal, like many other animals--a theory that is very strongly
supported by the fact that women so outnumber men in the world. I
daresay that is something you have never heard before?

Svava. Yes, I have heard it!

Nordan. Don't you laugh at science! What else we to put faith in, I
should like to know?

Svava. I should just like men to have the same trouble over their
children that women do! Just let them have that, Uncle Nordan, and I
fancy they would soon change their principles! Just let them experience
it!

Nordan. They have no time for that; they have to govern the world.

Svava. Yes, they have allotted the parts themselves!--Now, tell me this,
Dr. Nordan. Is it cowardly not to practise what you preach?

Nordan. Of course it is.

Svava. Then why do you not do it?

Nordan. I? I have always been a regular monster. Don't you know that,
dear child?

Svava. Dear Uncle Nordan--you have such long white locks; why do you
wear them like that?

Nordan. Oh, well--I have my reasons.

Svava. What are they?

Nordan. We won't go into that now.

Svava. You told me the reason once.

Nordan. Did I?

Svava. I wanted, one day, to take hold of your hair, but you would
not let me. You said: "Do you know why you must not do that?"--"No," I
said.--"Because no one has done that for more than thirty years."--"Who
was it that did it last?" I asked.--"It was a little girl, that you are
very like," you answered.

Nordan. So I told you that, did I?

Svava. "And she was one of your grandmother's younger sisters," you said
to me.

Nordan. She was. It was quite true. And you are like her, my child.

Svava. And then you told me that the year you went to college she was
standing beside you one day and caught up some locks of your hair in her
fingers. "You must never wear your hair shorter than this," she said.
She went away, and you went away; and when, one day, you wrote and asked
her whether you two did not belong to one another, her answer was "yes."
And a month later she was dead.

Nordan. She was dead.

Svava. And ever since then--you dear, queer old uncle--you have
considered yourself as married to her. (He nods.) And ever since the
evening you told me that--and I lay awake a long time, thinking over
it--I wanted, even when I was quite a young girl, to choose some one I
could have perfect confidence in. And then I chose wrong.

Nordan. Did you, Svava?

Svava. Do not ask me any more about that.--Then I chose once again, and
this time I was certain! For never had truer eyes looked in mine. And
how happy we were together! Day after day it always seemed new, and the
days were always too short. I dare not think about now. Oh, it is sinful
to deceive us so!--not deceit in words, it is true, but in letting
us give them our admiration and our most intimate confidences. Not in
words, no--and yet, it is in words; because they accept all we say, and
are silent themselves, and by that very fact make our words their own.
Our simple-mindedness pleases them as a bit of unspoilt nature, and it
is just by means of that that they deceive us. It creates an intimacy
between us and an atmosphere of happy give-and-take of jests, which we
think can exist only on one presupposition--and really it is all a sham.
I cannot understand how any one can so treat the one he loves--for he
did love me!

Nordan. He does love you.

Svava (getting up). But not as I loved him! All these years I have not
been frittering away my love. Besides, I have had too high an ideal of
what loving and being loved should be; and just for that reason I felt a
deep desire to be loved--I can say so to you. And when love came, seemed
to take all my strength from me; but I felt I should always be safe with
him, and so I let him see it and gloried in his seeing it. That is the
bitterest part of it to me now--because he was unworthy of it. He has
said to me: "I cannot bear to see any one else touch you!" and "When I
catch a glimpse of your arm, I think to myself that it has been round my
neck--mine, and no one else's in the world." And I felt proud and happy
when he said so, because I thought it was true. Hundreds of times I had
imagined some one's saying that to me some day. But I never imagined
that the one who would say it would be a man who--oh, it is disgusting!
When I think what it means, it makes me ready to hate him. The mere
thought that he has had his arms round me--has touched me--makes me
shudder! I am not laying down rules for any one else, but what I am
doing seems to me a matter of course. Every fibre of my being tells me
that. I must be left in peace!

Nordan. I see that this is more serious, and goes deeper, than I had any
suspicion of. None of them understand it that way, Alfred least of
all. He is only hurt--distressed and hurt at the thought that you could
distrust him.

Svava. I know that.

Nordan. Yes--well--don't take up such a high and mighty attitude! I
assure you that is how it will appear to most people.

Svava. Do you think so? I think people are beginning to think otherwise.

Nordan. Most people will think: "Other girls forgive things like that,
especially when they love a man."

Svava. There are some that will answer: "If she had not loved him, she
might have forgiven him."

Nordan. And yet, Svava?--and yet?

Svava. But, uncle, do you not understand? I do not know that I can
explain it, either; because, to do that, I should have to explain what
it is that we read into the face, the character, the manner of the man
we love--his voice, his smile. That is what I have lost. Its meaning is
gone.

Nordan. For a while, yes--till you have had a breathing space.

Svava. No, no, no! Do you remember that song of mine, about the beloved
one's image? that one always sees it as if it were framed in happiness?
Do you remember it?

Nordan. Yes.

Svava. Very well--I cannot see it like that any longer. I see it, of
course--but always with pain. Always! Am I to forgive that, because
other girls forgive it? What is that they have loved, these other girls?
Can you tell me that? Because what I loved is gone. I am not going to
sit down and try to conjure it up in my imagination again. I shall find
something else to do.

Nordan. You are embittered now. You have had your ideal thoroughly
shattered, and as long as you are smarting from that it is no use
reasoning with you. So I will only beg one thing of you--one single
little thing. But you must promise me to do it?

Svava. If I can.

Nordan. You can. There are things to take into consideration. Ask for
time to think it all over!

Svava. Ah!--mother has been writing to you!

Nordan. And if she has? Your mother knows what depends upon it.

Svava. What depends upon it? Why do you speak so mysteriously, as if we
were not on secure ground? Aren't we? Father talks about giving up this
place. Why?

Nordan. I suppose he thinks it will be necessary.

Svava. Father? On grounds of economy?

Nordan. Not in the least! No, but all the gossips in the place will be
at you. What you propose to do is a regular challenge, you know.

Svava. Oh, we can stand criticism! Father has some queer principles, you
know; but his own life--. Surely no one has any doubt about that?

Nordan. Listen to me, my child. You cannot prevent people inventing
things. So be careful!

Svava. What do you mean?

Nordan. I mean that you ought to go for a stroll in the park and pull
yourself together a little, before the Christensens come. Try to be
calm; come in calmly, and request time to think it over. That is all you
have to do! They will make no difficulty about that, because they must
agree. Nothing has happened yet, and all ways are still open. Do as I
ask!

Svava. I _have_ thought it over--and you will never get me to do
anything else.

Nordan. No, no. It is only a matter of form.

Svava. What? You mean something more than that, I know.

Nordan. What an obstinate girl you are!--Can you not do it then, let me
say, for your mother's sake? Your mother is a good woman.

Svava. What will they think, if I come in and say: "Will you not give me
time to consider the matter?" No, I cannot do that.

Nordan. What will you say, then?

Svava. I would rather say nothing at all. But if I absolutely must say
something--

Nordan. Of course you must!

Svava. Well, I will go out now and think it over. (Turns to go, but
stops.) But what you want can never be.

Nordan. It must be!

Svava (standing by the door). You said just now: "Your mother is a good
woman." It sounded almost as if you laid stress on the word "mother"?

Nordan. Suppose I did?

Svava. Is father not that, too?

Nordan. Your father a good woman?

Svava. Why do you try to turn it off with a joke?

Nordan. Because it is serious, confound it all!

Svava. Can I not believe father--?

Nordan. Hush!

Svava. Father?--Is it possible that he too--? Do people say that?
(NORDAN does not answer, and does not move.) Shameful! Impossible! I say
it is impossible! (Rushes out. RIIS comes in from the right.)

Riis. What is the matter with Svava?

Nordan (coming forward). There was nothing else for it.

Riis. Nothing else for it? What do you mean?

Nordan. No, devil take it!--there was nothing else for it.

Riis. Quite so--but what?

Nordan. What do you say?

Riis. No, what were you saying--?

Nordan. What was I saying?

Riis. You said there was nothing else for it. You alarm me.

Nordan. Do I? Then you did not hear right. (Moves away from him.)

Riis. Didn't hear right? You were swearing about it too!

Nordan. That I certainly did not.

Riis. Very well then, you didn't. But how did you get on with Svava?
Won't you answer me?

Nordan. How did I get on with Svava?

Riis. Why are you so preoccupied? Are things so bad, then?

Nordan. Preoccupied? Why should I be that?

Riis. You ought to know best. I was asking about Svava--how you got on
with Svava--and I think I have the right to know.

Nordan. Look here, Riis.

Riis. Yes? (NORDAN takes him by the arm.) What is it?

Nordan. Did you see Svava?

Riis. Hurrying away out through the park? Yes. My dear chap, what was
it?

Nordan. It was the Greek tragedy.

Riis. The Greek--?

Nordan. Only the name--only the name! Well, you know what the word
means, don't you?

Riis. The Greek--?

Nordan. No, no--not "Greek," but "tragedy"?

Riis. Something mournful--?

Nordan. Far from it! Something amusing! It came to Greece with the
worship of Dionysus, in whose train there was a goat--

Riis (draws his arm away). A goat? What on earth--?

Nordan. Yes, you may well be surprised--because it sang!

Riis. Sang?

Nordan. Yes--and is still singing, of course! And paints! There are
pictures by him in every exhibition. And works in bronze and marble!
Wonderful! And such a courtier as he is, too! It is he that designs
ball-dresses and arranges entertainments--

Riis. Have you gone raving mad?

Nordan. Why do you ask that?

Riis. I am waiting patiently here till you have done talking such damned
nonsense! We are accustomed to something of the sort when you are in one
of those humours, but to-day I can't understand a blessed word of what
you are saying.

Nordan. Don't you, my dear fellow?

Riis. Can you not tell me what my daughter said? Isn't it ridiculous
that I cannot get that out of you! Now, briefly and intelligibly, what
did she say?

Nordan. Do you want to know?

Riis. He asks that!

Nordan. She said she pitied all the innocent young girls that,
generation after generation, disappear--

Riis. Where to?

Nordan. That is just it--where to? She said: "They are brought up in
pious ignorance, and finally the unsuspecting creatures are wrapped up
in a long white veil that they shall not be able to see distinctly where
they are being taken to."

Riis. Now you are talking your mythology again. Am I not to--

Nordan. Be quiet! It is your daughter that is speaking. "But I will not
do that," she said. "I will enter confidently into the holy estate of
matrimony, and sit down by the hearth in the land of my fathers, and
bring up children in the sight of my husband. But he shall be as chaste
as I; for otherwise he stains my child's head, when he kisses it,
and dishonours me."--There, that is what she said, and she looked so
splendid as she said it. (A ring is heard at the bell.)

Riis. They are upon us! They are upon us! What in the world is going to
happen? We are in a muddle of the most preposterous theories! The whole
heathen mythology is buzzing round in my head! (Hurries to the door to
meet MR. and MRS. CHRISTENSEN, whom MARGIT is showing in.) I am so happy
to see you!--so very happy! But your son?

Christensen. We could not get him to come with us.

Riis. I am very sorry!--At the same time, I quite understand.

Christensen. I admire the beauty of this place afresh every time I see
it, my dear sir!

Mrs. Christensen. This beautiful old park! I wanted once--. Oh, good
morning, doctor! How are you?

Nordan. So, so!

Riis (to MARGIT). Please tell Mrs. Riis. And--oh, there she is. (MRS.
RIIS comes in by the door at the left.) And tell Miss Svava.

Nordan. She is out in the park (pointing)--out that way. (Exit MARGIT.)

Riis. No, this way!--That's right! Go straight on till you find her.

Mrs. Christensen (who meantime has come forward with MRS. RIIS). I have
been thinking so much about you the last day or two, my dear! What a
tiresome business this is!

Mrs. Riis. Do you mind my asking if you knew anything about it before?

Mrs. Christensen. What is there that a mother--and a wife--escapes the
knowledge of nowadays, my dear! She was in my service, you know. Come
here! (Tells MRS. RIIS something in a whisper, ending with something
about "discovery" and "dismissal.")

Riis (offering the ladies chairs). Won't you sit down?--Oh, I beg your
pardon! I did not see--. (Hurries to CHRISTENSEN.) Excuse me, but are
you really comfortable in that chair?

Christensen. Thank you, I am just as uncomfortable here as anywhere
else. It is the sitting down and getting up again that bothers me more
than anything else. (Looks round.) I have just been to see him.

Riis. Hoff?

Christensen. Honest fellow. Stupid.

Riis. So long as he holds his tongue--

Christensen. He'll do that.

Riis. Thank heaven for that! Then we have only ourselves to consider. I
suppose it cost you a bit?

Christensen. Not a penny!

Riis. You got out of it cheap, then.

Christensen. Yes, didn't I? Still, as a matter of fact, he has cost me
quite enough already--although he knows nothing about that.

Riis. Indeed? When he failed, I suppose.

Christensen. No, when he married.

Riis. Oh, I understand.

Christensen. And I didn't think I should hear any more about it after
that.--You ladies seem to be having a fine game of whispering! (MRS.
CHRISTENSEN comes forward. RIIS places chairs for her and his wife.)

Mrs. Christensen. I was telling Mrs. Riis about the Miss Tang affair.
She really seems to have risen from her grave!

Christensen. Is your daughter at home, may I ask?

Riis. I have sent to fetch her.

Mrs. Christensen. I hope the last few days have taught her a lesson too,
poor girl! She suffers from a fault that unusually clever people are
very liable to--I mean self-righteousness.

Riis. Exactly! You are perfectly right! But I should call it arrogance!

Mrs. Christensen. I should not like to say that--but presumption,
perhaps.

Mrs. Riis. Why do you say that, Mrs. Christensen?

Mrs. Christensen. Because of various conversations I have had with her.
I was speaking to her once about a man's being his wife's master. In
these days it is a good thing to impress that on young girls.

Christensen. Yes, indeed!

Mrs. Christensen. And when I reminded her of certain words of St.
Paul's, she said: "Yes, it is behind those bars that we women are still
shut up." Then I knew that something would happen. Pride goes before a
fall, you know.

Christensen. Oh, come, come! That won't do at all! Your chain of
reasoning isn't sound!

Mrs. Christensen. How?

Christensen. It is not. Because in the first place it was not Miss Riis
that fell, but your precious son. And in the second place his fall was
not a consequence of Miss Riis's pride, because of course it happened
many years before Miss Riis showed any of her pride. So that if you knew
that his fall would happen as a consequence of Miss Riis's pride, you
knew something that you certainly did not know.

Mrs. Christensen. Oh, you are making fun of me!

Christensen. I ought to be at a committee meeting punctually at
one.--May I ask what has become of your daughter?

Riis. Indeed I am really beginning to wonder--(During the foregoing,
NORDAN has remained in the background, sometimes in the room and
sometimes outside in the park. MARGIT now goes fast the window outside,
and NORDAN is heard speaking to her.)

Nordan. Have you only just found her?

Margit. No, sir--I have been down once already to take Miss Riis her
hat, gloves and parasol.

Nordan. Is she going out?

Margit. I don't know, sir. (Goes out.)

Christensen. Dear me!

Riis. What does it mean? (Turns to go and fetch her.)

Nordan. No, no! Do not you go!

Mrs. Riis. I expect I had better go--

Riis. Yes, you go!

Nordan. No, I will go. I am afraid I am responsible for--. (As he goes)
I'll answer for it I will bring her back!

Christensen. Dear me!

Mrs. Christensen (getting up). I am afraid, my dear Mrs. Riis, we have
come at an inconvenient time for your daughter?

Riis. Ah, you must be lenient with her! I assure you it is these
high-flown ideas--this reading, that her mother has not been nearly firm
enough in keeping her from.

Mrs. Riis. I? What are you talking about?

Riis. I say that this is a very important moment! And at moments like
this one sees very clearly, very--well, that is what happens!

Christensen. Your husband, Mrs. Riis, has suddenly had the same sort of
revelation as our parson had lately--I should say, my wife's parson. It
was one day just after dinner--after an extremely good dinner, by the
way--a moment when a man often has very bright ideas. We were talking
about all the things a woman has to learn now, as compared with the old
days, and how some people say it is mere waste of time because she will
forget it all again when she marries. "Yes," said parson, looking very
pleased, "my wife has completely forgotten how to spell; I hope she will
soon forget how to write, too!"

Mrs. Christensen. You imitate people so well, that one cannot help
laughing--although it isn't right. (CHRISTENSEN looks at his watch.)

Riis. It doesn't look as if they were coming back?--Will you go, or
shall I?

Mrs. Riis (getting up). I will go. But you could not expect them
already--

Riis (coming close up to her and speaking in an undertone). This is your
doing! I see it clearly!

Mrs. Riis. I do not think you know what you are saying. (Goes out.)

Riis (coming forward). I really must apologise most humbly! It is the
last thing I should ever have expected of Svava--because I pride myself
that the obligations of courtesy have never been disregarded in my house
before.

Mrs. Christensen. Perhaps something has happened?

Riis. I beg your pardon?--Good heavens!

Mrs. Christensen. Oh, do not misunderstand me! I only mean that
young girls are so easily agitated, and then they do not like to show
themselves.

Riis. All the same, Mrs. Christensen, all the same! At such a moment as
this, too!--You really must excuse me, I shall have no peace till I find
out for myself what has happened! (Hurries out.)

Christensen. If Alfred had been here, I suppose he would have been
running about all over the park after these females, too.

Mrs. Christensen. Really, my dear!

Christensen. Aren't we alone?

Mrs. Christensen. Yes, but still--!

Christensen. Well, I say, as a certain famous man said before me: "What
the devil was he doing in that galley?"

Mrs. Christensen. Do have a moment's patience! It is really necessary.

Christensen. Bah! Necessary! Riis is more afraid of a rupture than any
of us. Did you see him just now?

Mrs. Christensen. Yes, of course I did, but--

Christensen. She has already gone much farther than she has any right
to.

Mrs. Christensen. So Alfred thinks, too.

Christensen. Then he should have been here now, to say so. I asked him
to come.

Mrs. Christensen. He is in love, and that makes a man a little timid.

Christensen. Nonsense!

Mrs. Christensen. Oh, that passes off when one is in love as often as
you are. (Gets up.) Here they come!--No, not Svava.

Christensen. Is she not with them?

Mrs. Christensen. I don't see her.

Riis (appearing at the door). Here they are!

Mrs. Christensen. And your daughter too?

Riis. Yes, Svava too. She asked the others to go on ahead of her. I
expect she wanted to collect herself a little.

Mrs. Christensen (sitting down again). Ah, you see, it was just what I
thought, poor child!

Mrs. Riis (coming in). She will be here in a moment! (Goes up to MRS.
CHRISTENSEN.) You must forgive her, Mrs. Christensen; she has had a bad
time of it.

Mrs. Christensen. Bless my soul, of course I understand that! The first
time one has an experience of this kind, it tells on one.

Christensen. This is positively beginning to get amusing!

[Enter NORDAN.]

Nordan. Here we are! She asked me to come on little ahead of her.

Riis. She is not going to keep us waiting any longer, I hope?

Nordan. She was just behind me.

Riis. Here she is! (Goes to the door to meet her; NORDAN and MRS. RIIS
do the same from the other side of the room.)

Christensen. One would think she were the Queen of Sheba.

(SVAVA comes in, wearing her hat, and with her gloves and parasol in her
hand. CHRISTENSEN and MRS. CHRISTENSEN get up from their seats. She bows
slightly to them, and comes to the front of the stage on the right-hand
side. All sit down in silence. NORDAN is at the extreme left, then MRS.
RIIS, MRS. CHRISTENSEN and CHRISTENSEN. At the extreme right, but a
little behind the others, is RIIS, who is sitting down one minute and
standing the next.)

Mrs. Christensen. My dear Svava, we have come here to--well, you know
what we have come for. What has happened has distressed us very much;
but what is done cannot be undone. None of us can excuse Alfred. But all
the same we think that he might be granted forgiveness, especially
at the hands of one who must know that he loves her, and loves her
sincerely. That makes it a different matter altogether, of course.

Christensen. Of course!

Riis. Of course!

Nordan. Of course!

Mrs. Christensen. And, even if you don't quite agree with me about that,
I hope you will agree with me about Alfred himself. I mean to say, that
we consider his character, my dear Svava, should vouch to you for his
fidelity. I know that, if you require it, he will give you his word of
honour that--

Mrs. Riis (getting up). No! No!

Mrs. Christensen. What is the matter, my dear Mrs. Riis?

Mrs. Riis. No words of honour! He has to take an oath when he marries,
anyway.

Nordan. But surely two make it all the safer, Mrs. Riis?

Mrs. Riis. No, no! No oath! (Sits down again.)

Christensen. I was struck with our friend Dr. Nordan's remark. Tell me,
my dear sir, do you also take it for granted that the sort of thing my
son has done ought to be an absolute bar to marriage with an honourable
woman?

Nordan. Quite the contrary! I am quite sure it never prevents any one
getting married--and remarkably well married. It is only Svava that is
behaving in an extraordinary manner in every respect.

Mrs. Christensen. I would not go so far as to say that; but there is one
thing that Svava has overlooked. She is acting as if she were free. But
she is not by any means free. A betrothal is equivalent to a marriage;
at any rate, I am old-fashioned enough to consider it so, And the man to
whom I have given my hand is thereby made my master and given authority
over me, and I owe to him--as to a superior authority--my respect,
whether he act well or ill. I cannot give him notice, or run away from
him.

Riis. That is old-fashioned and sensible. I thank you heartily, Mrs.
Christensen!

Nordan. And I too!

Mrs. Riis. But if it is too late after the betrothal--. (Checks
herself.)

Mrs. Christensen. What do you mean, dear Mrs. Riis?

Mrs. Riis. Oh, nothing nothing at all.

Nordan. Mrs. Riis means that if it is too late after the betrothal, why
do people not speak out before they are betrothed?

Riis. What a thing to say!

Christensen. Well, it wouldn't be such a bad thing, would it? I imagine
proposals in future being worded somewhat in this way: "My dear
Miss So-and-So, up to date I have had such and such a number of love
affairs--that is to say, so many big ones and so many little ones."
Don't you think it would be a capital way to lead the conversation on
to--

Nordan.--to assuring her that she is the only one you have ever loved?

Christensen. Well, not exactly that, but--

Riis. Here comes Alfred!

Mrs. Riis. Alfred?

Mrs. Christensen. Yes, it really is he!

Riis (who has gone to the door to meet ALFRED). Ah, that is right! We
are so glad you have come!

Christensen. Well, my boy?

Alfred. When it came to the point, I could not do anything else--I had
to come here.

Christensen. I quite agree with you.

Riis. Yes, it was only the natural thing to do. (ALFRED comes forward
and bows respectfully to SVAVA. She bows slightly, but without looking
at him. He steps back again.)

Nordan. Good morning, my boy!

Alfred. Perhaps I have come at an inconvenient moment.

Riis. Not a bit of it! Quite the contrary!

Alfred. At the same time, it seems evident to me that my presence is not
welcome to Miss Riis. (No one answers him.)

Mrs. Christensen. But it is a family council we are holding--isn't it,
my dear girl?

Riis. I assure you, you _are_ welcome! And we are all particularly
anxious to hear what you have to say!

Christensen. That is so.

Alfred. I have not succeeded in getting a hearing yet, you know. I have
been refused admittance repeatedly--both in person and when I wrote. So
I thought that if I came now, perhaps I should get a hearing.

Riis. Of course. Who can object to that?

Nordan. You shall have your hearing.

Alfred. Perhaps I may take Miss Riis's silence to mean permission? In
that case--well--it is nothing so very much that I have to say, either.
It is merely to remind you that, when I asked for Miss Riis's hand, it
was because I loved her with all my heart--her and no one else. I could
not imagine any greater happiness, and any greater honour, than to
be loved by her in return. And so I think still. (He pauses, as if he
expected an answer. They all look at SVAVA.) What explanation I could
have given of my own free will--indeed what explanation, under other
circumstances, I should have felt impelled to give--I shall say nothing
about now. But I _owe_ no explanation! My honour demands that I should
make point of that. It is my future that I owe to her. And with regard
to that I must confess I have been hurt--deeply hurt--by the fact that
Miss Riis could doubt me for a moment. Never in my life has any one
doubted me before. With all respect, I must insist that my word shall be
taken. (They are all silent.) That is all I have to say.

Mrs. Riis (getting up unwillingly). But, Alfred, suppose a woman, under
the same circumstances, had come and said the same thing--who would
believe her? (They are all silent. SVAVA bursts into tears.)

Mrs. Christensen. Poor child!

Riis. Believe her?

Mrs. Riis. Yes, believe her. Believe her if, after past like that, she
came and assured us that she would make an honest wife?

Christensen. After a past like that?

Mrs. Riis. Perhaps that is putting it too harshly. But why should you
require her to believe a man any more readily than a man would believe
her? Because he would not believe her for a moment.

Riis (coming up behind her). Are you absolutely mad?

Christensen (half rising). Excuse me, ladies and gentlemen; the two
young people must settle the affair now! (Sits down again.)

Alfred. I must confess I have never thought of what Mrs. Riis has just
said, because such a thing never could happen. No man of honour would
choose a woman of whose past he was not certain. Never!

Mrs. Riis. But what about a woman of honour, Alfred?

Alfred. Ah, that is quite different.

Nordan. To put it precisely: a woman owes a man both her past and her
future; a man owes a woman only his future.

Alfred. Well, if you like to put it that way--yes.

Nordan (to SVAVA, as he gets up). I wanted you to postpone your answer,
my child. But now I think you ought to answer at once. (SVAVA goes up to
ALFRED, flings her glove in his face, and goes straight into her room.
ALFRED turns and looks after her. RIIS disappears into his room on the
right. Every one has risen from their seats. MRS. CHRISTENSEN takes
ALFRED by the arm and goes nut with him; CHRISTENSEN follows them. MRS.
RIIS is standing at the door of the room which SVAVA has locked after
her.)

Nordan. That was throwing down a gauntlet, if you like!

Mrs. Riis (calling through the door). Svava!

Christensen (coming in and speaking to NORDAN, who has taken no notice
of him and has not turned round). Then it is to be war?--Well, I fancy I
know a thing or two about war. (Goes out. NORDAN turns round and stands
looking after him.)

Mrs. Riis (still at the door). Svava! (RIIS comes rushing out of his
room, with his hat on and his gloves and stick in his hand, and follows
the CHRISTENSENS.) Svava!




ACT III


SCENE I

(SCENE.--DR. NORDAN'S garden, behind his neat one-storied house. He is
sitting on a chair in the foreground reading. His old servant, THOMAS,
opens the how door and looks out.)

Thomas. Doctor!

Nordan. What is it? (ALFRED comes into sight in the doorway.) Oh, it is
you! (Gets up.) Well, my boy? You don't look up to much!

Alfred. No, but never mind that. Can you give me a bit of breakfast?

Nordan. Have you had no breakfast yet? Have you not been home then?--not
been home all night?--not since yesterday? (Calls) Thomas!

Alfred. And when I have had something to eat, may I have a talk with
you?

Nordan. Of course, my dear boy. (To THOMAS, who has come out of the
house) Get some breakfast laid in that room, please (pointing to a
window on the left).

Alfred. And may I have a wash too?

Nordan. Go with Thomas. I will be with you directly. (ALFRED and THOMAS
go into the house. Then a carriage is heard stopping outside.) There is
a carriage. Go and see who it is, Thomas. I won't see any patients! I am
going away to-morrow.

Thomas. It is Mr. Christensen. (Goes into the house again.)

Nordan. Oho! (Goes to the window on the left.) Alfred!

Alfred (coming to the window). Yes?

Nordan. It is your father! If you do not want to be seen, pull down the
blind. (The blind is dulled dawn.)

Thomas (showing in CHRISTENSEN). Will you come this way please, sir.
(CHRISTENSEN is in court dress protected by a dustcoat, and wears the
cross of a Knight Commander of the Order of St. Olaf.)

Christensen. I hope I do not disturb you, doctor?

Nordan. Not at all!--In full dress! I congratulate you.

Christensen. Yes, we newly-fledged knights have to go to Court to-day.
But do you mind if I spend a minute or two here with you before I go on
to the palace?--Any news from over there? From the Riis's?

Nordan. No. They are sitting waiting for the "war" to begin, I expect.

Christensen. They shall not have to wait long, then! I have made up
my mind to begin it to-day. Has she come to her senses, by any chance?
Women usually feel things like that very acutely. But they usually get
over it, too.

Nordan. I do not think so. But I bow before your experience.

Christensen. Thank you! I should think that, as an old hand at playing
the buffer in family jars, you had a much greater experience. Yesterday
she was like an electric eel! And she gave her shock, too! The boy has
not been home since. I am almost glad of that; it shows he has some
sense of shame. I was beginning to doubt it.

Nordan. It is the coming "war" that interests me.

Christensen. Oh, you are anxious to see that, are you? Very well. As
a matter of fact there is no need to draw up a plan of campaign. That
affair of Mrs. North's can be taken up again any day, my dear fellow! It
is in the hands of the bank, you know.

Nordan. But what has that to do with your son engagement?

Christensen. What has it to do with it? Miss Riis gives my son his
dismissal because she cannot tolerate his conduct before marriage. Her
own father indulges in the same sort of conduct when he is well on in
married life! Tableau vivant très curieux!--to use a language Mr. Riis
is very fond of.

Nordan. It is a shame to talk like that--because your son is the only
one to blame in this matter.

Christensen. My son is not in the least to blame in the matter! He
has not done the slightest thing that could harm or discredit the
Riis's--not the slightest thing! He is a man of honour, who has given
Miss Riis his promise and has kept it. Will any one dare to contradict
that? Or to suggest that he will not keep his promise? If any one doubts
him, it is an insult. Dr. Nordan! In this matter the alternatives are
either an apology and peace--or war. For I am not going to put up with
this sort of thing; and if my son puts up with it, I shall despise him.

Nordan. Oh, I quite believe your son had every honourable intention
when he gave his promise. And very likely he would have kept it, too; I
cannot say for certain, because I have learnt to doubt. I am a doctor--I
have seen too much--and he did not appear to great advantage yesterday.
You really must forgive my saying so--but after the liveliness of his
young days, coupled with the tendencies he has inherited, do you think
he really had any right to be surprised if people doubted him?--if his
fiancée doubted him? Had he really any right to feel insulted, or
to demand apologies? Apologies for what? For having doubted his
virtue?--Just consider that!

Christensen. Why, what--?

Nordan. One moment! I was only half done. You said something about a
reconciliation, you know; of course by that you meant a marriage. If
your son is willing to marry a woman who distrusts him, then I shall
despise him.

Christensen. Really--!

Nordan. Yes, indeed I shall. Our opinions are as different as all that.
To my way of thinking, your son's only course is to submit--and wait; to
keep silence, and wait--always supposing, of course, that he still loves
her. That is my view of it.

Christensen. Well, I imagine that there are very few candidates for
matrimony who have not been guilty of what my son has been guilty of;
indeed, I am sure of it. And I imagine, too, that they have the same
unfortunate "hereditary tendencies"--an expression on which you laid
stress out of special friendship for me. But is that any reason
why girls who are betrothed should behave as Miss Riis has been
doing?--scream, and run away, and create a scandal? We should not be
able to hear ourselves speak! It would be the queerest sort of anarchy
the world has ever seen! Why, such doctrines as that are contrary to
the very nature and order of things! They are mad! And when, into the
bargain, they are thrown at our heads as if they were decisions of a
High Court of Morality--well, then I strike! Good-bye! (Starts to go,
but turns back.) And who is it that these High Court of Morality's
decisions would for the most part affect, do you suppose? Just the
ablest and most vigorous of our young men. Are we going to turn them
out and make a separate despised caste of them? And what things would
be affected, do you suppose? A great part of the world's literature and
art; a great part of all that is loveliest and most captivating in the
life of to-day; the world's greatest cities, most particularly--those
wonders of the world--teeming with their millions of people! Let me
tell you this: the life that disregards marriage or loosens the bonds of
marriage, or transforms the whole institution--you know very well what
I mean--the life that is accused of using the "weapons of seduction" in
its fashions, its luxury, its entertainments, its art, its theatre--that
life is one of the most potent factors in these teeming cities, one of
the most fruitful sources of their existence! No one who has seen it can
have any doubt about it, however ingenuous he may pretend to be. Are we
to wish to play havoc with all that too?--to disown the flower of the
world's youth, and ruin the world's finest cities? It seems to me that
people wish to do so much in the name of morality, that they end by
wishing to do what would be subversive of all morality.

Nordan. You are certainly embarking on your little war in the true
statesmanlike spirit!

Christensen. It is nothing but sound common-sense, my dear sir; that
is all that is necessary, I am sure. I shill have the whole town on my
side, you may be certain of that!

Thomas (appearing at the house door). Doctor!

Nordan (turning round). Is it possible! (Hurries to the doorway, in
which MRS. RIIS appears.)

Mrs. Riis. May I--?

Nordan. Of course! Will you come out here?

Mrs. Riis (to CHRISTENSEN, who bows to her). My visit is really to you,
Mr. Christensen.

Christensen. I am honoured.

Mrs. Riis. I happened to look out into the street just as your
carriage stopped and you got out. So I thought I would seize the
opportunity--because you threatened us yesterday, you know. Is that not
so? You declared war against us?

Christensen. My recollection of it is that war was declared, Mrs. Riis,
but that I merely accepted the challenge.

Mrs. Riis. And what line is your campaign going to take, if I may ask
the question?

Christensen. I have just had the honour of explaining my position to the
doctor. I do not know whether it would be gallant to do as much to you.

Nordan. I will do it, then. The campaign will be directed against your
husband. Mr. Christensen takes the offensive.

Mrs. Riis. Naturally!--because you know you can strike at him. But I
have come to ask you to think better of it.

Christensen (with a laugh). Really?

Mrs. Riis. Once--many years ago now--I took my child in my arms and
threatened to leave my husband. Thereupon he mentioned the name
of another man, and shielded himself behind that--for it was a
distinguished name. "See how lenient that man's wife is," he said. "And,
because she is so, all her friends are lenient, and that will be all the
better for their child." Those were his words.

Christensen. Well, as far as the advice they implied was concerned, it
was good advice--and no doubt you followed it.

Mrs. Riis. The position of a divorced woman is a very humiliating one
in the eyes of the world, and the daughter of such a woman fares very
little better. The rich and distinguished folk who lead the fashion take
care of that.

Christensen. But what--?

Mrs. Riis. That is my excuse for not having the courage to leave him. I
was thinking of my child's future. But it is my husband's excuse, too;
because he is one of those who follows the example of others.

Christensen. We all do that, Mrs. Riis.

Mrs. Riis. But it is the leaders of society that set the example, for
the most part; and in this matter they set a tempting one. I suppose I
can hardly be mistaken in thinking that I have heard your view of this
matter, all along, through my husband's mouth? Or, if I am mistaken in
that, I at all events surely heard it more accurately yesterday, when I
heard your voice in everything that your son said?

Christensen. I stand by every word of what my son said.

Mrs. Riis. I thought so. This campaign of yours will really be a
remarkable one! I see your influence in everything that has happened,
from first to last. You are the moving spirit of the whole campaign--on
both sides!

Nordan. Before you answer, Christensen--may I ask you, Mrs. Riis, to
consider whether you want to make the breach hopelessly irreparable?
Do you mean to make a reconciliation between the young people quite
impossible?

Mrs. Riis. It is impossible, as it is.

Nordan. Why?

Mrs. Riis. Because all confidence is destroyed.

Nordan. More so now than before?

Mrs. Riis. Yes. I will confess that up to the moment. When Alfred's word
of honour was offered yesterday--up to the moment when he demanded that
his word of honour should be believed--I did not recognise the fact that
it was my own story over again. But it was--word for word my own story!
That was just the way we began; who will vouch for it that the sequel
would not be the same as in our case?

Christensen. My son's character will vouch for that, Mrs. Riis!

Mrs. Riis. Character? A nice sort of character a man is likely to
develop who indulges in secret and illicit courses from his boyhood!
That is the very way faithlessness is bred. If any one wants to know the
reason why character is such a rare thing, I think they will find the
answer in that.

Christensen. A man's youth is by no means the test of his life. That
depends on his marriage.

Mrs. Riis. And why should a man's faithlessness disappear when he is
married? Can you tell me that?

Christensen. Because then he loves, of course.

Mrs. Riis. Because he loves? But do you mean that he has not loved
before then? How absolutely you men have blinded yourselves!--No, love
is not the least likely to be lasting when the will is vitiated. And
that is what it is--vitiated by the life a bachelor leads.

Christensen. And yet I know plenty of sensual men who have strong wills.

Mrs. Riis. I am not speaking of strength of will, but of purity,
faithfulness, nobility of will.

Christensen. Well, if my son is to be judged by any such nonsensical
standard as that, I am devoutly thankful he has got out of the whole
thing before it became serious--indeed I am! Now we have had enough of
this. (Prepares to go.)

Mrs. Riis. As far as your son is concerned--. (Turns to NORDAN.) Doctor,
answer me this, so that his father may hear it before he goes. When you
refused to go with us to the betrothal party, had you already heard some
thing about Alfred Christensen? Was what you had heard of such a nature
that you felt you could not trust him?

Nordan (after a moment's thought). Not altogether, certainly.

Mrs. Riis (to CHRISTENSEN). There, you hear!--But will you let me ask
you this, doctor: why did you not say so? Good God, why did you not
speak?

Nordan. Listen to me, Mrs. Riis. When two young people, who after all
are suited to one another--for they are that, are they not?

Christensen. They are that, I admit.

Nordan. When all of a sudden they fall madly in love with one another,
what are you to do?

Christensen. Oh, rake up all sorts of stories and exaggerations--create
a scandal!

Nordan. Indeed, I must confess--what as a matter of fact I have
said--that I have become accustomed to things not being exactly as they
should be in that respect. I looked upon these young people's engagement
in the same light as I have looked on others--on most others--that is
cruel to say, as a lottery. It might turn out well; on the other hand it
might turn out very badly.

Mrs. Riis. And you were willing to risk my daughter, whom you are
so fond of--for I know you are fond of her--in a lottery? Could one
possibly have a clearer proof of the real state of things?

Nordan. Yes, certainly! You yourself, Mrs. Riis--what did you do?

Mrs. Riis. I--?

Christensen. Bravo!

Nordan. You knew what Hoff had said--and more too. (CHRISTENSEN laughs
quietly.) Nevertheless you helped your husband, if not actually to try
and get her to overlook it, at all events to smooth things over.

Christensen. Bravo!

Nordan. And you called in my help to induce her to take time to think it
over.

Christensen. Mothers observe a considerable difference between theory
and practice in these matters, I notice.

Nordan. It was only when I saw how deeply it affected Svava--what
a horror she had of it--that my eyes were opened. And the longer I
listened to her, the more sympathy I felt for her; for I was young
myself once--and loved. But that was such a long time ago--and I have
grown tired--

Mrs. Riis (who has sat down at the little table). My God!

Nordan. Yes, Mrs. Riis. Let me tell you candidly--it is the mothers, and
no one else, that by degrees have made me callous. Mothers look upon the
whole thing so callously. The fact is that as a rule they know what is
what.

Christensen. That they do, the dear creatures! And Mrs. Riis is no
exception to the rule. You must admit, my dear madam, that you did all
you could to hold on to a young man who had had a lively past? Not to
mention the fact that this same young man had an extremely good social
position--a thing I only allude to incidentally.

Nordan. Exactly. Rather than not give their daughters a prospect of what
they call "a good marriage" they straightway forget all that they have
suffered themselves.

Mrs. Riis. You see, we do not know that it will turn out the same in
their case.

Nordan. You don't know it?

Mrs. Riis. No, I tell you that I did not think so! We believe that the
man our daughter is going to marry is so much better. We believe that
in their case there are stronger guarantees--that the circumstances are
altogether different. It is so! It is a kind of illusion that takes hold
of us.

Christensen. When there is a prospect of a good marriage, yes! I
entirely agree with you, Mrs. Riis--for the first time. Moreover, I
think there is another side to it. Isn't it possible that women have not
suffered so much after all from the fact that men are men? What? I
fancy the suffering has been more acute than serious--something like
sea-sickness; when it is over--well, it is over. And so when it is the
daughters' turn to go on board, the dear mothers think: "Oh, they will
be able to get over it too! Only let us get them off!" For they are so
anxious to get them off, that is the truth!

Mrs. Riis (getting up and coming forward). Well, if it is so, surely it
is nothing to make fun of! It only shows what a woman can sink to, from
living with a man.

Christensen Indeed!

Mrs. Riis. Yes--because each generation of women is endowed with
a stronger and stronger aspiration for a pure life. It results
unconsciously from the maternal instinct, and is intended as a
protection for the defenceless. Even worthless mothers feel that. But if
they succumb in spite of it, and each generation of married women in
its turn sinks as deep as you say, the reason of it can only be the
privilege that men enjoy as part of their education.

Christensen. What privilege?

Mrs. Riis. That of living as they please when they are bachelors, and
then having their word of honour believed in when they choose to enter
the married state. As long as women are powerless to put an end to that
horrible privilege or to make themselves independent of it, so long will
one half of the world continue to be sacrificed on account of the other
half--on account of the other half's lack of self-control. That one
privilege turns out to be more powerful than all the striving for
liberty in the world. And that is not a laughing matter.

Christensen. You are picturing to yourself a different world from this,
and different natures from ours, Mrs. Riis. And that--if you will excuse
my saying so--is obviously all the answer that is necessary to what you
say.

Mrs. Riis. Well, then, give that answer openly! Why do you not openly
acknowledge that as your standpoint?

Christensen. But don't we?

Mrs. Riis. No--not here, at all events. On the contrary, you range
yourselves ostensibly under our banner, while all the time you are
secretly betraying it. Why have you not the courage to unfurl your
own? Let these bachelor customs of yours be sanctioned as entirely
suitable--then we should be able to join issue with you. And then
every innocent bride would be able to know what it is she is entering
upon--and in what capacity.

Nordan. That would be simply nothing more or less than abolishing
marriage.

Mrs. Riis. Would not that be more honest, too? Because now it is only
being corrupted, long before it begins.

Christensen. Oh, of course it is all the men's fault! It is the fashion
to say that now--it is part of the "struggle for freedom." Down with
man's authority, of course!

Mrs. Riis. The authority his bachelor life has won for him!

Nordan. Ha, ha!

Mrs. Riis. Do not let us cover up the real issue with phrases! Let us
rather speak of the "desolate hearth" that the poet writes of. Marriage
laid in ruins is what he means by that; and what is the cause of it?
What is the cause of the chilly, horrible commonplace of every-day
life--sensual, idle, brutish? I could paint it even more vividly, but I
will not. I will refrain, for instance, from bringing up the subject
of hereditary disease. Let the question be thrashed out openly! Then
perhaps a fire will be kindled--and our consciences stirred! It must
become the most momentous question in every home. That is what is
needed!

Christensen. Our conversation has soared to such heights that it really
seems quite an anti-climax for me to say that I must go to a "higher
place"!--but you must excuse me all the same.

Mrs. Riis. I hope I have not delayed you?

Christensen. No, there is plenty of time. I am only longing
fervently--you really must not be offended--to get away from here.

Mrs. Riis. To your--equals?

Christensen. What a remarkable thing that you should remind me of them!
And, by the way, that reminds me that I am scarcely likely to meet you
or your family in future.

Mrs. Riis. No. Our acquaintance with you is at an end.

Christensen. Thank God for that!--All I hope now is that I shall succeed
in apportioning the ridicule with some degree of justice.

Mrs. Riis. You need only publish your autobiography!

Christensen. No--I think it should rather be your family principles,
madam! They are really very quaint. And when I relate the manner in
which they are put into practice by yourselves, I rather think that
people will be quite sufficiently amused. To speak seriously for a
moment--I mean to attack your husband's reputation in private and in
public, until he quits the town. I am not the sort of man to accept a
humiliation like this without returning the compliment. (Turns to go.)

Nordan. This is shocking!

Alfred (appearing in the doorway of the house). Father!

Christensen. You here?--How ill you look, my boy! Where have you been?

Alfred. I came here at the same time as you did, and have heard
everything. Let me tell you this at once, that if you take another step
against the Riis's, I shall go round and tell every one the reason why
Miss Riis threw me over. I shall tell them exactly what it was. Oh, it
is no use looking at me with that mocking expression! I shall do it--and
at once, too.

Christensen. I think you may spare yourself the trouble. The gossip
about a broken engagement will get all over the town quicker than you
could spread it.

Nordan (going up to ALFRED). One word, my boy--do you still love her?

Alfred. Do you ask that because she has been unjust to me? Well, now I
know quite well what led to it--and inevitably led to it. I understand
now!

Christensen. And forgive her? Without anything more?

Alfred. I love her more than ever--whatever she thinks of me!

Christensen. Well, upon my word! What next, I should like to know? You
claim your right to resume the rôle of lover, and leave us and other
honest folk to put the best face we can on the muddle you have made!
I suppose you are going across the road now to tell her how much you
enjoyed yourself yesterday?--or to ask for a respite till to-morrow, to
give you time to pass decently through a process of purification? May I
ask where you are going to find it and what it is going to consist of?
Oh, don't look so melodramatic! If you can put up with what you got from
Riis's girl yesterday and her mother to-day, surely you can put up with
a little angry talk or a little chaff from your father. I have had to
put up with the whole affair--the betrothal and the breaking it off
as well! And then to be sprinkled with essence of morality into the
bargain! Good Lord! I hope at least I shall not smell of it still when I
get to the palace. (Goes towards the house, but turns back at the door.)
You will find same money in the office to pay for a trip abroad. (Exit.)

Nordan. Does that mean banishment?

Alfred. Of course it does. (Appears very much agitated.)

Mrs. Riis. Doctor, you must come over to our house with me--and at once!

Nordan. How is she?

Mrs. Riis. I don't know.

Nordan. You don't know?

Mrs. Riis. She wanted to be alone yesterday. And to-day she went out
early.

Nordan. Has anything happened, then?

Mrs. Riis. Yes. You told me yesterday that you had given her a hint
about--her father.

Nordan. Well?

Mrs. Riis. And so I felt that it could not be concealed any longer.

Nordan. And you have--?

Mrs. Riis. I have written to her.

Nordan. Written?

Mrs. Riis. It seemed the easiest way--and we should escape talking about
it. All yesterday afternoon and last night I was writing, and tearing it
up, and writing again--writing--writing! It was not a long letter, when
all was done, but it took it out of me.

Nordan. And has she had the letter?

Mrs. Riis. When she had had her breakfast this morning and gone out, I
sent it after her. And now, my dear friend, I want to beg you to go and
have a talk with her--then you can let me know when I may go to her.
Because I am frightened! (Hides her face in her hands.)

Nordan. The moment you came I saw something serious had happened. You
argued so vehemently, too. Well, matters have developed, and no mistake!

Mrs. Riis. You mustn't go away, doctor! Don't go away from her now!

Nordan. Oh, that is it, is it?--Thomas!

[Enter THOMAS.]

Thomas. Yes, sir.

Nordan. You need not pack my things.

Thomas. Not pack, sir?--Very good, sir. (Gives the doctor his stick and
goes to open the house door for them.)

Nordan. Allow me, Mrs. Riis. (Offers her his arm.)

Alfred (coming forward). Mrs. Riis! May I speak to her?

Mrs. Riis. Speak to her? No, that is impossible.

Nordan. You heard, my boy, what she has to think about to-day.

Mrs. Riis. And if she would not speak to you before, it is not likely
she will now.

Alfred. If she should ask to speak to me, will you tell her I am here? I
shall stay here till she does.

Mrs. Riis. But what is the use of that?

Alfred. Well, that will be our affair. I know she wants to speak to me,
just as much as I do to her. Only tell her I am here! That is all I ask.
(Goes away into the farther part of the garden.)

Nordan. He does not know what he is talking about.

Mrs. Riis. Dear Dr. Nordan, let us go! I am so frightened.

Nordan. Not more than I am, I think.--So she knows it now, does she!
(They go out.)


SCENE II

(SCENE.--The same as in Acts I. and II. SVAVA comes into the room slowly
and looks round; then goes to the door and looks round outside the
house, then comes in again. As she turns back, she sees NORDAN standing
in the doorway.)

Svava. You!--Oh, Uncle Nordan! (Sobs.)

Nordan. My child! My dear child! Calm yourself!

Svava. But haven't you seen mother? She said she had gone across to see
you.

Nordan. Yes, she is coming directly. But look here--suppose you and I
go for a good long walk together, instead of talking to your mother or
anyone? Along quiet walk? Eh?

Svava. I can't.

Nordan. Why?

Svava. Because I must make an end of all this.

Nordan. What do you mean?

Svava (without answering his question). Uncle--?

Nordan. Yes?

Svava. Does Alfred know this?--Did he know it before?

Nordan. Yes.

Svava. Of course every one knew it except me. Oh, how I wish I could
hide myself away from every one! I will, too. I see the real state of
things now for the first time. I have been like a child trying to push a
mountain away with its two hands--and they have all been standing round,
laughing at me, of course. But let me speak to Alfred!

Nordan. To Alfred?

Svava. I behaved so wrongly yesterday. I ought never to have gone into
the room--but you gave me no choice when you came to me. I went with you
almost unconsciously.

Nordan. I suppose it was thinking of your father--of what I told you
about him--that made you--

Svava. I did not understand all at once. But, when I was by myself, it
all flashed across me--mother's strange uneasiness--father's threats
about leaving the country--all sorts of expressions, and signs--lots
and lots of things I had never understood and never even thought twice
about! I chased them out of my mind, but back they came!--back and back
again! It seemed to paralyse me. And when you took me by the arm and
said: "Now you must go in!"--I hardly had strength to think. Everything
seemed to be going round and round.

Nordan. Yes, I made a regular mess of it--both on that occasion and the
time before.

Svava. No, it was all quite right--quite right! We certainly went a
little off the lines, it is true. I must speak to Alfred; the matter
must not rest as it is. But, except for that, it was all quite right.
And now I have got to make an end of it all.

Nordan. What do you mean?

Svava. Where is mother?

Nordan. My dear girl, you ought not to try and do anything to-day. I
should advise you not to speak to anybody. If you do--well, I don't know
what may happen.

Svava. But I know.--Oh, it is no use talking to me like that! You think
I am simply a bundle of nerves to-day. And it is quite true--I am. But
if you try to thwart me it will only make me worse.

Nordan. I am not trying to thwart you at all. I only--

Svava. Yes, yes, I know.--Where is mother, then? And you must bring
Alfred here. I cannot go to him, can I? Or do you think he has too much
pride to come, after what happened yesterday? Oh, no, he is not like
that! Tell him he must not be proud with one who is so humiliated.
(Bursts into tears.)

Nordan. But do you think you are able for it?

Svava. You don't know how much I can stand! Anyway, I must get done with
it all, quickly. It has lasted long enough.

Nordan. Then shall I ask your mother--?

Svava. Yes!--and will you ask Alfred?

Nordan. Presently, yes. And if you should--

Svava. No, there is no "if" about it!

Nordan.--if you should want me, I won't go away till you are "done with
it all," as you say. (SVAVA goes up to him and embraces him. He goes
out. After a short pause MRS. RIIS comes in.)

Mrs. Riis (going to SVAVA). My child! (Stops.)

Svava. No, mother, I cannot come near you. Besides, I am trembling all
over. And you don't understand what it is? It has not dawned upon you
that you cannot treat me like this?

Mrs. Riis. Treat you like this, Svava? What do you mean?

Svava. Good heavens, mother!--letting me live here day after day, year
after year, without letting me know what I was living with? Allowing me
to preach the strictest principles, from a house like ours? What will
people say of us, now that everything will be known!

Mrs. Riis. Surely you would not have wished me to tell my child that--

Svava. Not while I was a child. But when I had grown up, yes--under any
circumstances! I ought to have been allowed the choice whether I would
live at home under such conditions or not! I ought to have been allowed
to know what every one else knew--or what they may get to know at any
moment.

Mrs. Riis. I have never looked at it in that light.

Svava. Never looked at it in that light? Mother!

Mrs. Riis. Never!--To shield you and have peace in our home while you
were a child, and peace afterwards in your studies, your interests and
your pleasures--for you are not like other girls, you know, Svava--to
ensure this, I have been almost incredibly careful that no hint of this
should come to your ears. I believed that to be my duty. You have no
conception what I have stooped to--for your sake, my child.

Svava. But you had no right to do it, mother!

Mrs. Riis. No right?--

Svava. No! To degrade yourself for my sake was to degrade me too.

Mrs. Riis (with emotion). Oh, my God--!

Svava. I do not reproach you for anything, mother! I would not do that
for the world--my dear mother! I am only so infinitely distressed and
appalled at the thought of your having to go about carrying such a
secret with you! Never able to be your real self with me for a moment!
Always hiding something! And to have to listen to my praises of what
so little deserved praise--to see me putting my faith in him, caressing
him--oh, mother, mother!

Mrs. Riis. Yes, dear, I felt that myself--many and many a time. But
I felt that I dared not tell you. It was wrong--so very wrong! I
understand that now! But would you have had me leave him at once, as
soon as I knew of it myself?

Svava. I cannot take upon myself to say. You decided that for yourself.
Each one must decide that for herself--according to the measure of her
love and her strength. But when the thing went on after I was grown
up--! Naturally that was why I made a second mistake. I had been brought
up to make mistakes, you see. (RIIS is heard outside the window, humming
a tune.)

Mrs. Riis. Good heavens, there he is! (RIIS is seen passing the
left-hand window. When he reaches the door, however, he stops and, with
the words, "Oh, by the bye!" turns back and goes hurriedly out.)

Mrs. Riis. You look quite changed, my child! Svava, you frighten me!
Surely you are not going to--?

Svava. What is it that is in your mind, mother?

Mrs. Riis. The thought that, as I have endured so much for your sake,
you might make up your mind to endure a little for mine.

Svava. A little of this? No, not for a moment!

Mrs. Riis. But what are you going to do?

Svava. Go away from here at once, of course.

Mrs. Riis (with a cry). Then I shall go with you!

Svava. You? Away from father?

Mrs. Riis. It has been for your sake that I have stayed with him. I
won't stay here a day without you!--Ah, you don't want me with you!

Svava. Mother, dear--I must have time to accustom myself to the changed
state of things. You have quite changed in my eyes too, you see. I have
been mistaken in you, and I must get accustomed to that idea. I must be
alone!--Oh, don't look so unhappy, dear!

Mrs. Riis. And this is the end of it all--this is the end of it!

Svava. I cannot act otherwise, dear. I must go away now to my
Kindergartens and give up my life entirely to that work. I must, I must!
If I cannot be alone there, I must go farther afield.

Mrs. Riis. This is the cruellest part of it all--the cruellest part!
Listen, is that--? Yes, it is he. Do not say anything now! For my sake
say nothing now; I cannot bear anything more on the top of this!--Try
to be friendly to him! Svava--do you hear me! (RIIS comes back, still
humming a tune; this time he has his overcoat over his arm. SVAVA comes
hurriedly forward, and after a moment's hesitation sits down with her
back half turned to him, and tries to busy herself with something. RIIS
puts down his overcoat. He is in court dress and wears the Order of St.
Olaf.)

Riis. Good morning, ladies! Good morning!

Mrs. Riis. Good morning!

Riis. Here is the latest great piece of news for you: Who do you think
drove me from the palace? Christensen!

Mrs. Riis. Really?

Riis. Yes! Our wrathful friend of yesterday! Yes! He and one of my
fellow-directors. I was one of the first persons he greeted when he got
to the palace. He introduced me to people, chatted with me--paid me the
most marked attention!

Mrs. Riis. You don't mean it?

Riis. Consequently nothing really happened here yesterday! No gloves
were thrown about at all, least of all in his eldest son's face!
Christensen, the worthy knight of to-day's making, feels the necessity
for peace! We ended by drinking a bottle of champagne at my brother's.

Mrs. Riis. How amusing!

Riis. Therefore, ladies--smiles, if you please! Nothing has happened
here, absolutely nothing! We begin again with an absolutely clean slate,
without a smear upon it!

Mrs. Riis. What a piece of luck!

Riis. Yes, isn't it! That rather violent outburst of our daughter's has
unburdened her mind and cleared the ideas in other people's heads. The
general atmosphere is agreeably clear, not to say favourable.

Mrs. Riis. And what was it like at the palace?

Riis. Well, I can tell you this--when I looked round at our batch of
new-fledged knights, it did not exactly impress me that it is virtue
that is rewarded in this world of ours. However, we were all confronted
with an alarmingly solemn document. It was about something we swore to
preserve--I fancy it was the State--or perhaps the Church--I am really
not sure, because I didn't read it. They all signed it!

Mrs. Riis. You, as well?

Riis. I, as well. Do you suppose I was going to be left out of such good
company? Up at those exalted heights one obtains a happier and freer
outlook upon life. We were all friends up there. People came up and
congratulated me--and after a bit I wasn't sure whether it was on my
daughter's account or on my own; and, what is more, I never knew I had
so many friends in the town, let alone at Court! But in such brilliant
company and such an atmosphere of praises and compliments and general
amiability, one was not inclined to be particular! And there were only
men present! You know--you ladies must excuse me--there is sometimes
a peculiar charm in being only with men, especially on great occasions
like that. Conversation becomes more pointed, more actual, more
robust--and laughter more full of zest. Men seem to understand one
another almost without the need of words.

Mrs. Riis. I suppose you are feeling very happy to-day, then?

Riis. I should think I am!--and I only wish every one were the same! I
daresay life might be better than it is; but, as I saw it under those
circumstances from those exalted heights, it might also be much worse.
And, as for us men--oh, well, we have our faults, no doubt, but we are
very good company for all that. It would be a dull world without us, I
am sure. Let us take life as it comes, my dear Svava! (Comes nearer
to her. She gets up.) What is the matter? Are you still in a bad
temper?--when you have had the pleasure of boxing his ears with your own
gloves, before the whole family circle? What more can you reasonably
ask of life? I should say you ought to have a good laugh over it!--Or is
there something up? What? Come, what is the matter now?

Mrs. Riis. The fact is--

Riis. Well, the fact is--?

Mrs. Riis. The fact is that Alfred will be here in a moment.

Riis. Alfred here? In a moment? Hurrah! I quite understand! But why
didn't you tell me so at once?

Mrs. Riis. You have talked the whole time since you came in.

Riis. I do believe I have!--Well, if you are going to take it seriously,
my dear Svava, perhaps you will allow your "knightly" father to take it
lightly? The whole thing amuses me so tremendously. I was put into good
spirits to-day the moment I saw, from Christensen's face, that there
was nothing in the wind. And so Alfred is coming here directly! Then I
understand everything. Hurrah, once more! I assure you that is the best
of all the good things that have happened to-day. I really think I must
play a festal overture till he comes! (Goes towards the piano, singing.)

Mrs. Riis. No, no, dear! Do you hear? No, no! (RIIS plays on, without
listening to hey, till she goes up to him, and stops him, pointing to
SVAVA.)

Svava. Oh, let him play, mother--let him play! It is the innocent
gaiety that I have admired since I was a child! (Bursts into tears, but
collects herself.) How hateful! How horrible!

Riis. My dear child, you look as if you wanted to be throwing down
gauntlets to-day too! Isn't that all done with?

Svava. No, indeed it is not!

Riis. You shall have the loan of my gloves, if you haven't--

Mrs. Riis. Oh, don't say those things to her!

Svava. Oh, yes, let him! Let him mock at us, mother dear! A man of his
moral earnestness has the right to mock at us!

Riis. What are you talking about? Does it show a lack of moral
earnestness not to be in love with old maids and sour-faced virtue?

Svava. Father, you are--

Mrs. Riis. No, Svava!

Riis. Oh, let her say what she wants! It is something quite new to see
a well-brought-up girl throw her gloves in her fiancé's face and
accusations in her father's! Especially when it is all done in the name
of morality!

Svava. Don't talk about morality! Or go and talk to Mrs. North about it!

Riis. Mrs.--Mrs.--? What has she to do with--?

Svava. Be quiet! I know everything! You have--

Mrs. Riis. Svava!

Svava. Ah, yes-for mother's sake I won't go on. But, when I threw down
my much discussed gauntlet yesterday, I knew about it then. That was why
I did it! It was a protest against everything of the kind, against
its beginning and its continuation, against him and against you!
I understood--then--your pious zeal in the matter, and the show of
scandalised morality you allowed mother to be a witness of!

Mrs. Riis. Svava!

Svava. I understand now, for the first time, what your consideration,
your politeness to mother--which I have so often admired--all meant!
Your fun, your good temper, your care of your appearance!--Oh, I never
can believe in anything any more! It is horrible, horrible!

Mrs. Riis. Svava, dear!

Svava. All life seems to have become unclean for me! My nearest and
dearest all soiled and smirched! That is why, ever since yesterday,
I have had the feeling of being an outcast; and that is what I am--an
outcast from all that I prized and reverenced--and that without my
having done the slightest thing to deserve it. Even so, it is not the
pain of it that I feel most deeply; it is the humiliation, the shame.
All that I have so often said must seem now to be nothing but empty
words--all that I have done myself must seem of no account--and this
without its being my fault! For it is your fault! I thought, too, that
I knew something about life; but there was more for me to learn! I see
that you wanted me to give way to such an extent that I should end
by acquiescing in it. I understand now, for the first time, what your
teaching meant--and the things that you invoked mother and heaven to
witness. But it is of no use! I can tell you that it is about as much
as one can stand, to have the thoughts I have had yesterday--last
night--to-day. However, it is once and for all; after this, nothing can
ever take me by surprise again. To think that any man could have the
heart to let his child have such an experience!

Mrs. Riis. Svava--look at your father!

Svava. Yes--but if you think what I am saying now is hard, remember what
I said to you before I knew this--no longer ago than yesterday morning.
That will give you some idea of how I believed in you, father--and some
idea of what I am feeling now! Oh--!

Riis. Svava!

Svava. You have ruined my home for me! Almost every other hour in it has
been corrupted--and I cannot face a future like that.

Riis and Mrs. Riis (together). But, Svava--!

Svava. No, I cannot! My faith in you is destroyed--so that I can never
think of this as a home again. It makes me feel as if I were merely
living with you as a lodger--from yesterday onwards, merely a lodger in
the house.

Riis. Don't say that! My child!

Svava. Yes, I am your child. It only needed you to say it like that, for
me to feel it deeply. To think of all the experiences we two have
had together--all the happy times we have had on our travels, in our
amusements--and then to think that I can never look back on them again,
never take them up again! That is why I cannot stay here.

Riis. You cannot stay here!

Svava. It would remind me of everything too painfully. I should see
everything in a distorted light.

Mrs. Riis. But you will see that you cannot bear to go away, either!

Riis. But--I can go!

Mrs Riis. You?

Riis. Yes, and your mother and you stay here?--Oh, Svava--!

Svava. No, I cannot accept that--come what may!

Riis. Do not say any more! Svava, I entreat you! Do not make me too
utterly miserable! Remember that never, until to-day--I never thought
to make you--. If you cannot bear to be with me any more--if you
cannot--then let me go away! It is I that am to blame, I know. Listen,
Svava! It must be I, not you! You must stay here!

Mrs. Riis (listening). Good heavens, there is Alfred!

Riis. Alfred! (A pause. ALFRED appears in the doorway.)

Alfred (after a moment). Perhaps I had better go away again?

Riis (to ALFRED). Go away again?--Go away again, did you say?--No, not
on any account! No!--No, you could not have come at a more fortunate
moment! My boy, my dear boy! Thank you!

Mrs. Riis (to SVAVA). Would you rather be alone--?

Svava. No, no, no!

Riis. You want to speak to Svava, don't you? I think it will be best
for me to leave you together. You need to talk things over frankly with
her--to be alone--naturally! You will excuse me, then, if I leave you,
won't you? I have something very important to do in town, so you will
excuse me! I must hurry and change my clothes--so please excuse me!
(Goes into his room.)

Alfred. Oh, but I can come some other time.

Mrs. Riis. But I expect you would like to talk to her now?

Alfred. It is no question of what I would like. I see--and I heard Dr.
Nordan say--that Miss Riis is quite worn out. But I felt it my duty, all
the same, to call.

Svava. And I thank you for doing so! It is more--far more--than I have
deserved. But I want to tell you at once that what happened yesterday--I
mean, the form my behaviour took yesterday--was due to the fact that,
only an hour before then, something had come to my knowledge that I had
never known before. And that was mixed up with it. (She can scarcely
conceal her emotion.)

Alfred. I knew that to-day you would be regretting what happened
yesterday--you are so good. And that was my only hope of seeing you
again.

Riis (coming out of his room partly dressed to go out). Does any one
want anything done in town? If so, I shall be happy to see to it! It
has occurred to me that perhaps these ladies would like to go away for a
little trip somewhere--what do you two say to that? When one's thoughts
are beginning to get a little--what shall I call it?--a little too much
for one, or perhaps I should rather say a trifle too serious, it is
often a wonderful diversion to go away for a little change. I have often
found it so myself--often, I assure you! Just think it over, won't you?
I could see about making plans for you at once, if you think so--eh?
Well, then, good-bye for the present! And--think it over! I think myself
it is such an excellent plan! (Goes out. SVAVA looks at her mother with
a smile, and hides her face in her hands.)

Mrs. Riis. I must go away for a few minutes and--

Svava. Mother!

Mrs. Riis. I really must, dear! I must collect my thoughts. This has
been too much for me. I shall not go farther away than into my room
there (pointing to the room on the left). And I will come back directly.
(SVAVA throws herself into a chair by the table, overcome by her
emotion.)

Alfred. It looks as if we two were to have to settle this matter, after
all.

Svava. Yes.

Alfred. I daresay that you will understand that since yesterday I have
done nothing else but invent speeches to make to you--but now I do not
feel as if it had been of much use.

Svava. It was good of you to come.

Alfred. But you must let me make one request of you, and that from my
heart: Wait for me! Because I know now what will show me the way to your
heart. We had planned out our life together, you and I; and, although I
shall do it alone, I shall carry out our plans unfalteringly. And then
perhaps, some day, when you see how faithful I have been--. I know I
ought not to worry you, least of all to-day. But give me an answer! You
need scarcely say anything--but just give me an answer!

Svava. But what for?

Alfred. I must have it to live on--and the more difficult the prize
is to attain, the better worth living will life be to me. Give me an
answer!

Svava (tries to speak, but bursts into tears). Ah, you see how
everything upsets me to-day. I cannot. Besides, what do you want me to
do? To wait? What would that mean? It would mean being ready and yet
not ready; trying to forget and yet always having it before my mind. (Is
overcome again by her emotion.) No!

Alfred. I see you need to be alone. But I cannot bring myself to go
away. (SVAVA gets up, and tries to regain control over herself. ALFRED
goes to her and throws himself on his knees beside her.) Give me just
one word.

Svava. But do you not understand that if you could give me back once
more the happiness that complete trust gives--do you think I should wait
for you to ask anything of me then? No, I should go to you and thank you
on my knees. Can you doubt that for a moment?

Alfred. No, no!

Svava. But I have not got it.

Alfred. Svava!

Svava. Oh, please--!

Alfred. Good-bye--good-bye! But I shall see you again some day? I shall
see you again? (Turns to go, but stops at the door.) I must have a
sign--something definite to take with me! Stretch out a hand to me! (At
these words SVAVA turns to him and stretches out both her hands to him.
He goes out. MRS. RIIS comes in from her room.)

Mrs. Riis. Did you promise him anything?

Svava. I think so. (Throws herself into her mother's arms.)
