                             AN IDEAL HUSBAND


                                  A PLAY

                                    BY
                               OSCAR WILDE

                                * * * * *

                            METHUEN & CO. LTD.
                           36 ESSEX STREET W.C.
                                  LONDON

                                * * * * *

                _First Published_, _at 1s. net_, _in 1912_

                                * * * * *

_This book was First Published in 1893_

_First Published_ (_Second Edition_) _by      _February_           _1908_
   Methuen & Co._
_Third Edition_                               _October_            _1909_
_Fourth edition_                              _October_            _1910_
_Fifth Edition_                               _May_                _1912_

THE PERSONS OF THE PLAY


THE EARL OF CAVERSHAM, K.G.

VISCOUNT GORING, his Son

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN, Bart., Under-Secretary for Foreign Affairs

VICOMTE DE NANJAC, Attaché at the French Embassy in London

MR. MONTFORD

MASON, Butler to Sir Robert Chiltern

PHIPPS, Lord Goring’s Servant

JAMES   }

HAROLD  } Footmen

LADY CHILTERN

LADY MARKBY

THE COUNTESS OF BASILDON

MRS. MARCHMONT

MISS MABEL CHILTERN, Sir Robert Chiltern’s Sister

MRS. CHEVELEY




THE SCENES OF THE PLAY


ACT I.  _The Octagon Room in Sir Robert Chiltern’s House in Grosvenor
Square_.

ACT II.  _Morning-room in Sir Robert Chiltern’s House_.

ACT III.  _The Library of Lord Goring’s House in Curzon Street_.

ACT IV.  _Same as Act II_.

TIME: _The Present_

PLACE: _London_.

     _The action of the play is completed within twenty-four hours_.




THEATRE ROYAL, HAYMARKET


                _Sole Lessee_: _Mr. Herbert Beerbohm Tree_

           _Managers_: _Mr. Lewis Waller and Mr. H. H. Morell_

                          _January_ 3_rd_, 1895

THE EARL OF CAVERSHAM       _Mr. Alfred Bishop_.
VISCOUNT GORING             _Mr. Charles H. Hawtrey_.
SIR ROBERT CHILTERN         _Mr. Lewis Waller_.
VICOMTE DE NANJAC           _Mr. Cosmo Stuart_.
MR. MONTFORD                _Mr. Harry Stanford_.
PHIPPS                      _Mr. C. H. Brookfield_.
MASON                       _Mr. H. Deane_.
JAMES                       _Mr. Charles Meyrick_.
HAROLD                      _Mr. Goodhart_.
LADY CHILTERN               _Miss Julia Neilson_.
LADY MARKBY                 _Miss Fanny Brough_.
COUNTESS OF BASILDON        _Miss Vane Featherston_.
MRS. MARCHMONT              _Miss Helen Forsyth_.
MISS MABEL CHILTERN         _Miss Maud Millet_.
MRS. CHEVELEY               _Miss Florence West_.




FIRST ACT


SCENE


_The octagon room at Sir Robert Chiltern’s house in Grosvenor Square_.

[_The room is brilliantly lighted and full of guests_.  _At the top of
the staircase stands_ LADY CHILTERN, _a woman of grave Greek beauty_,
_about twenty-seven years of age_.  _She receives the guests as they come
up_.  _Over the well of the staircase hangs a great chandelier with wax
lights_, _which illumine a large eighteenth-century French
tapestry—representing the Triumph of Love_, _from a design by
Boucher—that is stretched on the staircase wall_.  _On the right is the
entrance to the music-room_.  _The sound of a string quartette is faintly
heard_.  _The entrance on the left leads to other reception-rooms_.  MRS.
MARCHMONT _and_ LADY BASILDON, _two very pretty women_, _are seated
together on a Louis Seize sofa_.  _They are types of exquisite
fragility_.  _Their affectation of manner has a delicate charm_.
_Watteau would have loved to paint them_.]

MRS. MARCHMONT.  Going on to the Hartlocks’ to-night, Margaret?

LADY BASILDON.  I suppose so.  Are you?

MRS. MARCHMONT.  Yes.  Horribly tedious parties they give, don’t they?

LADY BASILDON.  Horribly tedious!  Never know why I go.  Never know why I
go anywhere.

MRS. MARCHMONT.  I come here to be educated.

LADY BASILDON.  Ah! I hate being educated!

MRS. MARCHMONT.  So do I.  It puts one almost on a level with the
commercial classes, doesn’t it?  But dear Gertrude Chiltern is always
telling me that I should have some serious purpose in life.  So I come
here to try to find one.

LADY BASILDON.  [_Looking round through her lorgnette_.]  I don’t see
anybody here to-night whom one could possibly call a serious purpose.
The man who took me in to dinner talked to me about his wife the whole
time.

MRS. MARCHMONT.  How very trivial of him!

LADY BASILDON.  Terribly trivial!  What did your man talk about?

MRS. MARCHMONT.  About myself.

LADY BASILDON.  [_Languidly_.]  And were you interested?

MRS. MARCHMONT.  [_Shaking her head_.]  Not in the smallest degree.

LADY BASILDON.  What martyrs we are, dear Margaret!

MRS. MARCHMONT.  [_Rising_.]  And how well it becomes us, Olivia!

[_They rise and go towards the music-room_.  _The_ VICOMTE DE NANJAC, _a
young attaché known for his neckties and his Anglomania_, _approaches
with a low bow_, _and enters into conversation_.]

MASON.  [_Announcing guests from the top of the staircase_.]  Mr. and
Lady Jane Barford.  Lord Caversham.

[_Enter_ LORD CAVERSHAM, _an old gentleman of seventy_, _wearing the
riband and star of the Garter_.  _A fine Whig type_.  _Rather like a
portrait by Lawrence_.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Good evening, Lady Chiltern!  Has my good-for-nothing
young son been here?

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Smiling_.]  I don’t think Lord Goring has arrived yet.

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Coming up to_ LORD CAVERSHAM.]  Why do you call Lord
Goring good-for-nothing?

[MABEL CHILTERN _is a perfect example of the English type of prettiness_,
_the apple-blossom type_.  _She has all the fragrance and freedom of a
flower_.  _There is ripple after ripple of sunlight in her hair_, _and
the little mouth_, _with its parted lips_, _is expectant_, _like the
mouth of a child_.  _She has the fascinating tyranny of youth_, _and the
astonishing courage of innocence_.  _To sane people she is not
reminiscent of any work of art_.  _But she is really like a Tanagra
statuette_, _and would be rather annoyed if she were told so_.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Because he leads such an idle life.

MABEL CHILTERN.  How can you say such a thing?  Why, he rides in the Row
at ten o’clock in the morning, goes to the Opera three times a week,
changes his clothes at least five times a day, and dines out every night
of the season.  You don’t call that leading an idle life, do you?

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Looking at her with a kindly twinkle in his eyes_.]
You are a very charming young lady!

MABEL CHILTERN.  How sweet of you to say that, Lord Caversham!  Do come
to us more often.  You know we are always at home on Wednesdays, and you
look so well with your star!

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Never go anywhere now.  Sick of London Society.
Shouldn’t mind being introduced to my own tailor; he always votes on the
right side.  But object strongly to being sent down to dinner with my
wife’s milliner.  Never could stand Lady Caversham’s bonnets.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Oh, I love London Society!  I think it has immensely
improved.  It is entirely composed now of beautiful idiots and brilliant
lunatics.  Just what Society should be.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Hum!  Which is Goring?  Beautiful idiot, or the other
thing?

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Gravely_.]  I have been obliged for the present to put
Lord Goring into a class quite by himself.  But he is developing
charmingly!

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Into what?

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_With a little curtsey_.]  I hope to let you know very
soon, Lord Caversham!

MASON.  [_Announcing guests_.]  Lady Markby.  Mrs. Cheveley.

[_Enter_ LADY MARKBY _and_ MRS. CHEVELEY.  LADY MARKBY _is a pleasant_,
_kindly_, _popular woman_, _with gray hair à la marquise and good lace_.
MRS. CHEVELEY, _who accompanies her_, _is tall and rather slight_.  _Lips
very thin and highly-coloured_, _a line of scarlet on a pallid face_.
_Venetian red hair_, _aquiline nose_, _and long throat_.  _Rouge
accentuates the natural paleness of her complexion_.  _Gray-green eyes
that move restlessly_.  _She is in heliotrope_, _with diamonds_.  _She
looks rather like an orchid_, _and makes great demands on one’s
curiosity_.  _In all her movements she is extremely graceful_.  _A work
of art_, _on the whole_, _but showing the influence of too many
schools_.]

LADY MARKBY.  Good evening, dear Gertrude!  So kind of you to let me
bring my friend, Mrs. Cheveley.  Two such charming women should know each
other!

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Advances towards_ MRS. CHEVELEY _with a sweet smile_.
_Then suddenly stops_, _and bows rather distantly_.]  I think Mrs.
Cheveley and I have met before.  I did not know she had married a second
time.

LADY MARKBY.  [_Genially_.]  Ah, nowadays people marry as often as they
can, don’t they?  It is most fashionable.  [_To_ DUCHESS OF MARYBOROUGH.]
Dear Duchess, and how is the Duke?  Brain still weak, I suppose?  Well,
that is only to be expected, is it not?  His good father was just the
same.  There is nothing like race, is there?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Playing with her fan_.]  But have we really met before,
Lady Chiltern?  I can’t remember where.  I have been out of England for
so long.

LADY CHILTERN.  We were at school together, Mrs. Cheveley.

MRS. CHEVELEY [_Superciliously_.]  Indeed?  I have forgotten all about my
schooldays.  I have a vague impression that they were detestable.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Coldly_.]  I am not surprised!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_In her sweetest manner_.]  Do you know, I am quite
looking forward to meeting your clever husband, Lady Chiltern.  Since he
has been at the Foreign Office, he has been so much talked of in Vienna.
They actually succeed in spelling his name right in the newspapers.  That
in itself is fame, on the continent.

LADY CHILTERN.  I hardly think there will be much in common between you
and my husband, Mrs. Cheveley!  [_Moves away_.]

VICOMTE DE NANJAC.  Ah! chère Madame, queue surprise!  I have not seen
you since Berlin!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Not since Berlin, Vicomte.  Five years ago!

VICOMTE DE NANJAC.  And you are younger and more beautiful than ever.
How do you manage it?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  By making it a rule only to talk to perfectly charming
people like yourself.

VICOMTE DE NANJAC.  Ah! you flatter me.  You butter me, as they say here.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Do they say that here?  How dreadful of them!

VICOMTE DE NANJAC.  Yes, they have a wonderful language.  It should be
more widely known.

[SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _enters_.  _A man of forty_, _but looking somewhat
younger_.  _Clean-shaven_, _with finely-cut features_, _dark-haired and
dark-eyed_.  _A personality of mark_.  _Not popular—few personalities
are_.  _But intensely admired by the few_, _and deeply respected by the
many_.  _The note of his manner is that of perfect distinction_, _with a
slight touch of pride_.  _One feels that he is conscious of the success
he has made in life_.  _A nervous temperament_, _with a tired look_.
_The firmly-chiselled mouth and chin contrast strikingly with the
romantic expression in the deep-set eyes_.  _The variance is suggestive
of an almost complete separation of passion and intellect_, _as though
thought and emotion were each isolated in its own sphere through some
violence of will-power_.  _There is nervousness in the nostrils_, _and in
the pale_, _thin_, _pointed hands_.  _It would be inaccurate to call him
picturesque_.  _Picturesqueness cannot survive the House of Commons_.
_But Vandyck would have liked to have painted his head_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Good evening, Lady Markby!  I hope you have brought
Sir John with you?

LADY MARKBY.  Oh! I have brought a much more charming person than Sir
John.  Sir John’s temper since he has taken seriously to politics has
become quite unbearable.  Really, now that the House of Commons is trying
to become useful, it does a great deal of harm.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I hope not, Lady Markby.  At any rate we do our
best to waste the public time, don’t we?  But who is this charming person
you have been kind enough to bring to us?

LADY MARKBY.  Her name is Mrs. Cheveley!  One of the Dorsetshire
Cheveleys, I suppose.  But I really don’t know.  Families are so mixed
nowadays.  Indeed, as a rule, everybody turns out to be somebody else.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Mrs. Cheveley?  I seem to know the name.

LADY MARKBY.  She has just arrived from Vienna.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Ah! yes.  I think I know whom you mean.

LADY MARKBY.  Oh! she goes everywhere there, and has such pleasant
scandals about all her friends.  I really must go to Vienna next winter.
I hope there is a good chef at the Embassy.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  If there is not, the Ambassador will certainly have
to be recalled.  Pray point out Mrs. Cheveley to me.  I should like to
see her.

LADY MARKBY.  Let me introduce you.  [_To_ MRS. CHEVELEY.]  My dear, Sir
Robert Chiltern is dying to know you!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Bowing_.]  Every one is dying to know the
brilliant Mrs. Cheveley.  Our attachés at Vienna write to us about
nothing else.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thank you, Sir Robert.  An acquaintance that begins with
a compliment is sure to develop into a real friendship.  It starts in the
right manner.  And I find that I know Lady Chiltern already.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Really?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Yes.  She has just reminded me that we were at school
together.  I remember it perfectly now.  She always got the good conduct
prize.  I have a distinct recollection of Lady Chiltern always getting
the good conduct prize!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Smiling_.]  And what prizes did you get, Mrs.
Cheveley?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  My prizes came a little later on in life.  I don’t think
any of them were for good conduct.  I forget!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I am sure they were for something charming!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I don’t know that women are always rewarded for being
charming.  I think they are usually punished for it!  Certainly, more
women grow old nowadays through the faithfulness of their admirers than
through anything else!  At least that is the only way I can account for
the terribly haggard look of most of your pretty women in London!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  What an appalling philosophy that sounds!  To
attempt to classify you, Mrs. Cheveley, would be an impertinence.  But
may I ask, at heart, are you an optimist or a pessimist?  Those seem to
be the only two fashionable religions left to us nowadays.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh, I’m neither.  Optimism begins in a broad grin, and
Pessimism ends with blue spectacles.  Besides, they are both of them
merely poses.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  You prefer to be natural?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Sometimes.  But it is such a very difficult pose to keep
up.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  What would those modern psychological novelists, of
whom we hear so much, say to such a theory as that?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Ah! the strength of women comes from the fact that
psychology cannot explain us.  Men can be analysed, women . . . merely
adored.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  You think science cannot grapple with the problem
of women?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Science can never grapple with the irrational.  That is
why it has no future before it, in this world.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  And women represent the irrational.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Well-dressed women do.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_With a polite bow_.]  I fear I could hardly agree
with you there.  But do sit down.  And now tell me, what makes you leave
your brilliant Vienna for our gloomy London—or perhaps the question is
indiscreet?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Questions are never indiscreet.  Answers sometimes are.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Well, at any rate, may I know if it is politics or
pleasure?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Politics are my only pleasure.  You see nowadays it is
not fashionable to flirt till one is forty, or to be romantic till one is
forty-five, so we poor women who are under thirty, or say we are, have
nothing open to us but politics or philanthropy.  And philanthropy seems
to me to have become simply the refuge of people who wish to annoy their
fellow-creatures.  I prefer politics.  I think they are more . . .
becoming!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  A political life is a noble career!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Sometimes.  And sometimes it is a clever game, Sir
Robert.  And sometimes it is a great nuisance.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Which do you find it?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I?  A combination of all three.  [_Drops her fan_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Picks up fan_.]  Allow me!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thanks.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  But you have not told me yet what makes you honour
London so suddenly.  Our season is almost over.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh! I don’t care about the London season!  It is too
matrimonial.  People are either hunting for husbands, or hiding from
them.  I wanted to meet you.  It is quite true.  You know what a woman’s
curiosity is.  Almost as great as a man’s!  I wanted immensely to meet
you, and . . . to ask you to do something for me.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I hope it is not a little thing, Mrs. Cheveley.  I
find that little things are so very difficult to do.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_After a moment’s reflection_.]  No, I don’t think it is
quite a little thing.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I am so glad.  Do tell me what it is.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Later on.  [_Rises_.]  And now may I walk through your
beautiful house?  I hear your pictures are charming.  Poor Baron
Arnheim—you remember the Baron?—used to tell me you had some wonderful
Corots.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_With an almost imperceptible start_.]  Did you
know Baron Arnheim well?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Smiling_.]  Intimately.  Did you?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  At one time.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Wonderful man, wasn’t he?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_After a pause_.]  He was very remarkable, in many
ways.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I often think it such a pity he never wrote his memoirs.
They would have been most interesting.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Yes: he knew men and cities well, like the old
Greek.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Without the dreadful disadvantage of having a Penelope
waiting at home for him.

MASON.  Lord Goring.

[_Enter_ LORD GORING.  _Thirty-four_, _but always says he is younger_.
_A well-bred_, _expressionless face_.  _He is clever_, _but would not
like to be thought so_.  _A flawless dandy_, _he would be annoyed if he
were considered romantic_.  _He plays with life_, _and is on perfectly
good terms with the world_.  _He is fond of being misunderstood_.  _It
gives him a post of vantage_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Good evening, my dear Arthur!  Mrs. Cheveley, allow
me to introduce to you Lord Goring, the idlest man in London.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I have met Lord Goring before.

LORD GORING.  [_Bowing_.]  I did not think you would remember me, Mrs.
Cheveley.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  My memory is under admirable control.  And are you still
a bachelor?

LORD GORING.  I . . . believe so.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  How very romantic!

LORD GORING.  Oh! I am not at all romantic.  I am not old enough.  I
leave romance to my seniors.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Lord Goring is the result of Boodle’s Club, Mrs.
Cheveley.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  He reflects every credit on the institution.

LORD GORING.  May I ask are you staying in London long?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  That depends partly on the weather, partly on the
cooking, and partly on Sir Robert.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  You are not going to plunge us into a European war,
I hope?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  There is no danger, at present!

[_She nods to_ LORD GORING, _with a look of amusement in her eyes_, _and
goes out with_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  LORD GORING _saunters over to_ MABEL
CHILTERN.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  You are very late!

LORD GORING.  Have you missed me?

MABEL CHILTERN.  Awfully!

LORD GORING.  Then I am sorry I did not stay away longer.  I like being
missed.

MABEL CHILTERN.  How very selfish of you!

LORD GORING.  I am very selfish.

MABEL CHILTERN.  You are always telling me of your bad qualities, Lord
Goring.

LORD GORING.  I have only told you half of them as yet, Miss Mabel!

MABEL CHILTERN.  Are the others very bad?

LORD GORING.  Quite dreadful!  When I think of them at night I go to
sleep at once.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Well, I delight in your bad qualities.  I wouldn’t have
you part with one of them.

LORD GORING.  How very nice of you!  But then you are always nice.  By
the way, I want to ask you a question, Miss Mabel.  Who brought Mrs.
Cheveley here?  That woman in heliotrope, who has just gone out of the
room with your brother?

MABEL CHILTERN.  Oh, I think Lady Markby brought her.  Why do you ask?

LORD GORING.  I haven’t seen her for years, that is all.

MABEL CHILTERN.  What an absurd reason!

LORD GORING.  All reasons are absurd.

MABEL CHILTERN.  What sort of a woman is she?

LORD GORING.  Oh! a genius in the daytime and a beauty at night!

MABEL CHILTERN.  I dislike her already.

LORD GORING.  That shows your admirable good taste.

VICOMTE DE NANJAC.  [_Approaching_.]  Ah, the English young lady is the
dragon of good taste, is she not?  Quite the dragon of good taste.

LORD GORING.  So the newspapers are always telling us.

VICOMTE DE NANJAC.  I read all your English newspapers.  I find them so
amusing.

LORD GORING.  Then, my dear Nanjac, you must certainly read between the
lines.

VICOMTE DE NANJAC.  I should like to, but my professor objects.  [_To_
MABEL CHILTERN.]  May I have the pleasure of escorting you to the
music-room, Mademoiselle?

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Looking very disappointed_.]  Delighted, Vicomte,
quite delighted!  [_Turning to_ LORD GORING.]  Aren’t you coming to the
music-room?

LORD GORING.  Not if there is any music going on, Miss Mabel.

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Severely_.]  The music is in German.  You would not
understand it.

[_Goes out with the_ VICOMTE DE NANJAC.  LORD CAVERSHAM _comes up to his
son_.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Well, sir! what are you doing here?  Wasting your life
as usual!  You should be in bed, sir.  You keep too late hours!  I heard
of you the other night at Lady Rufford’s dancing till four o’clock in the
morning!

LORD GORING.  Only a quarter to four, father.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Can’t make out how you stand London Society.  The thing
has gone to the dogs, a lot of damned nobodies talking about nothing.

LORD GORING.  I love talking about nothing, father.  It is the only thing
I know anything about.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  You seem to me to be living entirely for pleasure.

LORD GORING.  What else is there to live for, father?  Nothing ages like
happiness.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  You are heartless, sir, very heartless!

LORD GORING.  I hope not, father.  Good evening, Lady Basildon!

LADY BASILDON.  [_Arching two pretty eyebrows_.]  Are you here?  I had no
idea you ever came to political parties!

LORD GORING.  I adore political parties.  They are the only place left to
us where people don’t talk politics.

LADY BASILDON.  I delight in talking politics.  I talk them all day long.
But I can’t bear listening to them.  I don’t know how the unfortunate men
in the House stand these long debates.

LORD GORING.  By never listening.

LADY BASILDON.  Really?

LORD GORING.  [_In his most serious manner_.]  Of course.  You see, it is
a very dangerous thing to listen.  If one listens one may be convinced;
and a man who allows himself to be convinced by an argument is a
thoroughly unreasonable person.

LADY BASILDON.  Ah! that accounts for so much in men that I have never
understood, and so much in women that their husbands never appreciate in
them!

MRS. MARCHMONT.  [_With a sigh_.]  Our husbands never appreciate anything
in us.  We have to go to others for that!

LADY BASILDON.  [_Emphatically_.]  Yes, always to others, have we not?

LORD GORING.  [_Smiling_.]  And those are the views of the two ladies who
are known to have the most admirable husbands in London.

MRS. MARCHMONT.  That is exactly what we can’t stand.  My Reginald is
quite hopelessly faultless.  He is really unendurably so, at times!
There is not the smallest element of excitement in knowing him.

LORD GORING.  How terrible!  Really, the thing should be more widely
known!

LADY BASILDON.  Basildon is quite as bad; he is as domestic as if he was
a bachelor.

MRS. MARCHMONT.  [_Pressing_ LADY BASILDON’S _hand_.]  My poor Olivia!
We have married perfect husbands, and we are well punished for it.

LORD GORING.  I should have thought it was the husbands who were
punished.

MRS. MARCHMONT.  [_Drawing herself up_.]  Oh, dear no!  They are as happy
as possible!  And as for trusting us, it is tragic how much they trust
us.

LADY BASILDON.  Perfectly tragic!

LORD GORING.  Or comic, Lady Basildon?

LADY BASILDON.  Certainly not comic, Lord Goring.  How unkind of you to
suggest such a thing!

MRS. MARCHMONT.  I am afraid Lord Goring is in the camp of the enemy, as
usual.  I saw him talking to that Mrs. Cheveley when he came in.

LORD GORING.  Handsome woman, Mrs. Cheveley!

LADY BASILDON.  [_Stiffly_.]  Please don’t praise other women in our
presence.  You might wait for us to do that!

LORD GORING.  I did wait.

MRS. MARCHMONT.  Well, we are not going to praise her.  I hear she went
to the Opera on Monday night, and told Tommy Rufford at supper that, as
far as she could see, London Society was entirely made up of dowdies and
dandies.

LORD GORING.  She is quite right, too.  The men are all dowdies and the
women are all dandies, aren’t they?

MRS. MARCHMONT.  [_After a pause_.]  Oh! do you really think that is what
Mrs. Cheveley meant?

LORD GORING.  Of course.  And a very sensible remark for Mrs. Cheveley to
make, too.

[_Enter_ MABEL CHILTERN.  _She joins the group_.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  Why are you talking about Mrs. Cheveley?  Everybody is
talking about Mrs. Cheveley!  Lord Goring says—what did you say, Lord
Goring, about Mrs. Cheveley?  Oh! I remember, that she was a genius in
the daytime and a beauty at night.

LADY BASILDON.  What a horrid combination!  So very unnatural!

MRS. MARCHMONT.  [_In her most dreamy manner_.]  I like looking at
geniuses, and listening to beautiful people.

LORD GORING.  Ah! that is morbid of you, Mrs. Marchmont!

MRS. MARCHMONT.  [_Brightening to a look of real pleasure_.]  I am so
glad to hear you say that.  Marchmont and I have been married for seven
years, and he has never once told me that I was morbid.  Men are so
painfully unobservant!

LADY BASILDON.  [_Turning to her_.]  I have always said, dear Margaret,
that you were the most morbid person in London.

MRS. MARCHMONT.  Ah! but you are always sympathetic, Olivia!

MABEL CHILTERN.  Is it morbid to have a desire for food?  I have a great
desire for food.  Lord Goring, will you give me some supper?

LORD GORING.  With pleasure, Miss Mabel.  [_Moves away with her_.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  How horrid you have been!  You have never talked to me
the whole evening!

LORD GORING.  How could I?  You went away with the child-diplomatist.

MABEL CHILTERN.  You might have followed us.  Pursuit would have been
only polite.  I don’t think I like you at all this evening!

LORD GORING.  I like you immensely.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Well, I wish you’d show it in a more marked way!  [_They
go downstairs_.]

MRS. MARCHMONT.  Olivia, I have a curious feeling of absolute faintness.
I think I should like some supper very much.  I know I should like some
supper.

LADY BASILDON.  I am positively dying for supper, Margaret!

MRS. MARCHMONT.  Men are so horribly selfish, they never think of these
things.

LADY BASILDON.  Men are grossly material, grossly material!

[_The_ VICOMTE DE NANJAC _enters from the music-room with some other
guests_.  _After having carefully examined all the people present_, _he
approaches_ LADY BASILDON.]

VICOMTE DE NANJAC.  May I have the honour of taking you down to supper,
Comtesse?

LADY BASILDON.  [_Coldly_.]  I never take supper, thank you, Vicomte.
[_The_ VICOMTE _is about to retire_.  LADY BASILDON, _seeing this_,
_rises at once and takes his arm_.]  But I will come down with you with
pleasure.

VICOMTE DE NANJAC.  I am so fond of eating!  I am very English in all my
tastes.

LADY BASILDON.  You look quite English, Vicomte, quite English.

[_They pass out_.  MR. MONTFORD, _a perfectly groomed young dandy_,
_approaches_ MRS. MARCHMONT.]

MR. MONTFORD.  Like some supper, Mrs. Marchmont?

MRS. MARCHMONT.  [_Languidly_.]  Thank you, Mr. Montford, I never touch
supper.  [_Rises hastily and takes his arm_.]  But I will sit beside you,
and watch you.

MR. MONTFORD.  I don’t know that I like being watched when I am eating!

MRS. MARCHMONT.  Then I will watch some one else.

MR. MONTFORD.  I don’t know that I should like that either.

MRS. MARCHMONT.  [_Severely_.]  Pray, Mr. Montford, do not make these
painful scenes of jealousy in public!

[_They go downstairs with the other guests_, _passing_ SIR ROBERT
CHILTERN _and_ MRS. CHEVELEY, _who now enter_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  And are you going to any of our country houses
before you leave England, Mrs. Cheveley?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh, no!  I can’t stand your English house-parties.  In
England people actually try to be brilliant at breakfast.  That is so
dreadful of them!  Only dull people are brilliant at breakfast.  And then
the family skeleton is always reading family prayers.  My stay in England
really depends on you, Sir Robert.  [_Sits down on the sofa_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Taking a seat beside her_.]  Seriously?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Quite seriously.  I want to talk to you about a great
political and financial scheme, about this Argentine Canal Company, in
fact.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  What a tedious, practical subject for you to talk
about, Mrs. Cheveley!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh, I like tedious, practical subjects.  What I don’t
like are tedious, practical people.  There is a wide difference.
Besides, you are interested, I know, in International Canal schemes.  You
were Lord Radley’s secretary, weren’t you, when the Government bought the
Suez Canal shares?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Yes.  But the Suez Canal was a very great and
splendid undertaking.  It gave us our direct route to India.  It had
imperial value.  It was necessary that we should have control.  This
Argentine scheme is a commonplace Stock Exchange swindle.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  A speculation, Sir Robert!  A brilliant, daring
speculation.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Believe me, Mrs. Cheveley, it is a swindle.  Let us
call things by their proper names.  It makes matters simpler.  We have
all the information about it at the Foreign Office.  In fact, I sent out
a special Commission to inquire into the matter privately, and they
report that the works are hardly begun, and as for the money already
subscribed, no one seems to know what has become of it.  The whole thing
is a second Panama, and with not a quarter of the chance of success that
miserable affair ever had.  I hope you have not invested in it.  I am
sure you are far too clever to have done that.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I have invested very largely in it.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Who could have advised you to do such a foolish
thing?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Your old friend—and mine.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Who?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Baron Arnheim.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Frowning_.]  Ah! yes.  I remember hearing, at the
time of his death, that he had been mixed up in the whole affair.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  It was his last romance.  His last but one, to do him
justice.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Rising_.]  But you have not seen my Corots yet.
They are in the music-room.  Corots seem to go with music, don’t they?
May I show them to you?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Shaking her head_.]  I am not in a mood to-night for
silver twilights, or rose-pink dawns.  I want to talk business.
[_Motions to him with her fan to sit down again beside her_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I fear I have no advice to give you, Mrs. Cheveley,
except to interest yourself in something less dangerous.  The success of
the Canal depends, of course, on the attitude of England, and I am going
to lay the report of the Commissioners before the House to-morrow night.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  That you must not do.  In your own interests, Sir Robert,
to say nothing of mine, you must not do that.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Looking at her in wonder_.]  In my own interests?
My dear Mrs. Cheveley, what do you mean?  [_Sits down beside her_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Sir Robert, I will be quite frank with you.  I want you
to withdraw the report that you had intended to lay before the House, on
the ground that you have reasons to believe that the Commissioners have
been prejudiced or misinformed, or something.  Then I want you to say a
few words to the effect that the Government is going to reconsider the
question, and that you have reason to believe that the Canal, if
completed, will be of great international value.  You know the sort of
things ministers say in cases of this kind.  A few ordinary platitudes
will do.  In modern life nothing produces such an effect as a good
platitude.  It makes the whole world kin.  Will you do that for me?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Mrs. Cheveley, you cannot be serious in making me
such a proposition!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I am quite serious.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Coldly_.]  Pray allow me to believe that you are
not.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Speaking with great deliberation and emphasis_.]  Ah!
but I am.  And if you do what I ask you, I . . . will pay you very
handsomely!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Pay me!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Yes.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I am afraid I don’t quite understand what you mean.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Leaning back on the sofa and looking at him_.]  How
very disappointing!  And I have come all the way from Vienna in order
that you should thoroughly understand me.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I fear I don’t.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_In her most nonchalant manner_.]  My dear Sir Robert,
you are a man of the world, and you have your price, I suppose.
Everybody has nowadays.  The drawback is that most people are so
dreadfully expensive.  I know I am.  I hope you will be more reasonable
in your terms.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Rises indignantly_.]  If you will allow me, I
will call your carriage for you.  You have lived so long abroad, Mrs.
Cheveley, that you seem to be unable to realise that you are talking to
an English gentleman.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Detains him by touching his arm with her fan_, _and
keeping it there while she is talking_.]  I realise that I am talking to
a man who laid the foundation of his fortune by selling to a Stock
Exchange speculator a Cabinet secret.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Biting his lip_.]  What do you mean?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Rising and facing him_.]  I mean that I know the real
origin of your wealth and your career, and I have got your letter, too.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  What letter?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Contemptuously_.]  The letter you wrote to Baron
Arnheim, when you were Lord Radley’s secretary, telling the Baron to buy
Suez Canal shares—a letter written three days before the Government
announced its own purchase.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Hoarsely_.]  It is not true.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  You thought that letter had been destroyed.  How foolish
of you!  It is in my possession.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  The affair to which you allude was no more than a
speculation.  The House of Commons had not yet passed the bill; it might
have been rejected.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  It was a swindle, Sir Robert.  Let us call things by
their proper names.  It makes everything simpler.  And now I am going to
sell you that letter, and the price I ask for it is your public support
of the Argentine scheme.  You made your own fortune out of one canal.
You must help me and my friends to make our fortunes out of another!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  It is infamous, what you propose—infamous!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh, no!  This is the game of life as we all have to play
it, Sir Robert, sooner or later!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I cannot do what you ask me.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  You mean you cannot help doing it.  You know you are
standing on the edge of a precipice.  And it is not for you to make
terms.  It is for you to accept them.  Supposing you refuse—

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  What then?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  My dear Sir Robert, what then?  You are ruined, that is
all!  Remember to what a point your Puritanism in England has brought
you.  In old days nobody pretended to be a bit better than his
neighbours.  In fact, to be a bit better than one’s neighbour was
considered excessively vulgar and middle-class.  Nowadays, with our
modern mania for morality, every one has to pose as a paragon of purity,
incorruptibility, and all the other seven deadly virtues—and what is the
result?  You all go over like ninepins—one after the other.  Not a year
passes in England without somebody disappearing.  Scandals used to lend
charm, or at least interest, to a man—now they crush him.  And yours is a
very nasty scandal. You couldn’t survive it.  If it were known that as a
young man, secretary to a great and important minister, you sold a
Cabinet secret for a large sum of money, and that that was the origin of
your wealth and career, you would be hounded out of public life, you
would disappear completely.  And after all, Sir Robert, why should you
sacrifice your entire future rather than deal diplomatically with your
enemy?  For the moment I am your enemy.  I admit it!  And I am much
stronger than you are.  The big battalions are on my side.  You have a
splendid position, but it is your splendid position that makes you so
vulnerable.  You can’t defend it!  And I am in attack.  Of course I have
not talked morality to you.  You must admit in fairness that I have
spared you that.  Years ago you did a clever, unscrupulous thing; it
turned out a great success.  You owe to it your fortune and position.
And now you have got to pay for it.  Sooner or later we have all to pay
for what we do.  You have to pay now.  Before I leave you to-night, you
have got to promise me to suppress your report, and to speak in the House
in favour of this scheme.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  What you ask is impossible.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  You must make it possible.  You are going to make it
possible.  Sir Robert, you know what your English newspapers are like.
Suppose that when I leave this house I drive down to some newspaper
office, and give them this scandal and the proofs of it!  Think of their
loathsome joy, of the delight they would have in dragging you down, of
the mud and mire they would plunge you in.  Think of the hypocrite with
his greasy smile penning his leading article, and arranging the foulness
of the public placard.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Stop!  You want me to withdraw the report and to
make a short speech stating that I believe there are possibilities in the
scheme?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Sitting down on the sofa_.]  Those are my terms.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_In a low voice_.]  I will give you any sum of
money you want.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Even you are not rich enough, Sir Robert, to buy back
your past.  No man is.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I will not do what you ask me.  I will not.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  You have to.  If you don’t . . . [_Rises from the sofa_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Bewildered and unnerved_.]  Wait a moment!  What
did you propose?  You said that you would give me back my letter, didn’t
you?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Yes.  That is agreed.  I will be in the Ladies’ Gallery
to-morrow night at half-past eleven.  If by that time—and you will have
had heaps of opportunity—you have made an announcement to the House in
the terms I wish, I shall hand you back your letter with the prettiest
thanks, and the best, or at any rate the most suitable, compliment I can
think of.  I intend to play quite fairly with you.  One should always
play fairly . . . when one has the winning cards.  The Baron taught me
that . . . amongst other things.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  You must let me have time to consider your
proposal.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  No; you must settle now!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Give me a week—three days!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Impossible!  I have got to telegraph to Vienna to-night.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  My God! what brought you into my life?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Circumstances.  [_Moves towards the door_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Don’t go.  I consent.  The report shall be
withdrawn.  I will arrange for a question to be put to me on the subject.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thank you.  I knew we should come to an amicable
agreement.  I understood your nature from the first.  I analysed you,
though you did not adore me.  And now you can get my carriage for me, Sir
Robert.  I see the people coming up from supper, and Englishmen always
get romantic after a meal, and that bores me dreadfully.  [_Exit_ SIR
ROBERT CHILTERN.]

[_Enter Guests_, LADY CHILTERN, LADY MARKBY, LORD CAVERSHAM, LADY
BASILDON, MRS. MARCHMONT, VICOMTE DE NANJAC, MR. MONTFORD.]

LADY MARKBY.  Well, dear Mrs. Cheveley, I hope you have enjoyed yourself.
Sir Robert is very entertaining, is he not?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Most entertaining!  I have enjoyed my talk with him
immensely.

LADY MARKBY.  He has had a very interesting and brilliant career.  And he
has married a most admirable wife.  Lady Chiltern is a woman of the very
highest principles, I am glad to say.  I am a little too old now, myself,
to trouble about setting a good example, but I always admire people who
do.  And Lady Chiltern has a very ennobling effect on life, though her
dinner-parties are rather dull sometimes.  But one can’t have everything,
can one?  And now I must go, dear.  Shall I call for you to-morrow?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thanks.

LADY MARKBY.  We might drive in the Park at five.  Everything looks so
fresh in the Park now!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Except the people!

LADY MARKBY.  Perhaps the people are a little jaded.  I have often
observed that the Season as it goes on produces a kind of softening of
the brain.  However, I think anything is better than high intellectual
pressure.  That is the most unbecoming thing there is.  It makes the
noses of the young girls so particularly large.  And there is nothing so
difficult to marry as a large nose; men don’t like them.  Good-night,
dear!  [_To_ LADY CHILTERN.]  Good-night, Gertrude!  [_Goes out on_ LORD
CAVERSHAM’S _arm_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  What a charming house you have, Lady Chiltern!  I have
spent a delightful evening.  It has been so interesting getting to know
your husband.

LADY CHILTERN.  Why did you wish to meet my husband, Mrs. Cheveley?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh, I will tell you.  I wanted to interest him in this
Argentine Canal scheme, of which I dare say you have heard.  And I found
him most susceptible,—susceptible to reason, I mean.  A rare thing in a
man.  I converted him in ten minutes.  He is going to make a speech in
the House to-morrow night in favour of the idea.  We must go to the
Ladies’ Gallery and hear him!  It will be a great occasion!

LADY CHILTERN.  There must be some mistake.  That scheme could never have
my husband’s support.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh, I assure you it’s all settled.  I don’t regret my
tedious journey from Vienna now.  It has been a great success.  But, of
course, for the next twenty-four hours the whole thing is a dead secret.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Gently_.]  A secret?  Between whom?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_With a flash of amusement in her eyes_.]  Between your
husband and myself.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Entering_.]  Your carriage is here, Mrs.
Cheveley!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thanks!  Good evening, Lady Chiltern!  Good-night, Lord
Goring!  I am at Claridge’s.  Don’t you think you might leave a card?

LORD GORING.  If you wish it, Mrs. Cheveley!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh, don’t be so solemn about it, or I shall be obliged to
leave a card on you.  In England I suppose that would hardly be
considered en règle.  Abroad, we are more civilised.  Will you see me
down, Sir Robert?  Now that we have both the same interests at heart we
shall be great friends, I hope!

[_Sails out on_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN’S _arm_.  LADY CHILTERN _goes to the
top of the staircase and looks down at them as they descend_.  _Her
expression is troubled_.  _After a little time she is joined by some of
the guests_, _and passes with them into another reception-room_.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  What a horrid woman!

LORD GORING.  You should go to bed, Miss Mabel.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Lord Goring!

LORD GORING.  My father told me to go to bed an hour ago.  I don’t see
why I shouldn’t give you the same advice.  I always pass on good advice.
It is the only thing to do with it.  It is never of any use to oneself.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Lord Goring, you are always ordering me out of the room.
I think it most courageous of you.  Especially as I am not going to bed
for hours.  [_Goes over to the sofa_.]  You can come and sit down if you
like, and talk about anything in the world, except the Royal Academy,
Mrs. Cheveley, or novels in Scotch dialect.  They are not improving
subjects.  [_Catches sight of something that is lying on the sofa half
hidden by the cushion_.]  What is this?  Some one has dropped a diamond
brooch!  Quite beautiful, isn’t it?  [_Shows it to him_.]  I wish it was
mine, but Gertrude won’t let me wear anything but pearls, and I am
thoroughly sick of pearls.  They make one look so plain, so good and so
intellectual.  I wonder whom the brooch belongs to.

LORD GORING.  I wonder who dropped it.

MABEL CHILTERN.  It is a beautiful brooch.

LORD GORING.  It is a handsome bracelet.

MABEL CHILTERN.  It isn’t a bracelet.  It’s a brooch.

LORD GORING.  It can be used as a bracelet.  [_Takes it from her_, _and_,
_pulling out a green letter-case_, _puts the ornament carefully in it_,
_and replaces the whole thing in his breast-pocket with the most perfect
sang froid_.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  What are you doing?

LORD GORING.  Miss Mabel, I am going to make a rather strange request to
you.

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Eagerly_.]  Oh, pray do!  I have been waiting for it
all the evening.

LORD GORING.  [_Is a little taken aback_, _but recovers himself_.]  Don’t
mention to anybody that I have taken charge of this brooch.  Should any
one write and claim it, let me know at once.

MABEL CHILTERN.  That is a strange request.

LORD GORING.  Well, you see I gave this brooch to somebody once, years
ago.

MABEL CHILTERN.  You did?

LORD GORING.  Yes.

[LADY CHILTERN _enters alone_.  _The other guests have gone_.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  Then I shall certainly bid you good-night.  Good-night,
Gertrude!  [_Exit_.]

LADY CHILTERN.  Good-night, dear!  [_To_ LORD GORING.]  You saw whom Lady
Markby brought here to-night?

LORD GORING.  Yes.  It was an unpleasant surprise.  What did she come
here for?

LADY CHILTERN.  Apparently to try and lure Robert to uphold some
fraudulent scheme in which she is interested.  The Argentine Canal, in
fact.

LORD GORING.  She has mistaken her man, hasn’t she?

LADY CHILTERN.  She is incapable of understanding an upright nature like
my husband’s!

LORD GORING.  Yes.  I should fancy she came to grief if she tried to get
Robert into her toils.  It is extraordinary what astounding mistakes
clever women make.

LADY CHILTERN.  I don’t call women of that kind clever.  I call them
stupid!

LORD GORING.  Same thing often.  Good-night, Lady Chiltern!

LADY CHILTERN.  Good-night!

[_Enter_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  My dear Arthur, you are not going?  Do stop a
little!

LORD GORING.  Afraid I can’t, thanks.  I have promised to look in at the
Hartlocks’.  I believe they have got a mauve Hungarian band that plays
mauve Hungarian music.  See you soon.  Good-bye!

[_Exit_]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  How beautiful you look to-night, Gertrude!

LADY CHILTERN.  Robert, it is not true, is it?  You are not going to lend
your support to this Argentine speculation?  You couldn’t!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Starting_.]  Who told you I intended to do so?

LADY CHILTERN.  That woman who has just gone out, Mrs. Cheveley, as she
calls herself now.  She seemed to taunt me with it.  Robert, I know this
woman.  You don’t.  We were at school together.  She was untruthful,
dishonest, an evil influence on every one whose trust or friendship she
could win.  I hated, I despised her.  She stole things, she was a thief.
She was sent away for being a thief.  Why do you let her influence you?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Gertrude, what you tell me may be true, but it
happened many years ago.  It is best forgotten!  Mrs. Cheveley may have
changed since then.  No one should be entirely judged by their past.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Sadly_.]  One’s past is what one is.  It is the only
way by which people should be judged.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  That is a hard saying, Gertrude!

LADY CHILTERN.  It is a true saying, Robert.  And what did she mean by
boasting that she had got you to lend your support, your name, to a thing
I have heard you describe as the most dishonest and fraudulent scheme
there has ever been in political life?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Biting his lip_.]  I was mistaken in the view I
took.  We all may make mistakes.

LADY CHILTERN.  But you told me yesterday that you had received the
report from the Commission, and that it entirely condemned the whole
thing.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Walking up and down_.]  I have reasons now to
believe that the Commission was prejudiced, or, at any rate, misinformed.
Besides, Gertrude, public and private life are different things.  They
have different laws, and move on different lines.

LADY CHILTERN.  They should both represent man at his highest.  I see no
difference between them.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Stopping_.]  In the present case, on a matter of
practical politics, I have changed my mind.  That is all.

LADY CHILTERN.  All!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Sternly_.]  Yes!

LADY CHILTERN.  Robert!  Oh! it is horrible that I should have to ask you
such a question—Robert, are you telling me the whole truth?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Why do you ask me such a question?

LADY CHILTERN.  [_After a pause_.]  Why do you not answer it?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Sitting down_.]  Gertrude, truth is a very
complex thing, and politics is a very complex business.  There are wheels
within wheels.  One may be under certain obligations to people that one
must pay.  Sooner or later in political life one has to compromise.
Every one does.

LADY CHILTERN.  Compromise?  Robert, why do you talk so differently
to-night from the way I have always heard you talk?  Why are you changed?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I am not changed.  But circumstances alter things.

LADY CHILTERN.  Circumstances should never alter principles!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  But if I told you—

LADY CHILTERN.  What?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  That it was necessary, vitally necessary?

LADY CHILTERN.  It can never be necessary to do what is not honourable.
Or if it be necessary, then what is it that I have loved!  But it is not,
Robert; tell me it is not.  Why should it be?  What gain would you get?
Money?  We have no need of that!  And money that comes from a tainted
source is a degradation.  Power?  But power is nothing in itself.  It is
power to do good that is fine—that, and that only.  What is it, then?
Robert, tell me why you are going to do this dishonourable thing!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Gertrude, you have no right to use that word.  I
told you it was a question of rational compromise.  It is no more than
that.

LADY CHILTERN.  Robert, that is all very well for other men, for men who
treat life simply as a sordid speculation; but not for you, Robert, not
for you.  You are different.  All your life you have stood apart from
others.  You have never let the world soil you.  To the world, as to
myself, you have been an ideal always.  Oh! be that ideal still.  That
great inheritance throw not away—that tower of ivory do not destroy.
Robert, men can love what is beneath them—things unworthy, stained,
dishonoured.  We women worship when we love; and when we lose our
worship, we lose everything.  Oh! don’t kill my love for you, don’t kill
that!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Gertrude!

LADY CHILTERN.  I know that there are men with horrible secrets in their
lives—men who have done some shameful thing, and who in some critical
moment have to pay for it, by doing some other act of shame—oh! don’t
tell me you are such as they are!  Robert, is there in your life any
secret dishonour or disgrace?  Tell me, tell me at once, that—

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  That what?

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Speaking very slowly_.]  That our lives may drift
apart.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Drift apart?

LADY CHILTERN.  That they may be entirely separate.  It would be better
for us both.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Gertrude, there is nothing in my past life that you
might not know.

LADY CHILTERN.  I was sure of it, Robert, I was sure of it.  But why did
you say those dreadful things, things so unlike your real self?  Don’t
let us ever talk about the subject again.  You will write, won’t you, to
Mrs. Cheveley, and tell her that you cannot support this scandalous
scheme of hers?  If you have given her any promise you must take it back,
that is all!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Must I write and tell her that?

LADY CHILTERN.  Surely, Robert!  What else is there to do?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I might see her personally.  It would be better.

LADY CHILTERN.  You must never see her again, Robert.  She is not a woman
you should ever speak to.  She is not worthy to talk to a man like you.
No; you must write to her at once, now, this moment, and let your letter
show her that your decision is quite irrevocable!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Write this moment!

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  But it is so late.  It is close on twelve.

LADY CHILTERN.  That makes no matter.  She must know at once that she has
been mistaken in you—and that you are not a man to do anything base or
underhand or dishonourable.  Write here, Robert.  Write that you decline
to support this scheme of hers, as you hold it to be a dishonest scheme.
Yes—write the word dishonest.  She knows what that word means.  [SIR
ROBERT CHILTERN _sits down and writes a letter_.  _His wife takes it up
and reads it_.]  Yes; that will do.  [_Rings bell_.]  And now the
envelope.  [_He writes the envelope slowly_.  _Enter_ MASON.]  Have this
letter sent at once to Claridge’s Hotel.  There is no answer.  [_Exit_
MASON.  LADY CHILTERN _kneels down beside her husband_, _and puts her
arms around him_.]  Robert, love gives one an instinct to things.  I feel
to-night that I have saved you from something that might have been a
danger to you, from something that might have made men honour you less
than they do.  I don’t think you realise sufficiently, Robert, that you
have brought into the political life of our time a nobler atmosphere, a
finer attitude towards life, a freer air of purer aims and higher
ideals—I know it, and for that I love you, Robert.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Oh, love me always, Gertrude, love me always!

LADY CHILTERN.  I will love you always, because you will always be worthy
of love.  We needs must love the highest when we see it!  [_Kisses him
and rises and goes out_.]

[SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _walks up and down for a moment_; _then sits down
and buries his face in his hands_.  _The Servant enters and begins
pulling out the lights_.  SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _looks up_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Put out the lights, Mason, put out the lights!

[_The Servant puts out the lights_.  _The room becomes almost dark_.
_The only light there is comes from the great chandelier that hangs over
the staircase and illumines the tapestry of the Triumph of Love_.]

                                 ACT DROP




SECOND ACT


SCENE


_Morning-room at Sir Robert Chiltern’s house_.

[LORD GORING, _dressed in the height of fashion_, _is lounging in an
armchair_.  SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _is standing in front of the fireplace_.
_He is evidently in a state of great mental excitement and distress_.
_As the scene progresses he paces nervously up and down the room_.]

LORD GORING.  My dear Robert, it’s a very awkward business, very awkward
indeed.  You should have told your wife the whole thing.  Secrets from
other people’s wives are a necessary luxury in modern life.  So, at
least, I am always told at the club by people who are bald enough to know
better.  But no man should have a secret from his own wife.  She
invariably finds it out.  Women have a wonderful instinct about things.
They can discover everything except the obvious.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Arthur, I couldn’t tell my wife.  When could I have
told her?  Not last night.  It would have made a life-long separation
between us, and I would have lost the love of the one woman in the world
I worship, of the only woman who has ever stirred love within me.  Last
night it would have been quite impossible.  She would have turned from me
in horror . . . in horror and in contempt.

LORD GORING.  Is Lady Chiltern as perfect as all that?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Yes; my wife is as perfect as all that.

LORD GORING.  [_Taking off his left-hand glove_.]  What a pity!  I beg
your pardon, my dear fellow, I didn’t quite mean that.  But if what you
tell me is true, I should like to have a serious talk about life with
Lady Chiltern.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  It would be quite useless.

LORD GORING.  May I try?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Yes; but nothing could make her alter her views.

LORD GORING.  Well, at the worst it would simply be a psychological
experiment.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  All such experiments are terribly dangerous.

LORD GORING.  Everything is dangerous, my dear fellow.  If it wasn’t so,
life wouldn’t be worth living. . . . Well, I am bound to say that I think
you should have told her years ago.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  When?  When we were engaged?  Do you think she
would have married me if she had known that the origin of my fortune is
such as it is, the basis of my career such as it is, and that I had done
a thing that I suppose most men would call shameful and dishonourable?

LORD GORING.  [_Slowly_.]  Yes; most men would call it ugly names.  There
is no doubt of that.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Bitterly_.]  Men who every day do something of
the same kind themselves.  Men who, each one of them, have worse secrets
in their own lives.

LORD GORING.  That is the reason they are so pleased to find out other
people’s secrets.  It distracts public attention from their own.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  And, after all, whom did I wrong by what I did?  No
one.

LORD GORING.  [_Looking at him steadily_.]  Except yourself, Robert.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_After a pause_.]  Of course I had private
information about a certain transaction contemplated by the Government of
the day, and I acted on it.  Private information is practically the
source of every large modern fortune.

LORD GORING.  [_Tapping his boot with his cane_.]  And public scandal
invariably the result.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Pacing up and down the room_.]  Arthur, do you
think that what I did nearly eighteen years ago should be brought up
against me now?  Do you think it fair that a man’s whole career should be
ruined for a fault done in one’s boyhood almost?  I was twenty-two at the
time, and I had the double misfortune of being well-born and poor, two
unforgiveable things nowadays.  Is it fair that the folly, the sin of
one’s youth, if men choose to call it a sin, should wreck a life like
mine, should place me in the pillory, should shatter all that I have
worked for, all that I have built up.  Is it fair, Arthur?

LORD GORING.  Life is never fair, Robert.  And perhaps it is a good thing
for most of us that it is not.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Every man of ambition has to fight his century with
its own weapons.  What this century worships is wealth.  The God of this
century is wealth.  To succeed one must have wealth.  At all costs one
must have wealth.

LORD GORING.  You underrate yourself, Robert.  Believe me, without wealth
you could have succeeded just as well.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  When I was old, perhaps.  When I had lost my
passion for power, or could not use it.  When I was tired, worn out,
disappointed.  I wanted my success when I was young.  Youth is the time
for success.  I couldn’t wait.

LORD GORING.  Well, you certainly have had your success while you are
still young.  No one in our day has had such a brilliant success.
Under-Secretary for Foreign Affairs at the age of forty—that’s good
enough for any one, I should think.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  And if it is all taken away from me now?  If I lose
everything over a horrible scandal?  If I am hounded from public life?

LORD GORING.  Robert, how could you have sold yourself for money?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Excitedly_.]  I did not sell myself for money.  I
bought success at a great price.  That is all.

LORD GORING.  [_Gravely_.]  Yes; you certainly paid a great price for it.
But what first made you think of doing such a thing?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Baron Arnheim.

LORD GORING.  Damned scoundrel!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  No; he was a man of a most subtle and refined
intellect.  A man of culture, charm, and distinction.  One of the most
intellectual men I ever met.

LORD GORING.  Ah! I prefer a gentlemanly fool any day.  There is more to
be said for stupidity than people imagine.  Personally I have a great
admiration for stupidity.  It is a sort of fellow-feeling, I suppose.
But how did he do it?  Tell me the whole thing.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Throws himself into an armchair by the
writing-table_.]  One night after dinner at Lord Radley’s the Baron began
talking about success in modern life as something that one could reduce
to an absolutely definite science.  With that wonderfully fascinating
quiet voice of his he expounded to us the most terrible of all
philosophies, the philosophy of power, preached to us the most marvellous
of all gospels, the gospel of gold.  I think he saw the effect he had
produced on me, for some days afterwards he wrote and asked me to come
and see him.  He was living then in Park Lane, in the house Lord Woolcomb
has now.  I remember so well how, with a strange smile on his pale,
curved lips, he led me through his wonderful picture gallery, showed me
his tapestries, his enamels, his jewels, his carved ivories, made me
wonder at the strange loveliness of the luxury in which he lived; and
then told me that luxury was nothing but a background, a painted scene in
a play, and that power, power over other men, power over the world, was
the one thing worth having, the one supreme pleasure worth knowing, the
one joy one never tired of, and that in our century only the rich
possessed it.

LORD GORING.  [_With great deliberation_.]  A thoroughly shallow creed.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Rising_.]  I didn’t think so then.  I don’t think
so now.  Wealth has given me enormous power.  It gave me at the very
outset of my life freedom, and freedom is everything.  You have never
been poor, and never known what ambition is.  You cannot understand what
a wonderful chance the Baron gave me.  Such a chance as few men get.

LORD GORING.  Fortunately for them, if one is to judge by results.  But
tell me definitely, how did the Baron finally persuade you to—well, to do
what you did?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  When I was going away he said to me that if I ever
could give him any private information of real value he would make me a
very rich man.  I was dazed at the prospect he held out to me, and my
ambition and my desire for power were at that time boundless.  Six weeks
later certain private documents passed through my hands.

LORD GORING.  [_Keeping his eyes steadily fixed on the carpet_.]  State
documents?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Yes.  [LORD GORING _sighs_, _then passes his hand
across his forehead and looks up_.]

LORD GORING.  I had no idea that you, of all men in the world, could have
been so weak, Robert, as to yield to such a temptation as Baron Arnheim
held out to you.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Weak?  Oh, I am sick of hearing that phrase.  Sick
of using it about others.  Weak?  Do you really think, Arthur, that it is
weakness that yields to temptation?  I tell you that there are terrible
temptations that it requires strength, strength and courage, to yield to.
To stake all one’s life on a single moment, to risk everything on one
throw, whether the stake be power or pleasure, I care not—there is no
weakness in that.  There is a horrible, a terrible courage.  I had that
courage.  I sat down the same afternoon and wrote Baron Arnheim the
letter this woman now holds.  He made three-quarters of a million over
the transaction.

LORD GORING.  And you?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I received from the Baron £110,000.

LORD GORING.  You were worth more, Robert.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  No; that money gave me exactly what I wanted, power
over others.  I went into the House immediately.  The Baron advised me in
finance from time to time.  Before five years I had almost trebled my
fortune.  Since then everything that I have touched has turned out a
success.  In all things connected with money I have had a luck so
extraordinary that sometimes it has made me almost afraid.  I remember
having read somewhere, in some strange book, that when the gods wish to
punish us they answer our prayers.

LORD GORING.  But tell me, Robert, did you never suffer any regret for
what you had done?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  No.  I felt that I had fought the century with its
own weapons, and won.

LORD GORING.  [_Sadly_.]  You thought you had won.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I thought so.  [_After a long pause_.]  Arthur, do
you despise me for what I have told you?

LORD GORING.  [_With deep feeling in his voice_.]  I am very sorry for
you, Robert, very sorry indeed.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I don’t say that I suffered any remorse.  I didn’t.
Not remorse in the ordinary, rather silly sense of the word.  But I have
paid conscience money many times.  I had a wild hope that I might disarm
destiny.  The sum Baron Arnheim gave me I have distributed twice over in
public charities since then.

LORD GORING.  [_Looking up_.]  In public charities?  Dear me! what a lot
of harm you must have done, Robert!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Oh, don’t say that, Arthur; don’t talk like that!

LORD GORING.  Never mind what I say, Robert!  I am always saying what I
shouldn’t say.  In fact, I usually say what I really think.  A great
mistake nowadays.  It makes one so liable to be misunderstood.  As
regards this dreadful business, I will help you in whatever way I can.
Of course you know that.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Thank you, Arthur, thank you.  But what is to be
done?  What can be done?

LORD GORING.  [_Leaning back with his hands in his pockets_.]  Well, the
English can’t stand a man who is always saying he is in the right, but
they are very fond of a man who admits that he has been in the wrong.  It
is one of the best things in them.  However, in your case, Robert, a
confession would not do.  The money, if you will allow me to say so, is
. . . awkward.  Besides, if you did make a clean breast of the whole
affair, you would never be able to talk morality again.  And in England a
man who can’t talk morality twice a week to a large, popular, immoral
audience is quite over as a serious politician.  There would be nothing
left for him as a profession except Botany or the Church.  A confession
would be of no use.  It would ruin you.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  It would ruin me.  Arthur, the only thing for me to
do now is to fight the thing out.

LORD GORING.  [_Rising from his chair_.]  I was waiting for you to say
that, Robert.  It is the only thing to do now.  And you must begin by
telling your wife the whole story.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  That I will not do.

LORD GORING.  Robert, believe me, you are wrong.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I couldn’t do it.  It would kill her love for me.
And now about this woman, this Mrs. Cheveley.  How can I defend myself
against her?  You knew her before, Arthur, apparently.

LORD GORING.  Yes.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Did you know her well?

LORD GORING.  [_Arranging his necktie_.]  So little that I got engaged to
be married to her once, when I was staying at the Tenbys’.  The affair
lasted for three days . . . nearly.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Why was it broken off?

LORD GORING.  [_Airily_.]  Oh, I forget.  At least, it makes no matter.
By the way, have you tried her with money?  She used to be confoundedly
fond of money.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I offered her any sum she wanted.  She refused.

LORD GORING.  Then the marvellous gospel of gold breaks down sometimes.
The rich can’t do everything, after all.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Not everything.  I suppose you are right.  Arthur,
I feel that public disgrace is in store for me.  I feel certain of it.  I
never knew what terror was before.  I know it now.  It is as if a hand of
ice were laid upon one’s heart.  It is as if one’s heart were beating
itself to death in some empty hollow.

LORD GORING.  [_Striking the table_.]  Robert, you must fight her.  You
must fight her.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  But how?

LORD GORING.  I can’t tell you how at present.  I have not the smallest
idea.  But every one has some weak point.  There is some flaw in each one
of us.  [_Strolls to the fireplace and looks at himself in the glass_.]
My father tells me that even I have faults.  Perhaps I have.  I don’t
know.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  In defending myself against Mrs. Cheveley, I have a
right to use any weapon I can find, have I not?

LORD GORING.  [_Still looking in the glass_.]  In your place I don’t
think I should have the smallest scruple in doing so.  She is thoroughly
well able to take care of herself.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Sits down at the table and takes a pen in his
hand_.]  Well, I shall send a cipher telegram to the Embassy at Vienna,
to inquire if there is anything known against her.  There may be some
secret scandal she might be afraid of.

LORD GORING.  [_Settling his buttonhole_.]  Oh, I should fancy Mrs.
Cheveley is one of those very modern women of our time who find a new
scandal as becoming as a new bonnet, and air them both in the Park every
afternoon at five-thirty.  I am sure she adores scandals, and that the
sorrow of her life at present is that she can’t manage to have enough of
them.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Writing_.]  Why do you say that?

LORD GORING.  [_Turning round_.]  Well, she wore far too much rouge last
night, and not quite enough clothes.  That is always a sign of despair in
a woman.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Striking a bell_.]  But it is worth while my
wiring to Vienna, is it not?

LORD GORING.  It is always worth while asking a question, though it is
not always worth while answering one.

[_Enter_ MASON.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Is Mr. Trafford in his room?

MASON.  Yes, Sir Robert.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Puts what he has written into an envelope_,
_which he then carefully closes_.]  Tell him to have this sent off in
cipher at once.  There must not be a moment’s delay.

MASON.  Yes, Sir Robert.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Oh! just give that back to me again.

[_Writes something on the envelope_.  MASON _then goes out with the
letter_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  She must have had some curious hold over Baron
Arnheim.  I wonder what it was.

LORD GORING.  [_Smiling_.]  I wonder.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I will fight her to the death, as long as my wife
knows nothing.

LORD GORING.  [_Strongly_.]  Oh, fight in any case—in any case.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_With a gesture of despair_.]  If my wife found
out, there would be little left to fight for.  Well, as soon as I hear
from Vienna, I shall let you know the result.  It is a chance, just a
chance, but I believe in it.  And as I fought the age with its own
weapons, I will fight her with her weapons.  It is only fair, and she
looks like a woman with a past, doesn’t she?

LORD GORING.  Most pretty women do.  But there is a fashion in pasts just
as there is a fashion in frocks.  Perhaps Mrs. Cheveley’s past is merely
a slightly décolleté one, and they are excessively popular nowadays.
Besides, my dear Robert, I should not build too high hopes on frightening
Mrs. Cheveley.  I should not fancy Mrs. Cheveley is a woman who would be
easily frightened.  She has survived all her creditors, and she shows
wonderful presence of mind.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Oh! I live on hopes now.  I clutch at every chance.
I feel like a man on a ship that is sinking.  The water is round my feet,
and the very air is bitter with storm.  Hush! I hear my wife’s voice.

[_Enter_ LADY CHILTERN _in walking dress_.]

LADY CHILTERN.  Good afternoon, Lord Goring!

LORD GORING.  Good afternoon, Lady Chiltern!  Have you been in the Park?

LADY CHILTERN.  No; I have just come from the Woman’s Liberal
Association, where, by the way, Robert, your name was received with loud
applause, and now I have come in to have my tea.  [_To_ LORD GORING.]
You will wait and have some tea, won’t you?

LORD GORING.  I’ll wait for a short time, thanks.

LADY CHILTERN.  I will be back in a moment.  I am only going to take my
hat off.

LORD GORING.  [_In his most earnest manner_.]  Oh! please don’t.  It is
so pretty.  One of the prettiest hats I ever saw.  I hope the Woman’s
Liberal Association received it with loud applause.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_With a smile_.]  We have much more important work to do
than look at each other’s bonnets, Lord Goring.

LORD GORING.  Really?  What sort of work?

LADY CHILTERN.  Oh! dull, useful, delightful things, Factory Acts, Female
Inspectors, the Eight Hours’ Bill, the Parliamentary Franchise. . . .
Everything, in fact, that you would find thoroughly uninteresting.

LORD GORING.  And never bonnets?

LADY CHILTERN.  [_With mock indignation_.]  Never bonnets, never!

[LADY CHILTERN _goes out through the door leading to her boudoir_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Takes_ LORD GORING’S _hand_.]  You have been a
good friend to me, Arthur, a thoroughly good friend.

LORD GORING.  I don’t know that I have been able to do much for you,
Robert, as yet.  In fact, I have not been able to do anything for you, as
far as I can see.  I am thoroughly disappointed with myself.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  You have enabled me to tell you the truth.  That is
something.  The truth has always stifled me.

LORD GORING.  Ah! the truth is a thing I get rid of as soon as possible!
Bad habit, by the way.  Makes one very unpopular at the club . . . with
the older members.  They call it being conceited.  Perhaps it is.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I would to God that I had been able to tell the
truth . . . to live the truth.  Ah! that is the great thing in life, to
live the truth.  [_Sighs_, _and goes towards the door_.]  I’ll see you
soon again, Arthur, shan’t I?

LORD GORING.  Certainly.  Whenever you like.  I’m going to look in at the
Bachelors’ Ball to-night, unless I find something better to do.  But I’ll
come round to-morrow morning.  If you should want me to-night by any
chance, send round a note to Curzon Street.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Thank you.

[_As he reaches the door_, LADY CHILTERN _enters from her boudoir_.]

LADY CHILTERN.  You are not going, Robert?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I have some letters to write, dear.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Going to him_.]  You work too hard, Robert.  You seem
never to think of yourself, and you are looking so tired.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  It is nothing, dear, nothing.

[_He kisses her and goes out_.]

LADY CHILTERN.  [_To_ LORD GORING.]  Do sit down.  I am so glad you have
called.  I want to talk to you about . . . well, not about bonnets, or
the Woman’s Liberal Association.  You take far too much interest in the
first subject, and not nearly enough in the second.

LORD GORING.  You want to talk to me about Mrs. Cheveley?

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes.  You have guessed it.  After you left last night I
found out that what she had said was really true.  Of course I made
Robert write her a letter at once, withdrawing his promise.

LORD GORING.  So he gave me to understand.

LADY CHILTERN.  To have kept it would have been the first stain on a
career that has been stainless always.  Robert must be above reproach.
He is not like other men.  He cannot afford to do what other men do.
[_She looks at_ LORD GORING, _who remains silent_.]  Don’t you agree with
me?  You are Robert’s greatest friend.  You are our greatest friend, Lord
Goring.  No one, except myself, knows Robert better than you do.  He has
no secrets from me, and I don’t think he has any from you.

LORD GORING.  He certainly has no secrets from me.  At least I don’t
think so.

LADY CHILTERN.  Then am I not right in my estimate of him?  I know I am
right.  But speak to me frankly.

LORD GORING.  [_Looking straight at her_.]  Quite frankly?

LADY CHILTERN.  Surely.  You have nothing to conceal, have you?

LORD GORING.  Nothing.  But, my dear Lady Chiltern, I think, if you will
allow me to say so, that in practical life—

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Smiling_.]  Of which you know so little, Lord Goring—

LORD GORING.  Of which I know nothing by experience, though I know
something by observation.  I think that in practical life there is
something about success, actual success, that is a little unscrupulous,
something about ambition that is unscrupulous always.  Once a man has set
his heart and soul on getting to a certain point, if he has to climb the
crag, he climbs the crag; if he has to walk in the mire—

LADY CHILTERN.  Well?

LORD GORING.  He walks in the mire.  Of course I am only talking
generally about life.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Gravely_.]  I hope so.  Why do you look at me so
strangely, Lord Goring?

LORD GORING.  Lady Chiltern, I have sometimes thought that . . . perhaps
you are a little hard in some of your views on life.  I think that . . .
often you don’t make sufficient allowances.  In every nature there are
elements of weakness, or worse than weakness.  Supposing, for instance,
that—that any public man, my father, or Lord Merton, or Robert, say, had,
years ago, written some foolish letter to some one . . .

LADY CHILTERN.  What do you mean by a foolish letter?

LORD GORING.  A letter gravely compromising one’s position.  I am only
putting an imaginary case.

LADY CHILTERN.  Robert is as incapable of doing a foolish thing as he is
of doing a wrong thing.

LORD GORING.  [_After a long pause_.]  Nobody is incapable of doing a
foolish thing.  Nobody is incapable of doing a wrong thing.

LADY CHILTERN.  Are you a Pessimist?  What will the other dandies say?
They will all have to go into mourning.

LORD GORING.  [_Rising_.]  No, Lady Chiltern, I am not a Pessimist.
Indeed I am not sure that I quite know what Pessimism really means.  All
I do know is that life cannot be understood without much charity, cannot
be lived without much charity.  It is love, and not German philosophy,
that is the true explanation of this world, whatever may be the
explanation of the next.  And if you are ever in trouble, Lady Chiltern,
trust me absolutely, and I will help you in every way I can.  If you ever
want me, come to me for my assistance, and you shall have it.  Come at
once to me.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Looking at him in surprise_.]  Lord Goring, you are
talking quite seriously.  I don’t think I ever heard you talk seriously
before.

LORD GORING.  [_Laughing_.]  You must excuse me, Lady Chiltern.  It won’t
occur again, if I can help it.

LADY CHILTERN.  But I like you to be serious.

[_Enter_ MABEL CHILTERN, _in the most ravishing frock_.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  Dear Gertrude, don’t say such a dreadful thing to Lord
Goring.  Seriousness would be very unbecoming to him.  Good afternoon
Lord Goring!  Pray be as trivial as you can.

LORD GORING.  I should like to, Miss Mabel, but I am afraid I am . . . a
little out of practice this morning; and besides, I have to be going now.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Just when I have come in!  What dreadful manners you
have!  I am sure you were very badly brought up.

LORD GORING.  I was.

MABEL CHILTERN.  I wish I had brought you up!

LORD GORING.  I am so sorry you didn’t.

MABEL CHILTERN.  It is too late now, I suppose?

LORD GORING.  [_Smiling_.]  I am not so sure.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Will you ride to-morrow morning?

LORD GORING.  Yes, at ten.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Don’t forget.

LORD GORING.  Of course I shan’t.  By the way, Lady Chiltern, there is no
list of your guests in _The Morning Post_ of to-day.  It has apparently
been crowded out by the County Council, or the Lambeth Conference, or
something equally boring.  Could you let me have a list?  I have a
particular reason for asking you.

LADY CHILTERN.  I am sure Mr. Trafford will be able to give you one.

LORD GORING.  Thanks, so much.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Tommy is the most useful person in London.

LORD GORING [_Turning to her_.]  And who is the most ornamental?

MABEL CHILTERN [_Triumphantly_.]  I am.

LORD GORING.  How clever of you to guess it!  [_Takes up his hat and
cane_.]  Good-bye, Lady Chiltern!  You will remember what I said to you,
won’t you?

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes; but I don’t know why you said it to me.

LORD GORING.  I hardly know myself.  Good-bye, Miss Mabel!

MABEL CHILTERN [_With a little moue of disappointment_.]  I wish you were
not going.  I have had four wonderful adventures this morning; four and a
half, in fact.  You might stop and listen to some of them.

LORD GORING.  How very selfish of you to have four and a half!  There
won’t be any left for me.

MABEL CHILTERN.  I don’t want you to have any.  They would not be good
for you.

LORD GORING.  That is the first unkind thing you have ever said to me.
How charmingly you said it!  Ten to-morrow.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Sharp.

LORD GORING.  Quite sharp.  But don’t bring Mr. Trafford.

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_With a little toss of the head_.]  Of course I shan’t
bring Tommy Trafford.  Tommy Trafford is in great disgrace.

LORD GORING.  I am delighted to hear it.  [_Bows and goes out_.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  Gertrude, I wish you would speak to Tommy Trafford.

LADY CHILTERN.  What has poor Mr. Trafford done this time?  Robert says
he is the best secretary he has ever had.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Well, Tommy has proposed to me again.  Tommy really does
nothing but propose to me.  He proposed to me last night in the
music-room, when I was quite unprotected, as there was an elaborate trio
going on.  I didn’t dare to make the smallest repartee, I need hardly
tell you.  If I had, it would have stopped the music at once.  Musical
people are so absurdly unreasonable.  They always want one to be
perfectly dumb at the very moment when one is longing to be absolutely
deaf.  Then he proposed to me in broad daylight this morning, in front of
that dreadful statue of Achilles.  Really, the things that go on in front
of that work of art are quite appalling.  The police should interfere.
At luncheon I saw by the glare in his eye that he was going to propose
again, and I just managed to check him in time by assuring him that I was
a bimetallist.  Fortunately I don’t know what bimetallism means.  And I
don’t believe anybody else does either.  But the observation crushed
Tommy for ten minutes.  He looked quite shocked.  And then Tommy is so
annoying in the way he proposes.  If he proposed at the top of his voice,
I should not mind so much.  That might produce some effect on the public.
But he does it in a horrid confidential way.  When Tommy wants to be
romantic he talks to one just like a doctor.  I am very fond of Tommy,
but his methods of proposing are quite out of date.  I wish, Gertrude,
you would speak to him, and tell him that once a week is quite often
enough to propose to any one, and that it should always be done in a
manner that attracts some attention.

LADY CHILTERN.  Dear Mabel, don’t talk like that.  Besides, Robert thinks
very highly of Mr. Trafford.  He believes he has a brilliant future
before him.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Oh! I wouldn’t marry a man with a future before him for
anything under the sun.

LADY CHILTERN.  Mabel!

MABEL CHILTERN.  I know, dear.  You married a man with a future, didn’t
you?  But then Robert was a genius, and you have a noble,
self-sacrificing character.  You can stand geniuses.  I have no character
at all, and Robert is the only genius I could ever bear.  As a rule, I
think they are quite impossible.  Geniuses talk so much, don’t they?
Such a bad habit!  And they are always thinking about themselves, when I
want them to be thinking about me.  I must go round now and rehearse at
Lady Basildon’s.  You remember, we are having tableaux, don’t you?  The
Triumph of something, I don’t know what!  I hope it will be triumph of
me.  Only triumph I am really interested in at present.  [_Kisses_ LADY
CHILTERN _and goes out_; _then comes running back_.]  Oh, Gertrude, do
you know who is coming to see you?  That dreadful Mrs. Cheveley, in a
most lovely gown.  Did you ask her?

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Rising_.]  Mrs. Cheveley!  Coming to see me?
Impossible!

MABEL CHILTERN.  I assure you she is coming upstairs, as large as life
and not nearly so natural.

LADY CHILTERN.  You need not wait, Mabel.  Remember, Lady Basildon is
expecting you.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Oh! I must shake hands with Lady Markby.  She is
delightful.  I love being scolded by her.

[_Enter_ MASON.]

MASON.  Lady Markby.  Mrs. Cheveley.

[_Enter_ LADY MARKBY _and_ MRS. CHEVELEY.]

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Advancing to meet them_.]  Dear Lady Markby, how nice
of you to come and see me!  [_Shakes hands with her_, _and bows somewhat
distantly to_ MRS. CHEVELEY.]  Won’t you sit down, Mrs. Cheveley?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thanks.  Isn’t that Miss Chiltern?  I should like so much
to know her.

LADY CHILTERN.  Mabel, Mrs. Cheveley wishes to know you.

[MABEL CHILTERN _gives a little nod_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY [_Sitting down_.]  I thought your frock so charming last
night, Miss Chiltern.  So simple and . . . suitable.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Really?  I must tell my dressmaker.  It will be such a
surprise to her.  Good-bye, Lady Markby!

LADY MARKBY.  Going already?

MABEL CHILTERN.  I am so sorry but I am obliged to.  I am just off to
rehearsal.  I have got to stand on my head in some tableaux.

LADY MARKBY.  On your head, child?  Oh! I hope not.  I believe it is most
unhealthy.  [_Takes a seat on the sofa next_ LADY CHILTERN.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  But it is for an excellent charity: in aid of the
Undeserving, the only people I am really interested in.  I am the
secretary, and Tommy Trafford is treasurer.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  And what is Lord Goring?

MABEL CHILTERN.  Oh! Lord Goring is president.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  The post should suit him admirably, unless he has
deteriorated since I knew him first.

LADY MARKBY.  [_Reflecting_.]  You are remarkably modern, Mabel.  A
little too modern, perhaps.  Nothing is so dangerous as being too modern.
One is apt to grow old-fashioned quite suddenly.  I have known many
instances of it.

MABEL CHILTERN.  What a dreadful prospect!

LADY MARKBY.  Ah! my dear, you need not be nervous.  You will always be
as pretty as possible.  That is the best fashion there is, and the only
fashion that England succeeds in setting.

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_With a curtsey_.]  Thank you so much, Lady Markby, for
England . . . and myself.  [_Goes out_.]

LADY MARKBY.  [_Turning to_ LADY CHILTERN.]  Dear Gertrude, we just
called to know if Mrs. Cheveley’s diamond brooch has been found.

LADY CHILTERN.  Here?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Yes.  I missed it when I got back to Claridge’s, and I
thought I might possibly have dropped it here.

LADY CHILTERN.  I have heard nothing about it.  But I will send for the
butler and ask.  [_Touches the bell_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh, pray don’t trouble, Lady Chiltern.  I dare say I lost
it at the Opera, before we came on here.

LADY MARKBY.  Ah yes, I suppose it must have been at the Opera.  The fact
is, we all scramble and jostle so much nowadays that I wonder we have
anything at all left on us at the end of an evening.  I know myself that,
when I am coming back from the Drawing Room, I always feel as if I hadn’t
a shred on me, except a small shred of decent reputation, just enough to
prevent the lower classes making painful observations through the windows
of the carriage.  The fact is that our Society is terribly
over-populated.  Really, some one should arrange a proper scheme of
assisted emigration.  It would do a great deal of good.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I quite agree with you, Lady Markby.  It is nearly six
years since I have been in London for the Season, and I must say Society
has become dreadfully mixed.  One sees the oddest people everywhere.

LADY MARKBY.  That is quite true, dear.  But one needn’t know them.  I’m
sure I don’t know half the people who come to my house.  Indeed, from all
I hear, I shouldn’t like to.

[_Enter_ MASON.]

LADY CHILTERN.  What sort of a brooch was it that you lost, Mrs.
Cheveley?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  A diamond snake-brooch with a ruby, a rather large ruby.

LADY MARKBY.  I thought you said there was a sapphire on the head, dear?

MRS. CHEVELEY [_Smiling_.]  No, lady Markby—a ruby.

LADY MARKBY.  [_Nodding her head_.]  And very becoming, I am quite sure.

LADY CHILTERN.  Has a ruby and diamond brooch been found in any of the
rooms this morning, Mason?

MASON.  No, my lady.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  It really is of no consequence, Lady Chiltern.  I am so
sorry to have put you to any inconvenience.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Coldly_.]  Oh, it has been no inconvenience.  That will
do, Mason.  You can bring tea.

[_Exit_ MASON.]

LADY MARKBY.  Well, I must say it is most annoying to lose anything.  I
remember once at Bath, years ago, losing in the Pump Room an exceedingly
handsome cameo bracelet that Sir John had given me.  I don’t think he has
ever given me anything since, I am sorry to say.  He has sadly
degenerated.  Really, this horrid House of Commons quite ruins our
husbands for us.  I think the Lower House by far the greatest blow to a
happy married life that there has been since that terrible thing called
the Higher Education of Women was invented.

LADY CHILTERN.  Ah! it is heresy to say that in this house, Lady Markby.
Robert is a great champion of the Higher Education of Women, and so, I am
afraid, am I.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  The higher education of men is what I should like to see.
Men need it so sadly.

LADY MARKBY.  They do, dear.  But I am afraid such a scheme would be
quite unpractical.  I don’t think man has much capacity for development.
He has got as far as he can, and that is not far, is it?  With regard to
women, well, dear Gertrude, you belong to the younger generation, and I
am sure it is all right if you approve of it.  In my time, of course, we
were taught not to understand anything.  That was the old system, and
wonderfully interesting it was.  I assure you that the amount of things I
and my poor dear sister were taught not to understand was quite
extraordinary.  But modern women understand everything, I am told.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Except their husbands.  That is the one thing the modern
woman never understands.

LADY MARKBY.  And a very good thing too, dear, I dare say.  It might
break up many a happy home if they did.  Not yours, I need hardly say,
Gertrude.  You have married a pattern husband.  I wish I could say as
much for myself.  But since Sir John has taken to attending the debates
regularly, which he never used to do in the good old days, his language
has become quite impossible.  He always seems to think that he is
addressing the House, and consequently whenever he discusses the state of
the agricultural labourer, or the Welsh Church, or something quite
improper of that kind, I am obliged to send all the servants out of the
room.  It is not pleasant to see one’s own butler, who has been with one
for twenty-three years, actually blushing at the side-board, and the
footmen making contortions in corners like persons in circuses.  I assure
you my life will be quite ruined unless they send John at once to the
Upper House.  He won’t take any interest in politics then, will he?  The
House of Lords is so sensible.  An assembly of gentlemen.  But in his
present state, Sir John is really a great trial.  Why, this morning
before breakfast was half over, he stood up on the hearthrug, put his
hands in his pockets, and appealed to the country at the top of his
voice.  I left the table as soon as I had my second cup of tea, I need
hardly say.  But his violent language could be heard all over the house!
I trust, Gertrude, that Sir Robert is not like that?

LADY CHILTERN.  But I am very much interested in politics, Lady Markby.
I love to hear Robert talk about them.

LADY MARKBY.  Well, I hope he is not as devoted to Blue Books as Sir John
is.  I don’t think they can be quite improving reading for any one.

MRS. CHEVELEY [_Languidly_.]  I have never read a Blue Book.  I prefer
books . . . in yellow covers.

LADY MARKBY.  [_Genially unconscious_.]  Yellow is a gayer colour, is it
not?  I used to wear yellow a good deal in my early days, and would do so
now if Sir John was not so painfully personal in his observations, and a
man on the question of dress is always ridiculous, is he not?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh, no!  I think men are the only authorities on dress.

LADY MARKBY.  Really?  One wouldn’t say so from the sort of hats they
wear? would one?

[_The butler enters_, _followed by the footman_.  _Tea is set on a small
table close to_ LADY CHILTERN.]

LADY CHILTERN.  May I give you some tea, Mrs. Cheveley?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thanks.  [_The butler hands_ MRS. CHEVELEY _a cup of tea
on a salver_.]

LADY CHILTERN.  Some tea, Lady Markby?

LADY MARKBY.  No thanks, dear.  [_The servants go out_.]  The fact is, I
have promised to go round for ten minutes to see poor Lady Brancaster,
who is in very great trouble.  Her daughter, quite a well-brought-up
girl, too, has actually become engaged to be married to a curate in
Shropshire.  It is very sad, very sad indeed.  I can’t understand this
modern mania for curates.  In my time we girls saw them, of course,
running about the place like rabbits.  But we never took any notice of
them, I need hardly say.  But I am told that nowadays country society is
quite honeycombed with them.  I think it most irreligious.  And then the
eldest son has quarrelled with his father, and it is said that when they
meet at the club Lord Brancaster always hides himself behind the money
article in _The Times_.  However, I believe that is quite a common
occurrence nowadays and that they have to take in extra copies of _The
Times_ at all the clubs in St. James’s Street; there are so many sons who
won’t have anything to do with their fathers, and so many fathers who
won’t speak to their sons.  I think myself, it is very much to be
regretted.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  So do I.  Fathers have so much to learn from their sons
nowadays.

LADY MARKBY.  Really, dear?  What?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  The art of living.  The only really Fine Art we have
produced in modern times.

LADY MARKBY.  [_Shaking her head_.]  Ah!  I am afraid Lord Brancaster
knew a good deal about that.  More than his poor wife ever did.
[_Turning to_ LADY CHILTERN.]  You know Lady Brancaster, don’t you, dear?

LADY CHILTERN.  Just slightly.  She was staying at Langton last autumn,
when we were there.

LADY MARKBY.  Well, like all stout women, she looks the very picture of
happiness, as no doubt you noticed.  But there are many tragedies in her
family, besides this affair of the curate.  Her own sister, Mrs. Jekyll,
had a most unhappy life; through no fault of her own, I am sorry to say.
She ultimately was so broken-hearted that she went into a convent, or on
to the operatic stage, I forget which.  No; I think it was decorative
art-needlework she took up.  I know she had lost all sense of pleasure in
life.  [_Rising_.]  And now, Gertrude, if you will allow me, I shall
leave Mrs. Cheveley in your charge and call back for her in a quarter of
an hour.  Or perhaps, dear Mrs. Cheveley, you wouldn’t mind waiting in
the carriage while I am with Lady Brancaster.  As I intend it to be a
visit of condolence, I shan’t stay long.

MRS. CHEVELEY [_Rising_.]  I don’t mind waiting in the carriage at all,
provided there is somebody to look at one.

LADY MARKBY.  Well, I hear the curate is always prowling about the house.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I am afraid I am not fond of girl friends.

LADY CHILTERN [_Rising_.]  Oh, I hope Mrs. Cheveley will stay here a
little.  I should like to have a few minutes’ conversation with her.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  How very kind of you, Lady Chiltern!  Believe me, nothing
would give me greater pleasure.

LADY MARKBY.  Ah! no doubt you both have many pleasant reminiscences of
your schooldays to talk over together.  Good-bye, dear Gertrude!  Shall I
see you at Lady Bonar’s to-night?  She has discovered a wonderful new
genius.  He does . . . nothing at all, I believe.  That is a great
comfort, is it not?

LADY CHILTERN.  Robert and I are dining at home by ourselves to-night,
and I don’t think I shall go anywhere afterwards.  Robert, of course,
will have to be in the House.  But there is nothing interesting on.

LADY MARKBY.  Dining at home by yourselves?  Is that quite prudent?  Ah,
I forgot, your husband is an exception.  Mine is the general rule, and
nothing ages a woman so rapidly as having married the general rule.
[_Exit_ LADY MARKBY.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Wonderful woman, Lady Markby, isn’t she?  Talks more and
says less than anybody I ever met.  She is made to be a public speaker.
Much more so than her husband, though he is a typical Englishman, always
dull and usually violent.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Makes no answer_, _but remains standing_.  _There is a
pause_.  _Then the eyes of the two women meet_.  LADY CHILTERN _looks
stern and pale_.  MRS. CHEVELEY _seem rather amused_.]  Mrs. Cheveley, I
think it is right to tell you quite frankly that, had I known who you
really were, I should not have invited you to my house last night.

MRS. CHEVELEY [_With an impertinent smile_.]  Really?

LADY CHILTERN.  I could not have done so.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I see that after all these years you have not changed a
bit, Gertrude.

LADY CHILTERN.  I never change.

MRS. CHEVELEY [_Elevating her eyebrows_.]  Then life has taught you
nothing?

LADY CHILTERN.  It has taught me that a person who has once been guilty
of a dishonest and dishonourable action may be guilty of it a second
time, and should be shunned.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Would you apply that rule to every one?

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes, to every one, without exception.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Then I am sorry for you, Gertrude, very sorry for you.

LADY CHILTERN.  You see now, I was sure, that for many reasons any
further acquaintance between us during your stay in London is quite
impossible?

MRS. CHEVELEY [_Leaning back in her chair_.]  Do you know, Gertrude, I
don’t mind your talking morality a bit.  Morality is simply the attitude
we adopt towards people whom we personally dislike.  You dislike me.  I
am quite aware of that.  And I have always detested you.  And yet I have
come here to do you a service.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Contemptuously_.]  Like the service you wished to
render my husband last night, I suppose.  Thank heaven, I saved him from
that.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Starting to her feet_.]  It was you who made him write
that insolent letter to me?  It was you who made him break his promise?

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Then you must make him keep it.  I give you till
to-morrow morning—no more.  If by that time your husband does not
solemnly bind himself to help me in this great scheme in which I am
interested—

LADY CHILTERN.  This fraudulent speculation—

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Call it what you choose.  I hold your husband in the
hollow of my hand, and if you are wise you will make him do what I tell
him.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Rising and going towards her_.]  You are impertinent.
What has my husband to do with you?  With a woman like you?

MRS. CHEVELEY [_With a bitter laugh_.]  In this world like meets with
like.  It is because your husband is himself fraudulent and dishonest
that we pair so well together.  Between you and him there are chasms.  He
and I are closer than friends.  We are enemies linked together.  The same
sin binds us.

LADY CHILTERN.  How dare you class my husband with yourself?  How dare
you threaten him or me?  Leave my house.  You are unfit to enter it.

[SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _enters from behind_.  _He hears his wife’s last
words_, _and sees to whom they are addressed_.  _He grows deadly pale_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Your house!  A house bought with the price of dishonour.
A house, everything in which has been paid for by fraud.  [_Turns round
and sees_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.]  Ask him what the origin of his fortune
is!  Get him to tell you how he sold to a stockbroker a Cabinet secret.
Learn from him to what you owe your position.

LADY CHILTERN.  It is not true!  Robert!  It is not true!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Pointing at him with outstretched finger_.]  Look at
him!  Can he deny it?  Does he dare to?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Go!  Go at once.  You have done your worst now.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  My worst?  I have not yet finished with you, with either
of you.  I give you both till to-morrow at noon.  If by then you don’t do
what I bid you to do, the whole world shall know the origin of Robert
Chiltern.

[SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _strikes the bell_.  _Enter_ MASON.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Show Mrs. Cheveley out.

[MRS. CHEVELEY _starts_; _then bows with somewhat exaggerated politeness
to_ LADY CHILTERN, _who makes no sign of response_.  _As she passes by_
SIR ROBERT CHILTERN, _who is standing close to the door_, _she pauses for
a moment and looks him straight in the face_.  _She then goes out_,
_followed by the servant_, _who closes the door after him_.  _The husband
and wife are left alone_.  LADY CHILTERN _stands like some one in a
dreadful dream_.  _Then she turns round and looks at her husband_.  _She
looks at him with strange eyes_, _as though she were seeing him for the
first time_.]

LADY CHILTERN.  You sold a Cabinet secret for money!  You began your life
with fraud!  You built up your career on dishonour!  Oh, tell me it is
not true!  Lie to me!  Lie to me!  Tell me it is not true!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  What this woman said is quite true.  But, Gertrude,
listen to me.  You don’t realise how I was tempted.  Let me tell you the
whole thing. [_Goes towards her_.]

LADY CHILTERN.  Don’t come near me.  Don’t touch me.  I feel as if you
had soiled me for ever.  Oh! what a mask you have been wearing all these
years!  A horrible painted mask!  You sold yourself for money.  Oh! a
common thief were better.  You put yourself up to sale to the highest
bidder!  You were bought in the market.  You lied to the whole world.
And yet you will not lie to me.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Rushing towards her_.]  Gertrude!  Gertrude!

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Thrusting him back with outstretched hands_.]  No,
don’t speak!  Say nothing!  Your voice wakes terrible memories—memories
of things that made me love you—memories of words that made me love
you—memories that now are horrible to me.  And how I worshipped you!  You
were to me something apart from common life, a thing pure, noble, honest,
without stain.  The world seemed to me finer because you were in it, and
goodness more real because you lived.  And now—oh, when I think that I
made of a man like you my ideal! the ideal of my life!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  There was your mistake.  There was your error.  The
error all women commit.  Why can’t you women love us, faults and all?
Why do you place us on monstrous pedestals?  We have all feet of clay,
women as well as men; but when we men love women, we love them knowing
their weaknesses, their follies, their imperfections, love them all the
more, it may be, for that reason.  It is not the perfect, but the
imperfect, who have need of love.  It is when we are wounded by our own
hands, or by the hands of others, that love should come to cure us—else
what use is love at all?  All sins, except a sin against itself, Love
should forgive.  All lives, save loveless lives, true Love should pardon.
A man’s love is like that.  It is wider, larger, more human than a
woman’s.  Women think that they are making ideals of men.  What they are
making of us are false idols merely.  You made your false idol of me, and
I had not the courage to come down, show you my wounds, tell you my
weaknesses.  I was afraid that I might lose your love, as I have lost it
now.  And so, last night you ruined my life for me—yes, ruined it!  What
this woman asked of me was nothing compared to what she offered to me.
She offered security, peace, stability.  The sin of my youth, that I had
thought was buried, rose up in front of me, hideous, horrible, with its
hands at my throat.  I could have killed it for ever, sent it back into
its tomb, destroyed its record, burned the one witness against me.  You
prevented me.  No one but you, you know it.  And now what is there before
me but public disgrace, ruin, terrible shame, the mockery of the world, a
lonely dishonoured life, a lonely dishonoured death, it may be, some day?
Let women make no more ideals of men! let them not put them on alters and
bow before them, or they may ruin other lives as completely as you—you
whom I have so wildly loved—have ruined mine!

[_He passes from the room_.  LADY CHILTERN _rushes towards him_, _but the
door is closed when she reaches it_.  _Pale with anguish_, _bewildered_,
_helpless_, _she sways like a plant in the water_.  _Her hands_,
_outstretched_, _seem to tremble in the air like blossoms in the mind_.
_Then she flings herself down beside a sofa and buries her face_.  _Her
sobs are like the sobs of a child_.]

                                 ACT DROP




THIRD ACT


SCENE


_The Library in Lord Goring’s house_.  _An Adam room_.  _On the right is
the door leading into the hall_.  _On the left_, _the door of the
smoking-room_.  _A pair of folding doors at the back open into the
drawing-room_.  _The fire is lit_.  _Phipps_, _the butler_, _is arranging
some newspapers on the writing-table_.  _The distinction of Phipps is his
impassivity_. _He has been termed by enthusiasts the Ideal Butler_.  _The
Sphinx is not so incommunicable_.  _He is a mask with a manner_.  _Of his
intellectual or emotional life_, _history knows nothing_.  _He represents
the dominance of form_.

[_Enter_ LORD GORING _in evening dress with a buttonhole_.  _He is
wearing a silk hat and Inverness cape_.  _White-gloved_, _he carries a
Louis Seize cane_.  _His are all the delicate fopperies of Fashion_.
_One sees that he stands in immediate relation to modern life_, _makes it
indeed_, _and so masters it_.  _He is the first well-dressed philosopher
in the history of thought_.]

LORD GORING.  Got my second buttonhole for me, Phipps?

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.  [_Takes his hat_, _cane_, _and cape_, _and
presents new buttonhole on salver_.]

LORD GORING.  Rather distinguished thing, Phipps.  I am the only person
of the smallest importance in London at present who wears a buttonhole.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.  I have observed that,

LORD GORING.  [_Taking out old buttonhole_.]  You see, Phipps, Fashion is
what one wears oneself.  What is unfashionable is what other people wear.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.

LORD GORING.  Just as vulgarity is simply the conduct of other people.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.

LORD GORING.  [_Putting in a new buttonhole_.]  And falsehoods the truths
of other people.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.

LORD GORING.  Other people are quite dreadful.  The only possible society
is oneself.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.

LORD GORING.  To love oneself is the beginning of a lifelong romance,
Phipps.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.

LORD GORING.  [_Looking at himself in the glass_.]  Don’t think I quite
like this buttonhole, Phipps.  Makes me look a little too old.  Makes me
almost in the prime of life, eh, Phipps?

PHIPPS.  I don’t observe any alteration in your lordship’s appearance.

LORD GORING.  You don’t, Phipps?

PHIPPS.  No, my lord.

LORD GORING.  I am not quite sure.  For the future a more trivial
buttonhole, Phipps, on Thursday evenings.

PHIPPS.  I will speak to the florist, my lord.  She has had a loss in her
family lately, which perhaps accounts for the lack of triviality your
lordship complains of in the buttonhole.

LORD GORING.  Extraordinary thing about the lower classes in England—they
are always losing their relations.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord!  They are extremely fortunate in that respect.

LORD GORING.  [_Turns round and looks at him_.  PHIPPS _remains
impassive_.]  Hum!  Any letters, Phipps?

PHIPPS.  Three, my lord.  [_Hands letters on a salver_.]

LORD GORING.  [_Takes letters_.]  Want my cab round in twenty minutes.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.  [_Goes towards door_.]

LORD GORING.  [_Holds up letter in pink envelope_.]  Ahem!  Phipps, when
did this letter arrive?

PHIPPS.  It was brought by hand just after your lordship went to the
club.

LORD GORING.  That will do.  [_Exit_ PHIPPS.]  Lady Chiltern’s
handwriting on Lady Chiltern’s pink notepaper.  That is rather curious.
I thought Robert was to write.  Wonder what Lady Chiltern has got to say
to me?  [_Sits at bureau and opens letter_, _and reads it_.]  ‘I want
you.  I trust you.  I am coming to you.  Gertrude.’  [_Puts down the
letter with a puzzled look_.  _Then takes it up_, _and reads it again
slowly_.]  ‘I want you.  I trust you.  I am coming to you.’  So she has
found out everything!  Poor woman!  Poor woman!  [ _Pulls out watch and
looks at it_.]  But what an hour to call!  Ten o’clock!  I shall have to
give up going to the Berkshires.  However, it is always nice to be
expected, and not to arrive.  I am not expected at the Bachelors’, so I
shall certainly go there.  Well, I will make her stand by her husband.
That is the only thing for her to do.  That is the only thing for any
woman to do.  It is the growth of the moral sense in women that makes
marriage such a hopeless, one-sided institution.  Ten o’clock.  She
should be here soon.  I must tell Phipps I am not in to any one else.
[_Goes towards bell_]

[_Enter_ PHIPPS.]

PHIPPS.  Lord Caversham.

LORD GORING.  Oh, why will parents always appear at the wrong time?  Some
extraordinary mistake in nature, I suppose.  [_Enter_ LORD CAVERSHAM.]
Delighted to see you, my dear father.  [_Goes to meet him_.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Take my cloak off.

LORD GORING.  Is it worth while, father?

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Of course it is worth while, sir.  Which is the most
comfortable chair?

LORD GORING.  This one, father.  It is the chair I use myself, when I
have visitors.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Thank ye.  No draught, I hope, in this room?

LORD GORING.  No, father.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Sitting down_.]  Glad to hear it.  Can’t stand
draughts.  No draughts at home.

LORD GORING.  Good many breezes, father.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Eh?  Eh?  Don’t understand what you mean.  Want to have
a serious conversation with you, sir.

LORD GORING.  My dear father!  At this hour?

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Well, sir, it is only ten o’clock.  What is your
objection to the hour?  I think the hour is an admirable hour!

LORD GORING.  Well, the fact is, father, this is not my day for talking
seriously.  I am very sorry, but it is not my day.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  What do you mean, sir?

LORD GORING.  During the Season, father, I only talk seriously on the
first Tuesday in every month, from four to seven.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Well, make it Tuesday, sir, make it Tuesday.

LORD GORING.  But it is after seven, father, and my doctor says I must
not have any serious conversation after seven.  It makes me talk in my
sleep.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Talk in your sleep, sir?  What does that matter?  You
are not married.

LORD GORING.  No, father, I am not married.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Hum!  That is what I have come to talk to you about,
sir.  You have got to get married, and at once.  Why, when I was your
age, sir, I had been an inconsolable widower for three months, and was
already paying my addresses to your admirable mother.  Damme, sir, it is
your duty to get married.  You can’t be always living for pleasure.
Every man of position is married nowadays.  Bachelors are not fashionable
any more.  They are a damaged lot.  Too much is known about them.  You
must get a wife, sir.  Look where your friend Robert Chiltern has got to
by probity, hard work, and a sensible marriage with a good woman.  Why
don’t you imitate him, sir?  Why don’t you take him for your model?

LORD GORING.  I think I shall, father.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  I wish you would, sir.  Then I should be happy.  At
present I make your mother’s life miserable on your account.  You are
heartless, sir, quite heartless.

LORD GORING.  I hope not, father.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  And it is high time for you to get married.  You are
thirty-four years of age, sir.

LORD GORING.  Yes, father, but I only admit to thirty-two—thirty-one and
a half when I have a really good buttonhole.  This buttonhole is not . . .
trivial enough.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  I tell you you are thirty-four, sir.  And there is a
draught in your room, besides, which makes your conduct worse.  Why did
you tell me there was no draught, sir?  I feel a draught, sir, I feel it
distinctly.

LORD GORING.  So do I, father.  It is a dreadful draught.  I will come
and see you to-morrow, father.  We can talk over anything you like.  Let
me help you on with your cloak, father.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  No, sir; I have called this evening for a definite
purpose, and I am going to see it through at all costs to my health or
yours.  Put down my cloak, sir.

LORD GORING.  Certainly, father.  But let us go into another room.
[_Rings bell_.]  There is a dreadful draught here.  [_Enter_ PHIPPS.]
Phipps, is there a good fire in the smoking-room?

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.

LORD GORING.  Come in there, father.  Your sneezes are quite
heartrending.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Well, sir, I suppose I have a right to sneeze when I
choose?

LORD GORING.  [_Apologetically_.]  Quite so, father.  I was merely
expressing sympathy.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Oh, damn sympathy.  There is a great deal too much of
that sort of thing going on nowadays.

LORD GORING.  I quite agree with you, father.  If there was less sympathy
in the world there would be less trouble in the world.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Going towards the smoking-room_.]  That is a paradox,
sir.  I hate paradoxes.

LORD GORING.  So do I, father.  Everybody one meets is a paradox
nowadays.  It is a great bore.  It makes society so obvious.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Turning round_, _and looking at his son beneath his
bushy eyebrows_.]  Do you always really understand what you say, sir?

LORD GORING.  [_After some hesitation_.]  Yes, father, if I listen
attentively.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Indignantly_.]  If you listen attentively! . . .
Conceited young puppy!

[_Goes off grumbling into the smoking-room_.  PHIPPS _enters_.]

LORD GORING.  Phipps, there is a lady coming to see me this evening on
particular business.  Show her into the drawing-room when she arrives.
You understand?

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.

LORD GORING.  It is a matter of the gravest importance, Phipps.

PHIPPS.  I understand, my lord.

LORD GORING.  No one else is to be admitted, under any circumstances.

PHIPPS.  I understand, my lord.  [_Bell rings_.]

LORD GORING.  Ah! that is probably the lady.  I shall see her myself.

[_Just as he is going towards the door_ LORD CAVERSHAM _enters from the
smoking-room_.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Well, sir? am I to wait attendance on you?

LORD GORING.  [_Considerably perplexed_.]  In a moment, father.  Do
excuse me.  [LORD CAVERSHAM _goes back_.]  Well, remember my
instructions, Phipps—into that room.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.

[LORD GORING _goes into the smoking-room_.  HAROLD, _the footman shows_
MRS. CHEVELEY _in_.  _Lamia-like_, _she is in green and silver_.  _She
has a cloak of black satin_, _lined with dead rose-leaf silk_.]

HAROLD.  What name, madam?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_To_ PHIPPS, _who advances towards her_.]  Is Lord
Goring not here?  I was told he was at home?

PHIPPS.  His lordship is engaged at present with Lord Caversham, madam.

[_Turns a cold_, _glassy eye on_ HAROLD, _who at once retires_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_To herself_.]  How very filial!

PHIPPS.  His lordship told me to ask you, madam, to be kind enough to
wait in the drawing-room for him.  His lordship will come to you there.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_With a look of surprise_.]  Lord Goring expects me?

PHIPPS.  Yes, madam.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Are you quite sure?

PHIPPS.  His lordship told me that if a lady called I was to ask her to
wait in the drawing-room.  [_Goes to the door of the drawing-room and
opens it_.]  His lordship’s directions on the subject were very precise.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_To herself_]  How thoughtful of him!  To expect the
unexpected shows a thoroughly modern intellect.  [_Goes towards the
drawing-room and looks in_.]  Ugh!  How dreary a bachelor’s drawing-room
always looks.  I shall have to alter all this.  [PHIPPS _brings the lamp
from the writing-table_.]  No, I don’t care for that lamp.  It is far too
glaring.  Light some candles.

PHIPPS.  [_Replaces lamp_.]  Certainly, madam.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I hope the candles have very becoming shades.

PHIPPS.  We have had no complaints about them, madam, as yet.

[_Passes into the drawing-room and begins to light the candles_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_To herself_.]  I wonder what woman he is waiting for
to-night.  It will be delightful to catch him.  Men always look so silly
when they are caught.  And they are always being caught.  [_Looks about
room and approaches the writing-table_.]  What a very interesting room!
What a very interesting picture!  Wonder what his correspondence is like.
[_Takes up letters_.]  Oh, what a very uninteresting correspondence!
Bills and cards, debts and dowagers!  Who on earth writes to him on pink
paper?  How silly to write on pink paper!  It looks like the beginning of
a middle-class romance.  Romance should never begin with sentiment.  It
should begin with science and end with a settlement.  [_Puts letter
down_, _then takes it up again_.]  I know that handwriting.  That is
Gertrude Chiltern’s.  I remember it perfectly.  The ten commandments in
every stroke of the pen, and the moral law all over the page.  Wonder
what Gertrude is writing to him about?  Something horrid about me, I
suppose.  How I detest that woman!  [_Reads it_.]  ‘I trust you.  I want
you.  I am coming to you.  Gertrude.’  ‘I trust you.  I want you.  I am
coming to you.’

[_A look of triumph comes over her face_.  _She is just about to steal
the letter_, _when_ PHIPPS _comes in_.]

PHIPPS.  The candles in the drawing-room are lit, madam, as you directed.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thank you.  [_Rises hastily and slips the letter under a
large silver-cased blotting-book that is lying on the table_.]

PHIPPS.  I trust the shades will be to your liking, madam.  They are the
most becoming we have.  They are the same as his lordship uses himself
when he is dressing for dinner.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_With a smile_.]  Then I am sure they will be perfectly
right.

PHIPPS.  [_Gravely_.]  Thank you, madam.

[MRS. CHEVELEY _goes into the drawing-room_.  PHIPPS _closes the door and
retires_.  _The door is then slowly opened_, _and_ MRS. CHEVELEY _comes
out and creeps stealthily towards the writing-table_.  _Suddenly voices
are heard from the smoking-room_.  MRS. CHEVELEY _grows pale_, _and
stops_.  _The voices grow louder_, _and she goes back into the
drawing-room_, _biting her lip_.]

[_Enter_ LORD GORING _and_ LORD CAVERSHAM.]

LORD GORING.  [_Expostulating_.]  My dear father, if I am to get married,
surely you will allow me to choose the time, place, and person?
Particularly the person.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Testily_.]  That is a matter for me, sir.  You would
probably make a very poor choice.  It is I who should be consulted, not
you.  There is property at stake.  It is not a matter for affection.
Affection comes later on in married life.

LORD GORING.  Yes.  In married life affection comes when people
thoroughly dislike each other, father, doesn’t it?  [_Puts on_ LORD
CAVERSHAM’S _cloak for him_.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Certainly, sir.  I mean certainly not, air.  You are
talking very foolishly to-night.  What I say is that marriage is a matter
for common sense.

LORD GORING.  But women who have common sense are so curiously plain,
father, aren’t they?  Of course I only speak from hearsay.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  No woman, plain or pretty, has any common sense at all,
sir.  Common sense is the privilege of our sex.

LORD GORING.  Quite so.  And we men are so self-sacrificing that we never
use it, do we, father?

LORD CAVERSHAM.  I use it, sir.  I use nothing else.

LORD GORING.  So my mother tells me.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  It is the secret of your mother’s happiness.  You are
very heartless, sir, very heartless.

LORD GORING.  I hope not, father.

[_Goes out for a moment_.  _Then returns_, _looking rather put out_,
_with_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  My dear Arthur, what a piece of good luck meeting
you on the doorstep!  Your servant had just told me you were not at home.
How extraordinary!

LORD GORING.  The fact is, I am horribly busy to-night, Robert, and I
gave orders I was not at home to any one.  Even my father had a
comparatively cold reception.  He complained of a draught the whole time.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Ah! you must be at home to me, Arthur.  You are my
best friend.  Perhaps by to-morrow you will be my only friend.  My wife
has discovered everything.

LORD GORING.  Ah! I guessed as much!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Looking at him_.]  Really!  How?

LORD GORING.  [_After some hesitation_.]  Oh, merely by something in the
expression of your face as you came in.  Who told her?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Mrs. Cheveley herself.  And the woman I love knows
that I began my career with an act of low dishonesty, that I built up my
life upon sands of shame—that I sold, like a common huckster, the secret
that had been intrusted to me as a man of honour.  I thank heaven poor
Lord Radley died without knowing that I betrayed him.  I would to God I
had died before I had been so horribly tempted, or had fallen so low.
[_Burying his face in his hands_.]

LORD GORING.  [_After a pause_.]  You have heard nothing from Vienna yet,
in answer to your wire?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Looking up_.]  Yes; I got a telegram from the
first secretary at eight o’clock to-night.

LORD GORING.  Well?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Nothing is absolutely known against her.  On the
contrary, she occupies a rather high position in society.  It is a sort
of open secret that Baron Arnheim left her the greater portion of his
immense fortune.  Beyond that I can learn nothing.

LORD GORING.  She doesn’t turn out to be a spy, then?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Oh! spies are of no use nowadays.  Their profession
is over.  The newspapers do their work instead.

LORD GORING.  And thunderingly well they do it.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Arthur, I am parched with thirst.  May I ring for
something?  Some hock and seltzer?

LORD GORING.  Certainly.  Let me.  [_Rings the bell_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Thanks!  I don’t know what to do, Arthur, I don’t
know what to do, and you are my only friend.  But what a friend you
are—the one friend I can trust.  I can trust you absolutely, can’t I?

[_Enter_ PHIPPS.]

LORD GORING.  My dear Robert, of course.  Oh!  [_To_ PHIPPS.]  Bring some
hock and seltzer.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.

LORD GORING.  And Phipps!

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.

LORD GORING.  Will you excuse me for a moment, Robert?  I want to give
some directions to my servant.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Certainly.

LORD GORING.  When that lady calls, tell her that I am not expected home
this evening.  Tell her that I have been suddenly called out of town.
You understand?

PHIPPS.  The lady is in that room, my lord.  You told me to show her into
that room, my lord.

LORD GORING.  You did perfectly right.  [_Exit_ PHIPPS.]  What a mess I
am in.  No; I think I shall get through it.  I’ll give her a lecture
through the door.  Awkward thing to manage, though.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Arthur, tell me what I should do.  My life seems to
have crumbled about me.  I am a ship without a rudder in a night without
a star.

LORD GORING.  Robert, you love your wife, don’t you?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I love her more than anything in the world.  I used
to think ambition the great thing.  It is not.  Love is the great thing
in the world.  There is nothing but love, and I love her.  But I am
defamed in her eyes.  I am ignoble in her eyes.  There is a wide gulf
between us now.  She has found me out, Arthur, she has found me out.

LORD GORING.  Has she never in her life done some folly—some
indiscretion—that she should not forgive your sin?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  My wife!  Never!  She does not know what weakness
or temptation is.  I am of clay like other men.  She stands apart as good
women do—pitiless in her perfection—cold and stern and without mercy.
But I love her, Arthur.  We are childless, and I have no one else to
love, no one else to love me.  Perhaps if God had sent us children she
might have been kinder to me.  But God has given us a lonely house.  And
she has cut my heart in two.  Don’t let us talk of it.  I was brutal to
her this evening.  But I suppose when sinners talk to saints they are
brutal always.  I said to her things that were hideously true, on my
side, from my stand-point, from the standpoint of men.  But don’t let us
talk of that.

LORD GORING.  Your wife will forgive you.  Perhaps at this moment she is
forgiving you.  She loves you, Robert.  Why should she not forgive?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  God grant it!  God grant it!  [_Buries his face in
his hands_.]  But there is something more I have to tell you, Arthur.

[_Enter_ PHIPPS _with drinks_.]

PHIPPS.  [_Hands hock and seltzer to_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.]  Hock and
seltzer, sir.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Thank you.

LORD GORING.  Is your carriage here, Robert?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  No; I walked from the club.

LORD GORING.  Sir Robert will take my cab, Phipps.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.  [_Exit_.]

LORD GORING.  Robert, you don’t mind my sending you away?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Arthur, you must let me stay for five minutes.  I
have made up my mind what I am going to do to-night in the House.  The
debate on the Argentine Canal is to begin at eleven.  [_A chair falls in
the drawing-room_.]  What is that?

LORD GORING.  Nothing.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I heard a chair fall in the next room.  Some one
has been listening.

LORD GORING.  No, no; there is no one there.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  There is some one.  There are lights in the room,
and the door is ajar.  Some one has been listening to every secret of my
life.  Arthur, what does this mean?

LORD GORING.  Robert, you are excited, unnerved.  I tell you there is no
one in that room. Sit down, Robert.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Do you give me your word that there is no one
there?

LORD GORING.  Yes.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Your word of honour?  [_Sits down_.]

LORD GORING.  Yes.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Rises_.]  Arthur, let me see for myself.

LORD GORING.  No, no.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  If there is no one there why should I not look in
that room?  Arthur, you must let me go into that room and satisfy myself.
Let me know that no eavesdropper has heard my life’s secret.  Arthur, you
don’t realise what I am going through.

LORD GORING.  Robert, this must stop.  I have told you that there is no
one in that room—that is enough.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Rushes to the door of the room_.]  It is not
enough.  I insist on going into this room.  You have told me there is no
one there, so what reason can you have for refusing me?

LORD GORING.  For God’s sake, don’t!  There is some one there.  Some one
whom you must not see.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Ah, I thought so!

LORD GORING.  I forbid you to enter that room.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Stand back.  My life is at stake.  And I don’t care
who is there.  I will know who it is to whom I have told my secret and my
shame.  [_Enters room_.]

LORD GORING.  Great heavens! his own wife!

[SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _comes back_, _with a look of scorn and anger on his
face_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  What explanation have you to give me for the
presence of that woman here?

LORD GORING.  Robert, I swear to you on my honour that that lady is
stainless and guiltless of all offence towards you.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  She is a vile, an infamous thing!

LORD GORING.  Don’t say that, Robert!  It was for your sake she came
here.  It was to try and save you she came here.  She loves you and no
one else.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  You are mad.  What have I to do with her intrigues
with you?  Let her remain your mistress!  You are well suited to each
other.  She, corrupt and shameful—you, false as a friend, treacherous as
an enemy even—

LORD GORING.  It is not true, Robert.  Before heaven, it is not true.  In
her presence and in yours I will explain all.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Let me pass, sir.  You have lied enough upon your
word of honour.

[SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _goes out_.  LORD GORING _rushes to the door of the
drawing-room_, _when_ MRS. CHEVELEY _comes out_, _looking radiant and
much amused_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_With a mock curtsey_]  Good evening, Lord Goring!

LORD GORING.  Mrs. Cheveley!  Great heavens! . . . May I ask what you
were doing in my drawing-room?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Merely listening.  I have a perfect passion for listening
through keyholes.  One always hears such wonderful things through them.

LORD GORING.  Doesn’t that sound rather like tempting Providence?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh! surely Providence can resist temptation by this time.
[_Makes a sign to him to take her cloak off_, _which he does_.]

LORD GORING.  I am glad you have called.  I am going to give you some
good advice.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh! pray don’t.  One should never give a woman anything
that she can’t wear in the evening.

LORD GORING.  I see you are quite as wilful as you used to be.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Far more!  I have greatly improved.  I have had more
experience.

LORD GORING.  Too much experience is a dangerous thing.  Pray have a
cigarette.  Half the pretty women in London smoke cigarettes.  Personally
I prefer the other half.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thanks.  I never smoke.  My dressmaker wouldn’t like it,
and a woman’s first duty in life is to her dressmaker, isn’t it?  What
the second duty is, no one has as yet discovered.

LORD GORING.  You have come here to sell me Robert Chiltern’s letter,
haven’t you?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  To offer it to you on conditions.  How did you guess
that?

LORD GORING.  Because you haven’t mentioned the subject.  Have you got it
with you?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Sitting down_.]  Oh, no!  A well-made dress has no
pockets.

LORD GORING.  What is your price for it?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  How absurdly English you are!  The English think that a
cheque-book can solve every problem in life.  Why, my dear Arthur, I have
very much more money than you have, and quite as much as Robert Chiltern
has got hold of.  Money is not what I want.

LORD GORING.  What do you want then, Mrs. Cheveley?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Why don’t you call me Laura?

LORD GORING.  I don’t like the name.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  You used to adore it.

LORD GORING.  Yes: that’s why.  [MRS. CHEVELEY _motions to him to sit
down beside her_.  _He smiles_, _and does so_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Arthur, you loved me once.

LORD GORING.  Yes.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  And you asked me to be your wife.

LORD GORING.  That was the natural result of my loving you.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  And you threw me over because you saw, or said you saw,
poor old Lord Mortlake trying to have a violent flirtation with me in the
conservatory at Tenby.

LORD GORING.  I am under the impression that my lawyer settled that
matter with you on certain terms . . . dictated by yourself.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  At that time I was poor; you were rich.

LORD GORING.  Quite so.  That is why you pretended to love me.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Shrugging her shoulders_.]  Poor old Lord Mortlake, who
had only two topics of conversation, his gout and his wife!  I never
could quite make out which of the two he was talking about.  He used the
most horrible language about them both.  Well, you were silly, Arthur.
Why, Lord Mortlake was never anything more to me than an amusement.  One
of those utterly tedious amusements one only finds at an English country
house on an English country Sunday.  I don’t think any one at all morally
responsible for what he or she does at an English country house.

LORD GORING.  Yes.  I know lots of people think that.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I loved you, Arthur.

LORD GORING.  My dear Mrs. Cheveley, you have always been far too clever
to know anything about love.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I did love you.  And you loved me.  You know you loved
me; and love is a very wonderful thing.  I suppose that when a man has
once loved a woman, he will do anything for her, except continue to love
her?  [_Puts her hand on his_.]

LORD GORING.  [_Taking his hand away quietly_.]  Yes: except that.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_After a pause_.]  I am tired of living abroad.  I want
to come back to London.  I want to have a charming house here.  I want to
have a salon.  If one could only teach the English how to talk, and the
Irish how to listen, society here would be quite civilised.  Besides, I
have arrived at the romantic stage.  When I saw you last night at the
Chilterns’, I knew you were the only person I had ever cared for, if I
ever have cared for anybody, Arthur.  And so, on the morning of the day
you marry me, I will give you Robert Chiltern’s letter.  That is my
offer.  I will give it to you now, if you promise to marry me.

LORD GORING.  Now?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Smiling_.]  To-morrow.

LORD GORING.  Are you really serious?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Yes, quite serious.

LORD GORING.  I should make you a very bad husband.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I don’t mind bad husbands.  I have had two.  They amused
me immensely.

LORD GORING.  You mean that you amused yourself immensely, don’t you?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  What do you know about my married life?

LORD GORING.  Nothing: but I can read it like a book.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  What book?

LORD GORING.  [_Rising_.]  The Book of Numbers.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Do you think it is quite charming of you to be so rude to
a woman in your own house?

LORD GORING.  In the case of very fascinating women, sex is a challenge,
not a defence.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I suppose that is meant for a compliment.  My dear
Arthur, women are never disarmed by compliments.  Men always are.  That
is the difference between the two sexes.

LORD GORING.  Women are never disarmed by anything, as far as I know
them.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_After a pause_.]  Then you are going to allow your
greatest friend, Robert Chiltern, to be ruined, rather than marry some
one who really has considerable attractions left.  I thought you would
have risen to some great height of self-sacrifice, Arthur.  I think you
should.  And the rest of your life you could spend in contemplating your
own perfections.

LORD GORING.  Oh! I do that as it is.  And self-sacrifice is a thing that
should be put down by law.  It is so demoralising to the people for whom
one sacrifices oneself.  They always go to the bad.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  As if anything could demoralise Robert Chiltern!  You
seem to forget that I know his real character.

LORD GORING.  What you know about him is not his real character.  It was
an act of folly done in his youth, dishonourable, I admit, shameful, I
admit, unworthy of him, I admit, and therefore . . . not his true
character.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  How you men stand up for each other!

LORD GORING.  How you women war against each other!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Bitterly_.]  I only war against one woman, against
Gertrude Chiltern.  I hate her.  I hate her now more than ever.

LORD GORING.  Because you have brought a real tragedy into her life, I
suppose.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_With a sneer_.]  Oh, there is only one real tragedy in
a woman’s life.  The fact that her past is always her lover, and her
future invariably her husband.

LORD GORING.  Lady Chiltern knows nothing of the kind of life to which
you are alluding.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  A woman whose size in gloves is seven and three-quarters
never knows much about anything.  You know Gertrude has always worn seven
and three-quarters?  That is one of the reasons why there was never any
moral sympathy between us. . . . Well, Arthur, I suppose this romantic
interview may be regarded as at an end.  You admit it was romantic, don’t
you?  For the privilege of being your wife I was ready to surrender a
great prize, the climax of my diplomatic career.  You decline.  Very
well.  If Sir Robert doesn’t uphold my Argentine scheme, I expose him.
Voilà tout.

LORD GORING.  You mustn’t do that.  It would be vile, horrible, infamous.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Shrugging her shoulders_.]  Oh! don’t use big words.
They mean so little.  It is a commercial transaction.  That is all.
There is no good mixing up sentimentality in it.  I offered to sell
Robert Chiltern a certain thing.  If he won’t pay me my price, he will
have to pay the world a greater price.  There is no more to be said.  I
must go.  Good-bye.  Won’t you shake hands?

LORD GORING.  With you?  No.  Your transaction with Robert Chiltern may
pass as a loathsome commercial transaction of a loathsome commercial age;
but you seem to have forgotten that you came here to-night to talk of
love, you whose lips desecrated the word love, you to whom the thing is a
book closely sealed, went this afternoon to the house of one of the most
noble and gentle women in the world to degrade her husband in her eyes,
to try and kill her love for him, to put poison in her heart, and
bitterness in her life, to break her idol, and, it may be, spoil her
soul.  That I cannot forgive you.  That was horrible.  For that there can
be no forgiveness.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Arthur, you are unjust to me.  Believe me, you are quite
unjust to me.  I didn’t go to taunt Gertrude at all.  I had no idea of
doing anything of the kind when I entered.  I called with Lady Markby
simply to ask whether an ornament, a jewel, that I lost somewhere last
night, had been found at the Chilterns’.  If you don’t believe me, you
can ask Lady Markby.  She will tell you it is true.  The scene that
occurred happened after Lady Markby had left, and was really forced on me
by Gertrude’s rudeness and sneers.  I called, oh!—a little out of malice
if you like—but really to ask if a diamond brooch of mine had been found.
That was the origin of the whole thing.

LORD GORING.  A diamond snake-brooch with a ruby?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Yes.  How do you know?

LORD GORING.  Because it is found.  In point of fact, I found it myself,
and stupidly forgot to tell the butler anything about it as I was
leaving.  [_Goes over to the writing-table and pulls out the drawers_.]
It is in this drawer.  No, that one.  This is the brooch, isn’t it?
[_Holds up the brooch_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Yes.  I am so glad to get it back.  It was . . a present.

LORD GORING.  Won’t you wear it?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Certainly, if you pin it in.  [LORD GORING _suddenly
clasps it on her arm_.]  Why do you put it on as a bracelet?  I never
knew it could he worn as a bracelet.

LORD GORING.  Really?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Holding out her handsome arm_.]  No; but it looks very
well on me as a bracelet, doesn’t it?

LORD GORING.  Yes; much better than when I saw it last.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  When did you see it last?

LORD GORING.  [_Calmly_.]  Oh, ten years ago, on Lady Berkshire, from
whom you stole it.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Starting_.]  What do you mean?

LORD GORING.  I mean that you stole that ornament from my cousin, Mary
Berkshire, to whom I gave it when she was married.  Suspicion fell on a
wretched servant, who was sent away in disgrace.  I recognised it last
night.  I determined to say nothing about it till I had found the thief.
I have found the thief now, and I have heard her own confession.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Tossing her head_.]  It is not true.

LORD GORING.  You know it is true.  Why, thief is written across your
face at this moment.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I will deny the whole affair from beginning to end.  I
will say that I have never seen this wretched thing, that it was never in
my possession.

[MRS. CHEVELEY _tries to get the bracelet off her arm_, _but fails_.
LORD GORING _looks on amused_.  _Her thin fingers tear at the jewel to no
purpose_.  _A curse breaks from her_.]

LORD GORING.  The drawback of stealing a thing, Mrs. Cheveley, is that
one never knows how wonderful the thing that one steals is.  You can’t
get that bracelet off, unless you know where the spring is.  And I see
you don’t know where the spring is.  It is rather difficult to find.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  You brute!  You coward!  [_She tries again to unclasp the
bracelet_, _but fails_.]

LORD GORING.  Oh! don’t use big words.  They mean so little.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Again tears at the bracelet in a paroxysm of rage_,
_with inarticulate sounds_.  _Then stops_, _and looks at_ LORD GORING.]
What are you going to do?

LORD GORING.  I am going to ring for my servant.  He is an admirable
servant.  Always comes in the moment one rings for him.  When he comes I
will tell him to fetch the police.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Trembling_.]  The police?  What for?

LORD GORING.  To-morrow the Berkshires will prosecute you.  That is what
the police are for.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Is now in an agony of physical terror_.  _Her face is
distorted_.  _Her mouth awry_.  _A mask has fallen from her_.  _She it_,
_for the moment_, _dreadful to look at_.]  Don’t do that.  I will do
anything you want.  Anything in the world you want.

LORD GORING.  Give me Robert Chiltern’s letter.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Stop! Stop!  Let me have time to think.

LORD GORING.  Give me Robert Chiltern’s letter.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I have not got it with me.  I will give it to you
to-morrow.

LORD GORING.  You know you are lying.  Give it to me at once.  [MRS.
CHEVELEY _pulls the letter out_, _and hands it to him_.  _She is horribly
pale_.]  This is it?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_In a hoarse voice_.]  Yes.

LORD GORING.  [_Takes the letter_, _examines it_, _sighs_, _and burns it
with the lamp_.]  For so well-dressed a woman, Mrs. Cheveley, you have
moments of admirable common sense.  I congratulate you.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Catches sight of_ LADY CHILTERN’S _letter_, _the cover
of which is just showing from under the blotting-book_.]  Please get me a
glass of water.

LORD GORING.  Certainly.  [_Goes to the corner of the room and pours out
a glass of water_.  _While his back is turned_ MRS. CHEVELEY _steals_
LADY CHILTERN’S _letter_.  _When_ LORD GORING _returns the glass she
refuses it with a gesture_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thank you.  Will you help me on with my cloak?

LORD GORING.  With pleasure.  [_Puts her cloak on_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thanks.  I am never going to try to harm Robert Chiltern
again.

LORD GORING.  Fortunately you have not the chance, Mrs. Cheveley.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Well, if even I had the chance, I wouldn’t.  On the
contrary, I am going to render him a great service.

LORD GORING.  I am charmed to hear it.  It is a reformation.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Yes.  I can’t bear so upright a gentleman, so honourable
an English gentleman, being so shamefully deceived, and so—

LORD GORING.  Well?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I find that somehow Gertrude Chiltern’s dying speech and
confession has strayed into my pocket.

LORD GORING.  What do you mean?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_With a bitter note of triumph in her voice_.]  I mean
that I am going to send Robert Chiltern the love-letter his wife wrote to
you to-night.

LORD GORING.  Love-letter?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Laughing_.]  ‘I want you.  I trust you.  I am coming to
you.  Gertrude.’

[LORD GORING _rushes to the bureau and takes up the envelope_, _finds is
empty_, _and turns round_.]

LORD GORING.  You wretched woman, must you always be thieving?  Give me
back that letter.  I’ll take it from you by force.  You shall not leave
my room till I have got it.

[_He rushes towards her_, _but_ MRS. CHEVELEY _at once puts her hand on
the electric bell that is on the table_. _The bell sounds with shrill
reverberations_, _and_ PHIPPS _enters_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_After a pause_.]  Lord Goring merely rang that you
should show me out.  Good-night, Lord Goring!

[_Goes out followed by_ PHIPPS.  _Her face is illumined with evil
triumph_.  _There is joy in her eyes_.  _Youth seems to have come back to
her_.  _Her last glance is like a swift arrow_.  LORD GORING _bites his
lip_, _and lights his a cigarette_.]

                                ACT DROPS




FOURTH ACT


SCENE


_Same as Act II_.

[LORD GORING _is standing by the fireplace with his hands in his
pockets_.  _He is looking rather bored_.]

LORD GORING.  [_Pulls out his watch_, _inspects it_, _and rings the
bell_.]  It is a great nuisance.  I can’t find any one in this house to
talk to.  And I am full of interesting information.  I feel like the
latest edition of something or other.

[_Enter servant_.]

JAMES.  Sir Robert is still at the Foreign Office, my lord.

LORD GORING.  Lady Chiltern not down yet?

JAMES.  Her ladyship has not yet left her room.  Miss Chiltern has just
come in from riding.

LORD GORING.  [_To himself_.]  Ah! that is something.

JAMES.  Lord Caversham has been waiting some time in the library for Sir
Robert.  I told him your lordship was here.

LORD GORING.  Thank you!  Would you kindly tell him I’ve gone?

JAMES.  [_Bowing_.]  I shall do so, my lord.

[_Exit servant_.]

LORD GORING.  Really, I don’t want to meet my father three days running.
It is a great deal too much excitement for any son.  I hope to goodness
he won’t come up.  Fathers should be neither seen nor heard.  That is the
only proper basis for family life.  Mothers are different.  Mothers are
darlings.  [_Throws himself down into a chair_, _picks up a paper and
begins to read it_.]

[_Enter_ LORD CAVERSHAM.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Well, sir, what are you doing here?  Wasting your time
as usual, I suppose?

LORD GORING.  [_Throws down paper and rises_.]  My dear father, when one
pays a visit it is for the purpose of wasting other people’s time, not
one’s own.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Have you been thinking over what I spoke to you about
last night?

LORD GORING.  I have been thinking about nothing else.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Engaged to be married yet?

LORD GORING.  [_Genially_.]  Not yet: but I hope to be before lunch-time.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Caustically_.]  You can have till dinner-time if it
would be of any convenience to you.

LORD GORING.  Thanks awfully, but I think I’d sooner be engaged before
lunch.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Humph!  Never know when you are serious or not.

LORD GORING.  Neither do I, father.

[_A pause_.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  I suppose you have read _The Times_ this morning?

LORD GORING.  [_Airily_.]  The Times?  Certainly not.  I only read _The
Morning Post_.  All that one should know about modern life is where the
Duchesses are; anything else is quite demoralising.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Do you mean to say you have not read _The Times_ leading
article on Robert Chiltern’s career?

LORD GORING.  Good heavens!  No.  What does it say?

LORD CAVERSHAM.  What should it say, sir?  Everything complimentary, of
course.  Chiltern’s speech last night on this Argentine Canal scheme was
one of the finest pieces of oratory ever delivered in the House since
Canning.

LORD GORING.  Ah!  Never heard of Canning.  Never wanted to.  And did . . .
did Chiltern uphold the scheme?

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Uphold it, sir?  How little you know him!  Why, he
denounced it roundly, and the whole system of modern political finance.
This speech is the turning-point in his career, as _The Times_ points
out.  You should read this article, sir.  [_Opens_ The Times.]  ‘Sir
Robert Chiltern . . . most rising of our young statesmen . . . Brilliant
Orator . . . Unblemished career . . . Well-known integrity of character
. . . Represents what is best in English public life . . . Noble contrast
to the lax morality so common among foreign politicians.’  They will
never say that of you, sir.

LORD GORING.  I sincerely hope not, father.  However, I am delighted at
what you tell me about Robert, thoroughly delighted.  It shows he has got
pluck.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  He has got more than pluck, sir, he has got genius.

LORD GORING.  Ah! I prefer pluck.  It is not so common, nowadays, as
genius is.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  I wish you would go into Parliament.

LORD GORING.  My dear father, only people who look dull ever get into the
House of Commons, and only people who are dull ever succeed there.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Why don’t you try to do something useful in life?

LORD GORING.  I am far too young.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Testily_.]  I hate this affectation of youth, sir.  It
is a great deal too prevalent nowadays.

LORD GORING.  Youth isn’t an affectation.  Youth is an art.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Why don’t you propose to that pretty Miss Chiltern?

LORD GORING.  I am of a very nervous disposition, especially in the
morning.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  I don’t suppose there is the smallest chance of her
accepting you.

LORD GORING.  I don’t know how the betting stands to-day.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  If she did accept you she would be the prettiest fool in
England.

LORD GORING.  That is just what I should like to marry.  A thoroughly
sensible wife would reduce me to a condition of absolute idiocy in less
than six months.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  You don’t deserve her, sir.

LORD GORING.  My dear father, if we men married the women we deserved, we
should have a very bad time of it.

[_Enter_ MABEL CHILTERN.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  Oh! . . . How do you do, Lord Caversham?  I hope Lady
Caversham is quite well?

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Lady Caversham is as usual, as usual.

LORD GORING.  Good morning, Miss Mabel!

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Taking no notice at all of_ LORD GORING, _and
addressing herself exclusively to_ LORD CAVERSHAM.]  And Lady Caversham’s
bonnets . . . are they at all better?

LORD CAVERSHAM.  They have had a serious relapse, I am sorry to say.

LORD GORING.  Good morning, Miss Mabel!

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_To_ LORD CAVERSHAM.]  I hope an operation will not be
necessary.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Smiling at her pertness_.]  If it is, we shall have to
give Lady Caversham a narcotic.  Otherwise she would never consent to
have a feather touched.

LORD GORING.  [_With increased emphasis_.]  Good morning, Miss Mabel!

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Turning round with feigned surprise_.]  Oh, are you
here?  Of course you understand that after your breaking your appointment
I am never going to speak to you again.

LORD GORING.  Oh, please don’t say such a thing.  You are the one person
in London I really like to have to listen to me.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Lord Goring, I never believe a single word that either
you or I say to each other.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  You are quite right, my dear, quite right . . . as far
as he is concerned, I mean.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Do you think you could possibly make your son behave a
little better occasionally?  Just as a change.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  I regret to say, Miss Chiltern, that I have no influence
at all over my son.  I wish I had.  If I had, I know what I would make
him do.

MABEL CHILTERN.  I am afraid that he has one of those terribly weak
natures that are not susceptible to influence.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  He is very heartless, very heartless.

LORD GORING.  It seems to me that I am a little in the way here.

MABEL CHILTERN.  It is very good for you to be in the way, and to know
what people say of you behind your back.

LORD GORING.  I don’t at all like knowing what people say of me behind my
back.  It makes me far too conceited.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  After that, my dear, I really must bid you good morning.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Oh! I hope you are not going to leave me all alone with
Lord Goring?  Especially at such an early hour in the day.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  I am afraid I can’t take him with me to Downing Street.
It is not the Prime Minster’s day for seeing the unemployed.

[_Shakes hands with_ MABEL CHILTERN, _takes up his hat and stick_, _and
goes out_, _with a parting glare of indignation at_ LORD GORING.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Takes up roses and begins to arrange them in a bowl on
the table_.]  People who don’t keep their appointments in the Park are
horrid.

LORD GORING.  Detestable.

MABEL CHILTERN.  I am glad you admit it.  But I wish you wouldn’t look so
pleased about it.

LORD GORING.  I can’t help it.  I always look pleased when I am with you.

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Sadly_.]  Then I suppose it is my duty to remain with
you?

LORD GORING.  Of course it is.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Well, my duty is a thing I never do, on principle.  It
always depresses me.  So I am afraid I must leave you.

LORD GORING.  Please don’t, Miss Mabel.  I have something very particular
to say to you.

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Rapturously_.]  Oh! is it a proposal?

LORD GORING.  [_Somewhat taken aback_.]  Well, yes, it is—I am bound to
say it is.

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_With a sigh of pleasure_.]  I am so glad.  That makes
the second to-day.

LORD GORING.  [_Indignantly_.]  The second to-day?  What conceited ass
has been impertinent enough to dare to propose to you before I had
proposed to you?

MABEL CHILTERN.  Tommy Trafford, of course.  It is one of Tommy’s days
for proposing.  He always proposes on Tuesdays and Thursdays, during the
Season.

LORD GORING.  You didn’t accept him, I hope?

MABEL CHILTERN.  I make it a rule never to accept Tommy.  That is why he
goes on proposing.  Of course, as you didn’t turn up this morning, I very
nearly said yes.  It would have been an excellent lesson both for him and
for you if I had.  It would have taught you both better manners.

LORD GORING.  Oh! bother Tommy Trafford.  Tommy is a silly little ass.  I
love you.

MABEL CHILTERN.  I know.  And I think you might have mentioned it before.
I am sure I have given you heaps of opportunities.

LORD GORING.  Mabel, do be serious.  Please be serious.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Ah! that is the sort of thing a man always says to a
girl before he has been married to her.  He never says it afterwards.

LORD GORING.  [_Taking hold of her hand_.]  Mabel, I have told you that I
love you.  Can’t you love me a little in return?

MABEL CHILTERN.  You silly Arthur!  If you knew anything about . . .
anything, which you don’t, you would know that I adore you.  Every one in
London knows it except you.  It is a public scandal the way I adore you.
I have been going about for the last six months telling the whole of
society that I adore you.  I wonder you consent to have anything to say
to me.  I have no character left at all.  At least, I feel so happy that
I am quite sure I have no character left at all.

LORD GORING.  [_Catches her in his arms and kisses her_.  _Then there is
a pause of bliss_.]  Dear!  Do you know I was awfully afraid of being
refused!

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Looking up at him_.]  But you never have been refused
yet by anybody, have you, Arthur?  I can’t imagine any one refusing you.

LORD GORING.  [_After kissing her again_.]  Of course I’m not nearly good
enough for you, Mabel.

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Nestling close to him_.]  I am so glad, darling.  I
was afraid you were.

LORD GORING.  [_After some hesitation_.]  And I’m . . . I’m a little over
thirty.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Dear, you look weeks younger than that.

LORD GORING.  [_Enthusiastically_.]  How sweet of you to say so! . . .
And it is only fair to tell you frankly that I am fearfully extravagant.

MABEL CHILTERN.  But so am I, Arthur.  So we’re sure to agree.  And now I
must go and see Gertrude.

LORD GORING.  Must you really?  [_Kisses her_.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  Yes.

LORD GORING.  Then do tell her I want to talk to her particularly.  I
have been waiting here all the morning to see either her or Robert.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Do you mean to say you didn’t come here expressly to
propose to me?

LORD GORING.  [_Triumphantly_.]  No; that was a flash of genius.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Your first.

LORD GORING.  [_With determination_.]  My last.

MABEL CHILTERN.  I am delighted to hear it.  Now don’t stir.  I’ll be
back in five minutes.  And don’t fall into any temptations while I am
away.

LORD GORING.  Dear Mabel, while you are away, there are none.  It makes
me horribly dependent on you.

[_Enter_ LADY CHILTERN.]

LADY CHILTERN.  Good morning, dear!  How pretty you are looking!

MABEL CHILTERN.  How pale you are looking, Gertrude!  It is most
becoming!

LADY CHILTERN.  Good morning, Lord Goring!

LORD GORING.  [_Bowing_.]  Good morning, Lady Chiltern!

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Aside to_ LORD GORING.]  I shall be in the
conservatory under the second palm tree on the left.

LORD GORING.  Second on the left?

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_With a look of mock surprise_.]  Yes; the usual palm
tree.

[_Blows a kiss to him_, _unobserved by_ LADY CHILTERN, _and goes out_.]

LORD GORING.  Lady Chiltern, I have a certain amount of very good news to
tell you.  Mrs. Cheveley gave me up Robert’s letter last night, and I
burned it.  Robert is safe.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Sinking on the sofa_.]  Safe!  Oh! I am so glad of
that.  What a good friend you are to him—to us!

LORD GORING.  There is only one person now that could be said to be in
any danger.

LADY CHILTERN.  Who is that?

LORD GORING.  [_Sitting down beside her_.]  Yourself.

LADY CHILTERN.  I?  In danger?  What do you mean?

LORD GORING.  Danger is too great a word.  It is a word I should not have
used.  But I admit I have something to tell you that may distress you,
that terribly distresses me.  Yesterday evening you wrote me a very
beautiful, womanly letter, asking me for my help.  You wrote to me as one
of your oldest friends, one of your husband’s oldest friends.  Mrs.
Cheveley stole that letter from my rooms.

LADY CHILTERN.  Well, what use is it to her?  Why should she not have it?

LORD GORING.  [_Rising_.]  Lady Chiltern, I will be quite frank with you.
Mrs. Cheveley puts a certain construction on that letter and proposes to
send it to your husband.

LADY CHILTERN.  But what construction could she put on it? . . . Oh! not
that! not that!  If I in—in trouble, and wanting your help, trusting you,
propose to come to you . . . that you may advise me . . . assist me . . .
Oh! are there women so horrible as that . . .?  And she proposes to send
it to my husband?  Tell me what happened.  Tell me all that happened.

LORD GORING.  Mrs. Cheveley was concealed in a room adjoining my library,
without my knowledge.  I thought that the person who was waiting in that
room to see me was yourself.  Robert came in unexpectedly.  A chair or
something fell in the room.  He forced his way in, and he discovered her.
We had a terrible scene.  I still thought it was you.  He left me in
anger.  At the end of everything Mrs. Cheveley got possession of your
letter—she stole it, when or how, I don’t know.

LADY CHILTERN.  At what hour did this happen?

LORD GORING.  At half-past ten.  And now I propose that we tell Robert
the whole thing at once.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Looking at him with amazement that is almost terror_.]
You want me to tell Robert that the woman you expected was not Mrs.
Cheveley, but myself?  That it was I whom you thought was concealed in a
room in your house, at half-past ten o’clock at night?  You want me to
tell him that?

LORD GORING.  I think it is better that he should know the exact truth.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Rising_.]  Oh, I couldn’t, I couldn’t!

LORD GORING.  May I do it?

LADY CHILTERN.  No.

LORD GORING.  [_Gravely_.]  You are wrong, Lady Chiltern.

LADY CHILTERN.  No.  The letter must be intercepted.  That is all.  But
how can I do it?  Letters arrive for him every moment of the day.  His
secretaries open them and hand them to him.  I dare not ask the servants
to bring me his letters.  It would be impossible.  Oh! why don’t you tell
me what to do?

LORD GORING.  Pray be calm, Lady Chiltern, and answer the questions I am
going to put to you.  You said his secretaries open his letters.

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes.

LORD GORING.  Who is with him to-day?  Mr. Trafford, isn’t it?

LADY CHILTERN.  No.  Mr. Montford, I think.

LORD GORING.  You can trust him?

LADY CHILTERN.  [_With a gesture of despair_.]  Oh! how do I know?

LORD GORING.  He would do what you asked him, wouldn’t he?

LADY CHILTERN.  I think so.

LORD GORING.  Your letter was on pink paper.  He could recognise it
without reading it, couldn’t he?  By the colour?

LADY CHILTERN.  I suppose so.

LORD GORING.  Is he in the house now?

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes.

LORD GORING.  Then I will go and see him myself, and tell him that a
certain letter, written on pink paper, is to be forwarded to Robert
to-day, and that at all costs it must not reach him.  [_Goes to the
door_, _and opens it_.]  Oh! Robert is coming upstairs with the letter in
his hand.  It has reached him already.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_With a cry of pain_.]  Oh! you have saved his life;
what have you done with mine?

[_Enter_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  _He has the letter in his hand_, _and is
reading it_.  _He comes towards his wife_, _not noticing_ LORD GORING’S
_presence_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  ‘I want you.  I trust you.  I am coming to you.
Gertrude.’  Oh, my love!  Is this true?  Do you indeed trust me, and want
me?  If so, it was for me to come to you, not for you to write of coming
to me.  This letter of yours, Gertrude, makes me feel that nothing that
the world may do can hurt me now.  You want me, Gertrude?

[LORD GORING, _unseen by_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN, _makes an imploring sign
to_ LADY CHILTERN _to accept the situation and_ SIR ROBERT’S _error_.]

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  You trust me, Gertrude?

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Ah! why did you not add you loved me?

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Taking his hand_.]  Because I loved you.

[LORD GORING _passes into the conservatory_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Kisses her_.]  Gertrude, you don’t know what I
feel.  When Montford passed me your letter across the table—he had opened
it by mistake, I suppose, without looking at the handwriting on the
envelope—and I read it—oh! I did not care what disgrace or punishment was
in store for me, I only thought you loved me still.

LADY CHILTERN.  There is no disgrace in store for you, nor any public
shame.  Mrs. Cheveley has handed over to Lord Goring the document that
was in her possession, and he has destroyed it.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Are you sure of this, Gertrude?

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes; Lord Goring has just told me.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Then I am safe!  Oh! what a wonderful thing to be
safe!  For two days I have been in terror.  I am safe now.  How did
Arthur destroy my letter?  Tell me.

LADY CHILTERN.  He burned it.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I wish I had seen that one sin of my youth burning
to ashes.  How many men there are in modern life who would like to see
their past burning to white ashes before them!  Is Arthur still here?

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes; he is in the conservatory.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I am so glad now I made that speech last night in
the House, so glad.  I made it thinking that public disgrace might be the
result.  But it has not been so.

LADY CHILTERN.  Public honour has been the result.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I think so.  I fear so, almost.  For although I am
safe from detection, although every proof against me is destroyed, I
suppose, Gertrude . . . I suppose I should retire from public life?  [_He
looks anxiously at his wife_.]

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Eagerly_.]  Oh yes, Robert, you should do that.  It is
your duty to do that.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  It is much to surrender.

LADY CHILTERN.  No; it will be much to gain.

[SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _walks up and down the room with a troubled
expression_.  _Then comes over to his wife_, _and puts his hand on her
shoulder_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  And you would be happy living somewhere alone with
me, abroad perhaps, or in the country away from London, away from public
life?  You would have no regrets?

LADY CHILTERN.  Oh! none, Robert.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Sadly_.]  And your ambition for me?  You used to
be ambitious for me.

LADY CHILTERN.  Oh, my ambition!  I have none now, but that we two may
love each other.  It was your ambition that led you astray.  Let us not
talk about ambition.

[LORD GORING _returns from the conservatory_, _looking very pleased with
himself_, _and with an entirely new buttonhole that some one has made for
him_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Going towards him_.]  Arthur, I have to thank you
for what you have done for me.  I don’t know how I can repay you.
[_Shakes hands with him_.]

LORD GORING.  My dear fellow, I’ll tell you at once.  At the present
moment, under the usual palm tree . . . I mean in the conservatory . . .

[_Enter_ MASON.]

MASON.  Lord Caversham.

LORD GORING.  That admirable father of mine really makes a habit of
turning up at the wrong moment.  It is very heartless of him, very
heartless indeed.

[_Enter_ LORD CAVERSHAM.  MASON _goes out_.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Good morning, Lady Chiltern!  Warmest congratulations to
you, Chiltern, on your brilliant speech last night.  I have just left the
Prime Minister, and you are to have the vacant seat in the Cabinet.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_With a look of joy and triumph_.]  A seat in the
Cabinet?

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Yes; here is the Prime Minister’s letter.  [_Hands
letter_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Takes letter and reads it_.]  A seat in the
Cabinet!

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Certainly, and you well deserve it too.  You have got
what we want so much in political life nowadays—high character, high
moral tone, high principles.  [_To_ LORD GORING.]  Everything that you
have not got, sir, and never will have.

LORD GORING.  I don’t like principles, father.  I prefer prejudices.

[SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _is on the brink of accepting the Prime Minister’s
offer_, _when he sees wife looking at him with her clear_, _candid eyes_.
_He then realises that it is impossible_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I cannot accept this offer, Lord Caversham.  I have
made up my mind to decline it.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Decline it, sir!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  My intention is to retire at once from public life.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Angrily_.]  Decline a seat in the Cabinet, and retire
from public life?  Never heard such damned nonsense in the whole course
of my existence.  I beg your pardon, Lady Chiltern.  Chiltern, I beg your
pardon.  [_To_ LORD GORING.]  Don’t grin like that, sir.

LORD GORING.  No, father.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Lady Chiltern, you are a sensible woman, the most
sensible woman in London, the most sensible woman I know.  Will you
kindly prevent your husband from making such a . . . from taking such
. . . Will you kindly do that, Lady Chiltern?

LADY CHILTERN.  I think my husband in right in his determination, Lord
Caversham.  I approve of it.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  You approve of it?  Good heavens!

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Taking her husband’s hand_.]  I admire him for it.  I
admire him immensely for it.  I have never admired him so much before.
He is finer than even I thought him.  [_To_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.]  You
will go and write your letter to the Prime Minister now, won’t you?
Don’t hesitate about it, Robert.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_With a touch of bitterness_.]  I suppose I had
better write it at once.  Such offers are not repeated.  I will ask you
to excuse me for a moment, Lord Caversham.

LADY CHILTERN.  I may come with you, Robert, may I not?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Yes, Gertrude.

[LADY CHILTERN _goes out with him_.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  What is the matter with this family?  Something wrong
here, eh?  [_Tapping his forehead_.]  Idiocy?  Hereditary, I suppose.
Both of them, too.  Wife as well as husband.  Very sad.  Very sad indeed!
And they are not an old family.  Can’t understand it.

LORD GORING.  It is not idiocy, father, I assure you.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  What is it then, sir?

LORD GORING.  [_After some hesitation_.]  Well, it is what is called
nowadays a high moral tone, father.  That is all.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Hate these new-fangled names.  Same thing as we used to
call idiocy fifty years ago.  Shan’t stay in this house any longer.

LORD GORING.  [_Taking his arm_.]  Oh! just go in here for a moment,
father.  Third palm tree to the left, the usual palm tree.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  What, sir?

LORD GORING.  I beg your pardon, father, I forgot.  The conservatory,
father, the conservatory—there is some one there I want you to talk to.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  What about, sir?

LORD GORING.  About me, father,

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Grimly_.]  Not a subject on which much eloquence is
possible.

LORD GORING.  No, father; but the lady is like me.  She doesn’t care much
for eloquence in others.  She thinks it a little loud.

[LORD CAVERSHAM _goes out into the conservatory_.  LADY CHILTERN
_enters_.]

LORD GORING.  Lady Chiltern, why are you playing Mrs. Cheveley’s cards?

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Startled_.]  I don’t understand you.

LORD GORING.  Mrs. Cheveley made an attempt to ruin your husband.  Either
to drive him from public life, or to make him adopt a dishonourable
position.  From the latter tragedy you saved him.  The former you are now
thrusting on him.  Why should you do him the wrong Mrs. Cheveley tried to
do and failed?

LADY CHILTERN.  Lord Goring?

LORD GORING.  [_Pulling himself together for a great effort_, _and
showing the philosopher that underlies the dandy_.]  Lady Chiltern, allow
me.  You wrote me a letter last night in which you said you trusted me
and wanted my help.  Now is the moment when you really want my help, now
is the time when you have got to trust me, to trust in my counsel and
judgment.  You love Robert.  Do you want to kill his love for you?  What
sort of existence will he have if you rob him of the fruits of his
ambition, if you take him from the splendour of a great political career,
if you close the doors of public life against him, if you condemn him to
sterile failure, he who was made for triumph and success?  Women are not
meant to judge us, but to forgive us when we need forgiveness.  Pardon,
not punishment, is their mission.  Why should you scourge him with rods
for a sin done in his youth, before he knew you, before he knew himself?
A man’s life is of more value than a woman’s.  It has larger issues,
wider scope, greater ambitions.  A woman’s life revolves in curves of
emotions.  It is upon lines of intellect that a man’s life progresses.
Don’t make any terrible mistake, Lady Chiltern.  A woman who can keep a
man’s love, and love him in return, has done all the world wants of
women, or should want of them.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Troubled and hesitating_.]  But it is my husband
himself who wishes to retire from public life.  He feels it is his duty.
It was he who first said so.

LORD GORING.  Rather than lose your love, Robert would do anything, wreck
his whole career, as he is on the brink of doing now.  He is making for
you a terrible sacrifice.  Take my advice, Lady Chiltern, and do not
accept a sacrifice so great.  If you do, you will live to repent it
bitterly.  We men and women are not made to accept such sacrifices from
each other.  We are not worthy of them.  Besides, Robert has been
punished enough.

LADY CHILTERN.  We have both been punished.  I set him up too high.

LORD GORING.  [_With deep feeling in his voice_.]  Do not for that reason
set him down now too low.  If he has fallen from his altar, do not thrust
him into the mire.  Failure to Robert would be the very mire of shame.
Power is his passion.  He would lose everything, even his power to feel
love.  Your husband’s life is at this moment in your hands, your
husband’s love is in your hands.  Don’t mar both for him.

[_Enter_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Gertrude, here is the draft of my letter.  Shall I
read it to you?

LADY CHILTERN.  Let me see it.

[SIR ROBERT _hands her the letter_.  _She reads it_, _and then_, _with a
gesture of passion_, _tears it up_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  What are you doing?

LADY CHILTERN.  A man’s life is of more value than a woman’s.  It has
larger issues, wider scope, greater ambitions.  Our lives revolve in
curves of emotions.  It is upon lines of intellect that a man’s life
progresses.  I have just learnt this, and much else with it, from Lord
Goring.  And I will not spoil your life for you, nor see you spoil it as
a sacrifice to me, a useless sacrifice!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Gertrude!  Gertrude!

LADY CHILTERN.  You can forget.  Men easily forget.  And I forgive.  That
is how women help the world.  I see that now.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Deeply overcome by emotion_, _embraces her_.]  My
wife! my wife!  [_To_ LORD GORING.]  Arthur, it seems that I am always to
be in your debt.

LORD GORING.  Oh dear no, Robert.  Your debt is to Lady Chiltern, not to
me!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I owe you much.  And now tell me what you were
going to ask me just now as Lord Caversham came in.

LORD GORING.  Robert, you are your sister’s guardian, and I want your
consent to my marriage with her.  That is all.

LADY CHILTERN.  Oh, I am so glad!  I am so glad!  [_Shakes hands with_
LORD GORING.]

LORD GORING.  Thank you, Lady Chiltern.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_With a troubled look_.]  My sister to be your
wife?

LORD GORING.  Yes.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Speaking with great firmness_.]  Arthur, I am
very sorry, but the thing is quite out of the question.  I have to think
of Mabel’s future happiness.  And I don’t think her happiness would be
safe in your hands.  And I cannot have her sacrificed!

LORD GORING.  Sacrificed!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Yes, utterly sacrificed.  Loveless marriages are
horrible.  But there is one thing worse than an absolutely loveless
marriage.  A marriage in which there is love, but on one side only;
faith, but on one side only; devotion, but on one side only, and in which
of the two hearts one is sure to be broken.

LORD GORING.  But I love Mabel.  No other woman has any place in my life.

LADY CHILTERN.  Robert, if they love each other, why should they not be
married?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Arthur cannot bring Mabel the love that she
deserves.

LORD GORING.  What reason have you for saying that?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_After a pause_.]  Do you really require me to
tell you?

LORD GORING.  Certainly I do.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  As you choose.  When I called on you yesterday
evening I found Mrs. Cheveley concealed in your rooms.  It was between
ten and eleven o’clock at night.  I do not wish to say anything more.
Your relations with Mrs. Cheveley have, as I said to you last night,
nothing whatsoever to do with me.  I know you were engaged to be married
to her once.  The fascination she exercised over you then seems to have
returned.  You spoke to me last night of her as of a woman pure and
stainless, a woman whom you respected and honoured.  That may be so.  But
I cannot give my sister’s life into your hands.  It would be wrong of me.
It would be unjust, infamously unjust to her.

LORD GORING.  I have nothing more to say.

LADY CHILTERN.  Robert, it was not Mrs. Cheveley whom Lord Goring
expected last night.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Not Mrs. Cheveley!  Who was it then?

LORD GORING.  Lady Chiltern!

LADY CHILTERN.  It was your own wife.  Robert, yesterday afternoon Lord
Goring told me that if ever I was in trouble I could come to him for
help, as he was our oldest and best friend.  Later on, after that
terrible scene in this room, I wrote to him telling him that I trusted
him, that I had need of him, that I was coming to him for help and
advice.  [SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _takes the letter out of his pocket_.]
Yes, that letter.  I didn’t go to Lord Goring’s, after all.  I felt that
it is from ourselves alone that help can come.  Pride made me think that.
Mrs. Cheveley went.  She stole my letter and sent it anonymously to you
this morning, that you should think . . . Oh! Robert, I cannot tell you
what she wished you to think. . . .

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  What!  Had I fallen so low in your eyes that you
thought that even for a moment I could have doubted your goodness?
Gertrude, Gertrude, you are to me the white image of all good things, and
sin can never touch you.  Arthur, you can go to Mabel, and you have my
best wishes!  Oh! stop a moment.  There is no name at the beginning of
this letter.  The brilliant Mrs. Cheveley does not seem to have noticed
that.  There should be a name.

LADY CHILTERN.  Let me write yours.  It is you I trust and need.  You and
none else.

LORD GORING.  Well, really, Lady Chiltern, I think I should have back my
own letter.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Smiling_.]  No; you shall have Mabel.  [_Takes the
letter and writes her husband’s name on it_.]

LORD GORING.  Well, I hope she hasn’t changed her mind.  It’s nearly
twenty minutes since I saw her last.

[_Enter_ MABEL CHILTERN _and_ LORD CAVERSHAM.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  Lord Goring, I think your father’s conversation much
more improving than yours.  I am only going to talk to Lord Caversham in
the future, and always under the usual palm tree.

LORD GORING.  Darling!  [_Kisses her_.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Considerably taken aback_.]  What does this mean, sir?
You don’t mean to say that this charming, clever young lady has been so
foolish as to accept you?

LORD GORING.  Certainly, father!  And Chiltern’s been wise enough to
accept the seat in the Cabinet.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  I am very glad to hear that, Chiltern . . . I
congratulate you, sir.  If the country doesn’t go to the dogs or the
Radicals, we shall have you Prime Minister, some day.

[_Enter_ MASON.]

MASON.  Luncheon is on the table, my Lady!

[MASON _goes out_.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  You’ll stop to luncheon, Lord Caversham, won’t you?

LORD CAVERSHAM.  With pleasure, and I’ll drive you down to Downing Street
afterwards, Chiltern.  You have a great future before you, a great
future.  Wish I could say the same for you, sir.  [_To_ LORD GORING.]
But your career will have to be entirely domestic.

LORD GORING.  Yes, father, I prefer it domestic.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  And if you don’t make this young lady an ideal husband,
I’ll cut you off with a shilling.

MABEL CHILTERN.  An ideal husband!  Oh, I don’t think I should like that.
It sounds like something in the next world.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  What do you want him to be then, dear?

MABEL CHILTERN.  He can be what he chooses.  All I want is to be . . . to
be . . . oh! a real wife to him.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Upon my word, there is a good deal of common sense in
that, Lady Chiltern.

[_They all go out except_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  _He sinks in a chair_,
_wrapt in thought_.  _After a little time_ LADY CHILTERN _returns to look
for him_.]

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Leaning over the back of the chair_.]  Aren’t you
coming in, Robert?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Taking her hand_.]  Gertrude, is it love you feel
for me, or is it pity merely?

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Kisses him_.]  It is love, Robert.  Love, and only
love.  For both of us a new life is beginning.

                                 CURTAIN

                                * * * * *

                                * * * * *

              THE NORTHUMBERLAND PRESS, NEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AN IDEAL HUSBAND***


******* This file should be named 885-0.txt or 885-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/8/8/885



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of An Ideal Husband, by Oscar Wilde


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: An Ideal Husband
       A Play


Author: Oscar Wilde



Release Date: March 27, 2009  [eBook #885]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AN IDEAL HUSBAND***


Transcribed from the 1912 Methuen and Co. edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org





                             AN IDEAL HUSBAND


                                  A PLAY

                                    BY
                               OSCAR WILDE

                                * * * * *

                            METHUEN & CO. LTD.
                           36 ESSEX STREET W.C.
                                  LONDON

                                * * * * *

                _First Published_, _at 1s. net_, _in 1912_

                                * * * * *

_This book was First Published in 1893_

_First Published_ (_Second Edition_) _by      _February_           _1908_
   Methuen & Co._
_Third Edition_                               _October_            _1909_
_Fourth edition_                              _October_            _1910_
_Fifth Edition_                               _May_                _1912_

THE PERSONS OF THE PLAY


THE EARL OF CAVERSHAM, K.G.

VISCOUNT GORING, his Son

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN, Bart., Under-Secretary for Foreign Affairs

VICOMTE DE NANJAC, Attaché at the French Embassy in London

MR. MONTFORD

MASON, Butler to Sir Robert Chiltern

PHIPPS, Lord Goring’s Servant

JAMES   }

HAROLD  } Footmen

LADY CHILTERN

LADY MARKBY

THE COUNTESS OF BASILDON

MRS. MARCHMONT

MISS MABEL CHILTERN, Sir Robert Chiltern’s Sister

MRS. CHEVELEY




THE SCENES OF THE PLAY


ACT I.  _The Octagon Room in Sir Robert Chiltern’s House in Grosvenor
Square_.

ACT II.  _Morning-room in Sir Robert Chiltern’s House_.

ACT III.  _The Library of Lord Goring’s House in Curzon Street_.

ACT IV.  _Same as Act II_.

TIME: _The Present_

PLACE: _London_.

     _The action of the play is completed within twenty-four hours_.




THEATRE ROYAL, HAYMARKET


                _Sole Lessee_: _Mr. Herbert Beerbohm Tree_

           _Managers_: _Mr. Lewis Waller and Mr. H. H. Morell_

                          _January_ 3_rd_, 1895

THE EARL OF CAVERSHAM       _Mr. Alfred Bishop_.
VISCOUNT GORING             _Mr. Charles H. Hawtrey_.
SIR ROBERT CHILTERN         _Mr. Lewis Waller_.
VICOMTE DE NANJAC           _Mr. Cosmo Stuart_.
MR. MONTFORD                _Mr. Harry Stanford_.
PHIPPS                      _Mr. C. H. Brookfield_.
MASON                       _Mr. H. Deane_.
JAMES                       _Mr. Charles Meyrick_.
HAROLD                      _Mr. Goodhart_.
LADY CHILTERN               _Miss Julia Neilson_.
LADY MARKBY                 _Miss Fanny Brough_.
COUNTESS OF BASILDON        _Miss Vane Featherston_.
MRS. MARCHMONT              _Miss Helen Forsyth_.
MISS MABEL CHILTERN         _Miss Maud Millet_.
MRS. CHEVELEY               _Miss Florence West_.




FIRST ACT


SCENE


_The octagon room at Sir Robert Chiltern’s house in Grosvenor Square_.

[_The room is brilliantly lighted and full of guests_.  _At the top of
the staircase stands_ LADY CHILTERN, _a woman of grave Greek beauty_,
_about twenty-seven years of age_.  _She receives the guests as they come
up_.  _Over the well of the staircase hangs a great chandelier with wax
lights_, _which illumine a large eighteenth-century French
tapestry—representing the Triumph of Love_, _from a design by
Boucher—that is stretched on the staircase wall_.  _On the right is the
entrance to the music-room_.  _The sound of a string quartette is faintly
heard_.  _The entrance on the left leads to other reception-rooms_.  MRS.
MARCHMONT _and_ LADY BASILDON, _two very pretty women_, _are seated
together on a Louis Seize sofa_.  _They are types of exquisite
fragility_.  _Their affectation of manner has a delicate charm_.
_Watteau would have loved to paint them_.]

MRS. MARCHMONT.  Going on to the Hartlocks’ to-night, Margaret?

LADY BASILDON.  I suppose so.  Are you?

MRS. MARCHMONT.  Yes.  Horribly tedious parties they give, don’t they?

LADY BASILDON.  Horribly tedious!  Never know why I go.  Never know why I
go anywhere.

MRS. MARCHMONT.  I come here to be educated.

LADY BASILDON.  Ah! I hate being educated!

MRS. MARCHMONT.  So do I.  It puts one almost on a level with the
commercial classes, doesn’t it?  But dear Gertrude Chiltern is always
telling me that I should have some serious purpose in life.  So I come
here to try to find one.

LADY BASILDON.  [_Looking round through her lorgnette_.]  I don’t see
anybody here to-night whom one could possibly call a serious purpose.
The man who took me in to dinner talked to me about his wife the whole
time.

MRS. MARCHMONT.  How very trivial of him!

LADY BASILDON.  Terribly trivial!  What did your man talk about?

MRS. MARCHMONT.  About myself.

LADY BASILDON.  [_Languidly_.]  And were you interested?

MRS. MARCHMONT.  [_Shaking her head_.]  Not in the smallest degree.

LADY BASILDON.  What martyrs we are, dear Margaret!

MRS. MARCHMONT.  [_Rising_.]  And how well it becomes us, Olivia!

[_They rise and go towards the music-room_.  _The_ VICOMTE DE NANJAC, _a
young attaché known for his neckties and his Anglomania_, _approaches
with a low bow_, _and enters into conversation_.]

MASON.  [_Announcing guests from the top of the staircase_.]  Mr. and
Lady Jane Barford.  Lord Caversham.

[_Enter_ LORD CAVERSHAM, _an old gentleman of seventy_, _wearing the
riband and star of the Garter_.  _A fine Whig type_.  _Rather like a
portrait by Lawrence_.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Good evening, Lady Chiltern!  Has my good-for-nothing
young son been here?

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Smiling_.]  I don’t think Lord Goring has arrived yet.

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Coming up to_ LORD CAVERSHAM.]  Why do you call Lord
Goring good-for-nothing?

[MABEL CHILTERN _is a perfect example of the English type of prettiness_,
_the apple-blossom type_.  _She has all the fragrance and freedom of a
flower_.  _There is ripple after ripple of sunlight in her hair_, _and
the little mouth_, _with its parted lips_, _is expectant_, _like the
mouth of a child_.  _She has the fascinating tyranny of youth_, _and the
astonishing courage of innocence_.  _To sane people she is not
reminiscent of any work of art_.  _But she is really like a Tanagra
statuette_, _and would be rather annoyed if she were told so_.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Because he leads such an idle life.

MABEL CHILTERN.  How can you say such a thing?  Why, he rides in the Row
at ten o’clock in the morning, goes to the Opera three times a week,
changes his clothes at least five times a day, and dines out every night
of the season.  You don’t call that leading an idle life, do you?

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Looking at her with a kindly twinkle in his eyes_.]
You are a very charming young lady!

MABEL CHILTERN.  How sweet of you to say that, Lord Caversham!  Do come
to us more often.  You know we are always at home on Wednesdays, and you
look so well with your star!

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Never go anywhere now.  Sick of London Society.
Shouldn’t mind being introduced to my own tailor; he always votes on the
right side.  But object strongly to being sent down to dinner with my
wife’s milliner.  Never could stand Lady Caversham’s bonnets.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Oh, I love London Society!  I think it has immensely
improved.  It is entirely composed now of beautiful idiots and brilliant
lunatics.  Just what Society should be.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Hum!  Which is Goring?  Beautiful idiot, or the other
thing?

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Gravely_.]  I have been obliged for the present to put
Lord Goring into a class quite by himself.  But he is developing
charmingly!

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Into what?

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_With a little curtsey_.]  I hope to let you know very
soon, Lord Caversham!

MASON.  [_Announcing guests_.]  Lady Markby.  Mrs. Cheveley.

[_Enter_ LADY MARKBY _and_ MRS. CHEVELEY.  LADY MARKBY _is a pleasant_,
_kindly_, _popular woman_, _with gray hair à la marquise and good lace_.
MRS. CHEVELEY, _who accompanies her_, _is tall and rather slight_.  _Lips
very thin and highly-coloured_, _a line of scarlet on a pallid face_.
_Venetian red hair_, _aquiline nose_, _and long throat_.  _Rouge
accentuates the natural paleness of her complexion_.  _Gray-green eyes
that move restlessly_.  _She is in heliotrope_, _with diamonds_.  _She
looks rather like an orchid_, _and makes great demands on one’s
curiosity_.  _In all her movements she is extremely graceful_.  _A work
of art_, _on the whole_, _but showing the influence of too many
schools_.]

LADY MARKBY.  Good evening, dear Gertrude!  So kind of you to let me
bring my friend, Mrs. Cheveley.  Two such charming women should know each
other!

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Advances towards_ MRS. CHEVELEY _with a sweet smile_.
_Then suddenly stops_, _and bows rather distantly_.]  I think Mrs.
Cheveley and I have met before.  I did not know she had married a second
time.

LADY MARKBY.  [_Genially_.]  Ah, nowadays people marry as often as they
can, don’t they?  It is most fashionable.  [_To_ DUCHESS OF MARYBOROUGH.]
Dear Duchess, and how is the Duke?  Brain still weak, I suppose?  Well,
that is only to be expected, is it not?  His good father was just the
same.  There is nothing like race, is there?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Playing with her fan_.]  But have we really met before,
Lady Chiltern?  I can’t remember where.  I have been out of England for
so long.

LADY CHILTERN.  We were at school together, Mrs. Cheveley.

MRS. CHEVELEY [_Superciliously_.]  Indeed?  I have forgotten all about my
schooldays.  I have a vague impression that they were detestable.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Coldly_.]  I am not surprised!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_In her sweetest manner_.]  Do you know, I am quite
looking forward to meeting your clever husband, Lady Chiltern.  Since he
has been at the Foreign Office, he has been so much talked of in Vienna.
They actually succeed in spelling his name right in the newspapers.  That
in itself is fame, on the continent.

LADY CHILTERN.  I hardly think there will be much in common between you
and my husband, Mrs. Cheveley!  [_Moves away_.]

VICOMTE DE NANJAC.  Ah! chère Madame, queue surprise!  I have not seen
you since Berlin!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Not since Berlin, Vicomte.  Five years ago!

VICOMTE DE NANJAC.  And you are younger and more beautiful than ever.
How do you manage it?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  By making it a rule only to talk to perfectly charming
people like yourself.

VICOMTE DE NANJAC.  Ah! you flatter me.  You butter me, as they say here.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Do they say that here?  How dreadful of them!

VICOMTE DE NANJAC.  Yes, they have a wonderful language.  It should be
more widely known.

[SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _enters_.  _A man of forty_, _but looking somewhat
younger_.  _Clean-shaven_, _with finely-cut features_, _dark-haired and
dark-eyed_.  _A personality of mark_.  _Not popular—few personalities
are_.  _But intensely admired by the few_, _and deeply respected by the
many_.  _The note of his manner is that of perfect distinction_, _with a
slight touch of pride_.  _One feels that he is conscious of the success
he has made in life_.  _A nervous temperament_, _with a tired look_.
_The firmly-chiselled mouth and chin contrast strikingly with the
romantic expression in the deep-set eyes_.  _The variance is suggestive
of an almost complete separation of passion and intellect_, _as though
thought and emotion were each isolated in its own sphere through some
violence of will-power_.  _There is nervousness in the nostrils_, _and in
the pale_, _thin_, _pointed hands_.  _It would be inaccurate to call him
picturesque_.  _Picturesqueness cannot survive the House of Commons_.
_But Vandyck would have liked to have painted his head_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Good evening, Lady Markby!  I hope you have brought
Sir John with you?

LADY MARKBY.  Oh! I have brought a much more charming person than Sir
John.  Sir John’s temper since he has taken seriously to politics has
become quite unbearable.  Really, now that the House of Commons is trying
to become useful, it does a great deal of harm.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I hope not, Lady Markby.  At any rate we do our
best to waste the public time, don’t we?  But who is this charming person
you have been kind enough to bring to us?

LADY MARKBY.  Her name is Mrs. Cheveley!  One of the Dorsetshire
Cheveleys, I suppose.  But I really don’t know.  Families are so mixed
nowadays.  Indeed, as a rule, everybody turns out to be somebody else.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Mrs. Cheveley?  I seem to know the name.

LADY MARKBY.  She has just arrived from Vienna.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Ah! yes.  I think I know whom you mean.

LADY MARKBY.  Oh! she goes everywhere there, and has such pleasant
scandals about all her friends.  I really must go to Vienna next winter.
I hope there is a good chef at the Embassy.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  If there is not, the Ambassador will certainly have
to be recalled.  Pray point out Mrs. Cheveley to me.  I should like to
see her.

LADY MARKBY.  Let me introduce you.  [_To_ MRS. CHEVELEY.]  My dear, Sir
Robert Chiltern is dying to know you!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Bowing_.]  Every one is dying to know the
brilliant Mrs. Cheveley.  Our attachés at Vienna write to us about
nothing else.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thank you, Sir Robert.  An acquaintance that begins with
a compliment is sure to develop into a real friendship.  It starts in the
right manner.  And I find that I know Lady Chiltern already.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Really?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Yes.  She has just reminded me that we were at school
together.  I remember it perfectly now.  She always got the good conduct
prize.  I have a distinct recollection of Lady Chiltern always getting
the good conduct prize!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Smiling_.]  And what prizes did you get, Mrs.
Cheveley?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  My prizes came a little later on in life.  I don’t think
any of them were for good conduct.  I forget!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I am sure they were for something charming!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I don’t know that women are always rewarded for being
charming.  I think they are usually punished for it!  Certainly, more
women grow old nowadays through the faithfulness of their admirers than
through anything else!  At least that is the only way I can account for
the terribly haggard look of most of your pretty women in London!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  What an appalling philosophy that sounds!  To
attempt to classify you, Mrs. Cheveley, would be an impertinence.  But
may I ask, at heart, are you an optimist or a pessimist?  Those seem to
be the only two fashionable religions left to us nowadays.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh, I’m neither.  Optimism begins in a broad grin, and
Pessimism ends with blue spectacles.  Besides, they are both of them
merely poses.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  You prefer to be natural?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Sometimes.  But it is such a very difficult pose to keep
up.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  What would those modern psychological novelists, of
whom we hear so much, say to such a theory as that?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Ah! the strength of women comes from the fact that
psychology cannot explain us.  Men can be analysed, women . . . merely
adored.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  You think science cannot grapple with the problem
of women?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Science can never grapple with the irrational.  That is
why it has no future before it, in this world.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  And women represent the irrational.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Well-dressed women do.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_With a polite bow_.]  I fear I could hardly agree
with you there.  But do sit down.  And now tell me, what makes you leave
your brilliant Vienna for our gloomy London—or perhaps the question is
indiscreet?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Questions are never indiscreet.  Answers sometimes are.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Well, at any rate, may I know if it is politics or
pleasure?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Politics are my only pleasure.  You see nowadays it is
not fashionable to flirt till one is forty, or to be romantic till one is
forty-five, so we poor women who are under thirty, or say we are, have
nothing open to us but politics or philanthropy.  And philanthropy seems
to me to have become simply the refuge of people who wish to annoy their
fellow-creatures.  I prefer politics.  I think they are more . . .
becoming!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  A political life is a noble career!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Sometimes.  And sometimes it is a clever game, Sir
Robert.  And sometimes it is a great nuisance.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Which do you find it?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I?  A combination of all three.  [_Drops her fan_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Picks up fan_.]  Allow me!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thanks.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  But you have not told me yet what makes you honour
London so suddenly.  Our season is almost over.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh! I don’t care about the London season!  It is too
matrimonial.  People are either hunting for husbands, or hiding from
them.  I wanted to meet you.  It is quite true.  You know what a woman’s
curiosity is.  Almost as great as a man’s!  I wanted immensely to meet
you, and . . . to ask you to do something for me.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I hope it is not a little thing, Mrs. Cheveley.  I
find that little things are so very difficult to do.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_After a moment’s reflection_.]  No, I don’t think it is
quite a little thing.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I am so glad.  Do tell me what it is.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Later on.  [_Rises_.]  And now may I walk through your
beautiful house?  I hear your pictures are charming.  Poor Baron
Arnheim—you remember the Baron?—used to tell me you had some wonderful
Corots.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_With an almost imperceptible start_.]  Did you
know Baron Arnheim well?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Smiling_.]  Intimately.  Did you?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  At one time.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Wonderful man, wasn’t he?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_After a pause_.]  He was very remarkable, in many
ways.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I often think it such a pity he never wrote his memoirs.
They would have been most interesting.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Yes: he knew men and cities well, like the old
Greek.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Without the dreadful disadvantage of having a Penelope
waiting at home for him.

MASON.  Lord Goring.

[_Enter_ LORD GORING.  _Thirty-four_, _but always says he is younger_.
_A well-bred_, _expressionless face_.  _He is clever_, _but would not
like to be thought so_.  _A flawless dandy_, _he would be annoyed if he
were considered romantic_.  _He plays with life_, _and is on perfectly
good terms with the world_.  _He is fond of being misunderstood_.  _It
gives him a post of vantage_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Good evening, my dear Arthur!  Mrs. Cheveley, allow
me to introduce to you Lord Goring, the idlest man in London.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I have met Lord Goring before.

LORD GORING.  [_Bowing_.]  I did not think you would remember me, Mrs.
Cheveley.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  My memory is under admirable control.  And are you still
a bachelor?

LORD GORING.  I . . . believe so.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  How very romantic!

LORD GORING.  Oh! I am not at all romantic.  I am not old enough.  I
leave romance to my seniors.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Lord Goring is the result of Boodle’s Club, Mrs.
Cheveley.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  He reflects every credit on the institution.

LORD GORING.  May I ask are you staying in London long?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  That depends partly on the weather, partly on the
cooking, and partly on Sir Robert.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  You are not going to plunge us into a European war,
I hope?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  There is no danger, at present!

[_She nods to_ LORD GORING, _with a look of amusement in her eyes_, _and
goes out with_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  LORD GORING _saunters over to_ MABEL
CHILTERN.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  You are very late!

LORD GORING.  Have you missed me?

MABEL CHILTERN.  Awfully!

LORD GORING.  Then I am sorry I did not stay away longer.  I like being
missed.

MABEL CHILTERN.  How very selfish of you!

LORD GORING.  I am very selfish.

MABEL CHILTERN.  You are always telling me of your bad qualities, Lord
Goring.

LORD GORING.  I have only told you half of them as yet, Miss Mabel!

MABEL CHILTERN.  Are the others very bad?

LORD GORING.  Quite dreadful!  When I think of them at night I go to
sleep at once.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Well, I delight in your bad qualities.  I wouldn’t have
you part with one of them.

LORD GORING.  How very nice of you!  But then you are always nice.  By
the way, I want to ask you a question, Miss Mabel.  Who brought Mrs.
Cheveley here?  That woman in heliotrope, who has just gone out of the
room with your brother?

MABEL CHILTERN.  Oh, I think Lady Markby brought her.  Why do you ask?

LORD GORING.  I haven’t seen her for years, that is all.

MABEL CHILTERN.  What an absurd reason!

LORD GORING.  All reasons are absurd.

MABEL CHILTERN.  What sort of a woman is she?

LORD GORING.  Oh! a genius in the daytime and a beauty at night!

MABEL CHILTERN.  I dislike her already.

LORD GORING.  That shows your admirable good taste.

VICOMTE DE NANJAC.  [_Approaching_.]  Ah, the English young lady is the
dragon of good taste, is she not?  Quite the dragon of good taste.

LORD GORING.  So the newspapers are always telling us.

VICOMTE DE NANJAC.  I read all your English newspapers.  I find them so
amusing.

LORD GORING.  Then, my dear Nanjac, you must certainly read between the
lines.

VICOMTE DE NANJAC.  I should like to, but my professor objects.  [_To_
MABEL CHILTERN.]  May I have the pleasure of escorting you to the
music-room, Mademoiselle?

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Looking very disappointed_.]  Delighted, Vicomte,
quite delighted!  [_Turning to_ LORD GORING.]  Aren’t you coming to the
music-room?

LORD GORING.  Not if there is any music going on, Miss Mabel.

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Severely_.]  The music is in German.  You would not
understand it.

[_Goes out with the_ VICOMTE DE NANJAC.  LORD CAVERSHAM _comes up to his
son_.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Well, sir! what are you doing here?  Wasting your life
as usual!  You should be in bed, sir.  You keep too late hours!  I heard
of you the other night at Lady Rufford’s dancing till four o’clock in the
morning!

LORD GORING.  Only a quarter to four, father.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Can’t make out how you stand London Society.  The thing
has gone to the dogs, a lot of damned nobodies talking about nothing.

LORD GORING.  I love talking about nothing, father.  It is the only thing
I know anything about.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  You seem to me to be living entirely for pleasure.

LORD GORING.  What else is there to live for, father?  Nothing ages like
happiness.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  You are heartless, sir, very heartless!

LORD GORING.  I hope not, father.  Good evening, Lady Basildon!

LADY BASILDON.  [_Arching two pretty eyebrows_.]  Are you here?  I had no
idea you ever came to political parties!

LORD GORING.  I adore political parties.  They are the only place left to
us where people don’t talk politics.

LADY BASILDON.  I delight in talking politics.  I talk them all day long.
But I can’t bear listening to them.  I don’t know how the unfortunate men
in the House stand these long debates.

LORD GORING.  By never listening.

LADY BASILDON.  Really?

LORD GORING.  [_In his most serious manner_.]  Of course.  You see, it is
a very dangerous thing to listen.  If one listens one may be convinced;
and a man who allows himself to be convinced by an argument is a
thoroughly unreasonable person.

LADY BASILDON.  Ah! that accounts for so much in men that I have never
understood, and so much in women that their husbands never appreciate in
them!

MRS. MARCHMONT.  [_With a sigh_.]  Our husbands never appreciate anything
in us.  We have to go to others for that!

LADY BASILDON.  [_Emphatically_.]  Yes, always to others, have we not?

LORD GORING.  [_Smiling_.]  And those are the views of the two ladies who
are known to have the most admirable husbands in London.

MRS. MARCHMONT.  That is exactly what we can’t stand.  My Reginald is
quite hopelessly faultless.  He is really unendurably so, at times!
There is not the smallest element of excitement in knowing him.

LORD GORING.  How terrible!  Really, the thing should be more widely
known!

LADY BASILDON.  Basildon is quite as bad; he is as domestic as if he was
a bachelor.

MRS. MARCHMONT.  [_Pressing_ LADY BASILDON’S _hand_.]  My poor Olivia!
We have married perfect husbands, and we are well punished for it.

LORD GORING.  I should have thought it was the husbands who were
punished.

MRS. MARCHMONT.  [_Drawing herself up_.]  Oh, dear no!  They are as happy
as possible!  And as for trusting us, it is tragic how much they trust
us.

LADY BASILDON.  Perfectly tragic!

LORD GORING.  Or comic, Lady Basildon?

LADY BASILDON.  Certainly not comic, Lord Goring.  How unkind of you to
suggest such a thing!

MRS. MARCHMONT.  I am afraid Lord Goring is in the camp of the enemy, as
usual.  I saw him talking to that Mrs. Cheveley when he came in.

LORD GORING.  Handsome woman, Mrs. Cheveley!

LADY BASILDON.  [_Stiffly_.]  Please don’t praise other women in our
presence.  You might wait for us to do that!

LORD GORING.  I did wait.

MRS. MARCHMONT.  Well, we are not going to praise her.  I hear she went
to the Opera on Monday night, and told Tommy Rufford at supper that, as
far as she could see, London Society was entirely made up of dowdies and
dandies.

LORD GORING.  She is quite right, too.  The men are all dowdies and the
women are all dandies, aren’t they?

MRS. MARCHMONT.  [_After a pause_.]  Oh! do you really think that is what
Mrs. Cheveley meant?

LORD GORING.  Of course.  And a very sensible remark for Mrs. Cheveley to
make, too.

[_Enter_ MABEL CHILTERN.  _She joins the group_.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  Why are you talking about Mrs. Cheveley?  Everybody is
talking about Mrs. Cheveley!  Lord Goring says—what did you say, Lord
Goring, about Mrs. Cheveley?  Oh! I remember, that she was a genius in
the daytime and a beauty at night.

LADY BASILDON.  What a horrid combination!  So very unnatural!

MRS. MARCHMONT.  [_In her most dreamy manner_.]  I like looking at
geniuses, and listening to beautiful people.

LORD GORING.  Ah! that is morbid of you, Mrs. Marchmont!

MRS. MARCHMONT.  [_Brightening to a look of real pleasure_.]  I am so
glad to hear you say that.  Marchmont and I have been married for seven
years, and he has never once told me that I was morbid.  Men are so
painfully unobservant!

LADY BASILDON.  [_Turning to her_.]  I have always said, dear Margaret,
that you were the most morbid person in London.

MRS. MARCHMONT.  Ah! but you are always sympathetic, Olivia!

MABEL CHILTERN.  Is it morbid to have a desire for food?  I have a great
desire for food.  Lord Goring, will you give me some supper?

LORD GORING.  With pleasure, Miss Mabel.  [_Moves away with her_.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  How horrid you have been!  You have never talked to me
the whole evening!

LORD GORING.  How could I?  You went away with the child-diplomatist.

MABEL CHILTERN.  You might have followed us.  Pursuit would have been
only polite.  I don’t think I like you at all this evening!

LORD GORING.  I like you immensely.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Well, I wish you’d show it in a more marked way!  [_They
go downstairs_.]

MRS. MARCHMONT.  Olivia, I have a curious feeling of absolute faintness.
I think I should like some supper very much.  I know I should like some
supper.

LADY BASILDON.  I am positively dying for supper, Margaret!

MRS. MARCHMONT.  Men are so horribly selfish, they never think of these
things.

LADY BASILDON.  Men are grossly material, grossly material!

[_The_ VICOMTE DE NANJAC _enters from the music-room with some other
guests_.  _After having carefully examined all the people present_, _he
approaches_ LADY BASILDON.]

VICOMTE DE NANJAC.  May I have the honour of taking you down to supper,
Comtesse?

LADY BASILDON.  [_Coldly_.]  I never take supper, thank you, Vicomte.
[_The_ VICOMTE _is about to retire_.  LADY BASILDON, _seeing this_,
_rises at once and takes his arm_.]  But I will come down with you with
pleasure.

VICOMTE DE NANJAC.  I am so fond of eating!  I am very English in all my
tastes.

LADY BASILDON.  You look quite English, Vicomte, quite English.

[_They pass out_.  MR. MONTFORD, _a perfectly groomed young dandy_,
_approaches_ MRS. MARCHMONT.]

MR. MONTFORD.  Like some supper, Mrs. Marchmont?

MRS. MARCHMONT.  [_Languidly_.]  Thank you, Mr. Montford, I never touch
supper.  [_Rises hastily and takes his arm_.]  But I will sit beside you,
and watch you.

MR. MONTFORD.  I don’t know that I like being watched when I am eating!

MRS. MARCHMONT.  Then I will watch some one else.

MR. MONTFORD.  I don’t know that I should like that either.

MRS. MARCHMONT.  [_Severely_.]  Pray, Mr. Montford, do not make these
painful scenes of jealousy in public!

[_They go downstairs with the other guests_, _passing_ SIR ROBERT
CHILTERN _and_ MRS. CHEVELEY, _who now enter_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  And are you going to any of our country houses
before you leave England, Mrs. Cheveley?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh, no!  I can’t stand your English house-parties.  In
England people actually try to be brilliant at breakfast.  That is so
dreadful of them!  Only dull people are brilliant at breakfast.  And then
the family skeleton is always reading family prayers.  My stay in England
really depends on you, Sir Robert.  [_Sits down on the sofa_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Taking a seat beside her_.]  Seriously?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Quite seriously.  I want to talk to you about a great
political and financial scheme, about this Argentine Canal Company, in
fact.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  What a tedious, practical subject for you to talk
about, Mrs. Cheveley!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh, I like tedious, practical subjects.  What I don’t
like are tedious, practical people.  There is a wide difference.
Besides, you are interested, I know, in International Canal schemes.  You
were Lord Radley’s secretary, weren’t you, when the Government bought the
Suez Canal shares?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Yes.  But the Suez Canal was a very great and
splendid undertaking.  It gave us our direct route to India.  It had
imperial value.  It was necessary that we should have control.  This
Argentine scheme is a commonplace Stock Exchange swindle.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  A speculation, Sir Robert!  A brilliant, daring
speculation.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Believe me, Mrs. Cheveley, it is a swindle.  Let us
call things by their proper names.  It makes matters simpler.  We have
all the information about it at the Foreign Office.  In fact, I sent out
a special Commission to inquire into the matter privately, and they
report that the works are hardly begun, and as for the money already
subscribed, no one seems to know what has become of it.  The whole thing
is a second Panama, and with not a quarter of the chance of success that
miserable affair ever had.  I hope you have not invested in it.  I am
sure you are far too clever to have done that.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I have invested very largely in it.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Who could have advised you to do such a foolish
thing?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Your old friend—and mine.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Who?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Baron Arnheim.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Frowning_.]  Ah! yes.  I remember hearing, at the
time of his death, that he had been mixed up in the whole affair.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  It was his last romance.  His last but one, to do him
justice.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Rising_.]  But you have not seen my Corots yet.
They are in the music-room.  Corots seem to go with music, don’t they?
May I show them to you?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Shaking her head_.]  I am not in a mood to-night for
silver twilights, or rose-pink dawns.  I want to talk business.
[_Motions to him with her fan to sit down again beside her_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I fear I have no advice to give you, Mrs. Cheveley,
except to interest yourself in something less dangerous.  The success of
the Canal depends, of course, on the attitude of England, and I am going
to lay the report of the Commissioners before the House to-morrow night.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  That you must not do.  In your own interests, Sir Robert,
to say nothing of mine, you must not do that.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Looking at her in wonder_.]  In my own interests?
My dear Mrs. Cheveley, what do you mean?  [_Sits down beside her_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Sir Robert, I will be quite frank with you.  I want you
to withdraw the report that you had intended to lay before the House, on
the ground that you have reasons to believe that the Commissioners have
been prejudiced or misinformed, or something.  Then I want you to say a
few words to the effect that the Government is going to reconsider the
question, and that you have reason to believe that the Canal, if
completed, will be of great international value.  You know the sort of
things ministers say in cases of this kind.  A few ordinary platitudes
will do.  In modern life nothing produces such an effect as a good
platitude.  It makes the whole world kin.  Will you do that for me?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Mrs. Cheveley, you cannot be serious in making me
such a proposition!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I am quite serious.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Coldly_.]  Pray allow me to believe that you are
not.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Speaking with great deliberation and emphasis_.]  Ah!
but I am.  And if you do what I ask you, I . . . will pay you very
handsomely!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Pay me!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Yes.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I am afraid I don’t quite understand what you mean.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Leaning back on the sofa and looking at him_.]  How
very disappointing!  And I have come all the way from Vienna in order
that you should thoroughly understand me.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I fear I don’t.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_In her most nonchalant manner_.]  My dear Sir Robert,
you are a man of the world, and you have your price, I suppose.
Everybody has nowadays.  The drawback is that most people are so
dreadfully expensive.  I know I am.  I hope you will be more reasonable
in your terms.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Rises indignantly_.]  If you will allow me, I
will call your carriage for you.  You have lived so long abroad, Mrs.
Cheveley, that you seem to be unable to realise that you are talking to
an English gentleman.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Detains him by touching his arm with her fan_, _and
keeping it there while she is talking_.]  I realise that I am talking to
a man who laid the foundation of his fortune by selling to a Stock
Exchange speculator a Cabinet secret.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Biting his lip_.]  What do you mean?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Rising and facing him_.]  I mean that I know the real
origin of your wealth and your career, and I have got your letter, too.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  What letter?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Contemptuously_.]  The letter you wrote to Baron
Arnheim, when you were Lord Radley’s secretary, telling the Baron to buy
Suez Canal shares—a letter written three days before the Government
announced its own purchase.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Hoarsely_.]  It is not true.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  You thought that letter had been destroyed.  How foolish
of you!  It is in my possession.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  The affair to which you allude was no more than a
speculation.  The House of Commons had not yet passed the bill; it might
have been rejected.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  It was a swindle, Sir Robert.  Let us call things by
their proper names.  It makes everything simpler.  And now I am going to
sell you that letter, and the price I ask for it is your public support
of the Argentine scheme.  You made your own fortune out of one canal.
You must help me and my friends to make our fortunes out of another!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  It is infamous, what you propose—infamous!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh, no!  This is the game of life as we all have to play
it, Sir Robert, sooner or later!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I cannot do what you ask me.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  You mean you cannot help doing it.  You know you are
standing on the edge of a precipice.  And it is not for you to make
terms.  It is for you to accept them.  Supposing you refuse—

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  What then?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  My dear Sir Robert, what then?  You are ruined, that is
all!  Remember to what a point your Puritanism in England has brought
you.  In old days nobody pretended to be a bit better than his
neighbours.  In fact, to be a bit better than one’s neighbour was
considered excessively vulgar and middle-class.  Nowadays, with our
modern mania for morality, every one has to pose as a paragon of purity,
incorruptibility, and all the other seven deadly virtues—and what is the
result?  You all go over like ninepins—one after the other.  Not a year
passes in England without somebody disappearing.  Scandals used to lend
charm, or at least interest, to a man—now they crush him.  And yours is a
very nasty scandal. You couldn’t survive it.  If it were known that as a
young man, secretary to a great and important minister, you sold a
Cabinet secret for a large sum of money, and that that was the origin of
your wealth and career, you would be hounded out of public life, you
would disappear completely.  And after all, Sir Robert, why should you
sacrifice your entire future rather than deal diplomatically with your
enemy?  For the moment I am your enemy.  I admit it!  And I am much
stronger than you are.  The big battalions are on my side.  You have a
splendid position, but it is your splendid position that makes you so
vulnerable.  You can’t defend it!  And I am in attack.  Of course I have
not talked morality to you.  You must admit in fairness that I have
spared you that.  Years ago you did a clever, unscrupulous thing; it
turned out a great success.  You owe to it your fortune and position.
And now you have got to pay for it.  Sooner or later we have all to pay
for what we do.  You have to pay now.  Before I leave you to-night, you
have got to promise me to suppress your report, and to speak in the House
in favour of this scheme.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  What you ask is impossible.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  You must make it possible.  You are going to make it
possible.  Sir Robert, you know what your English newspapers are like.
Suppose that when I leave this house I drive down to some newspaper
office, and give them this scandal and the proofs of it!  Think of their
loathsome joy, of the delight they would have in dragging you down, of
the mud and mire they would plunge you in.  Think of the hypocrite with
his greasy smile penning his leading article, and arranging the foulness
of the public placard.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Stop!  You want me to withdraw the report and to
make a short speech stating that I believe there are possibilities in the
scheme?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Sitting down on the sofa_.]  Those are my terms.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_In a low voice_.]  I will give you any sum of
money you want.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Even you are not rich enough, Sir Robert, to buy back
your past.  No man is.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I will not do what you ask me.  I will not.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  You have to.  If you don’t . . . [_Rises from the sofa_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Bewildered and unnerved_.]  Wait a moment!  What
did you propose?  You said that you would give me back my letter, didn’t
you?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Yes.  That is agreed.  I will be in the Ladies’ Gallery
to-morrow night at half-past eleven.  If by that time—and you will have
had heaps of opportunity—you have made an announcement to the House in
the terms I wish, I shall hand you back your letter with the prettiest
thanks, and the best, or at any rate the most suitable, compliment I can
think of.  I intend to play quite fairly with you.  One should always
play fairly . . . when one has the winning cards.  The Baron taught me
that . . . amongst other things.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  You must let me have time to consider your
proposal.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  No; you must settle now!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Give me a week—three days!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Impossible!  I have got to telegraph to Vienna to-night.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  My God! what brought you into my life?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Circumstances.  [_Moves towards the door_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Don’t go.  I consent.  The report shall be
withdrawn.  I will arrange for a question to be put to me on the subject.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thank you.  I knew we should come to an amicable
agreement.  I understood your nature from the first.  I analysed you,
though you did not adore me.  And now you can get my carriage for me, Sir
Robert.  I see the people coming up from supper, and Englishmen always
get romantic after a meal, and that bores me dreadfully.  [_Exit_ SIR
ROBERT CHILTERN.]

[_Enter Guests_, LADY CHILTERN, LADY MARKBY, LORD CAVERSHAM, LADY
BASILDON, MRS. MARCHMONT, VICOMTE DE NANJAC, MR. MONTFORD.]

LADY MARKBY.  Well, dear Mrs. Cheveley, I hope you have enjoyed yourself.
Sir Robert is very entertaining, is he not?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Most entertaining!  I have enjoyed my talk with him
immensely.

LADY MARKBY.  He has had a very interesting and brilliant career.  And he
has married a most admirable wife.  Lady Chiltern is a woman of the very
highest principles, I am glad to say.  I am a little too old now, myself,
to trouble about setting a good example, but I always admire people who
do.  And Lady Chiltern has a very ennobling effect on life, though her
dinner-parties are rather dull sometimes.  But one can’t have everything,
can one?  And now I must go, dear.  Shall I call for you to-morrow?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thanks.

LADY MARKBY.  We might drive in the Park at five.  Everything looks so
fresh in the Park now!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Except the people!

LADY MARKBY.  Perhaps the people are a little jaded.  I have often
observed that the Season as it goes on produces a kind of softening of
the brain.  However, I think anything is better than high intellectual
pressure.  That is the most unbecoming thing there is.  It makes the
noses of the young girls so particularly large.  And there is nothing so
difficult to marry as a large nose; men don’t like them.  Good-night,
dear!  [_To_ LADY CHILTERN.]  Good-night, Gertrude!  [_Goes out on_ LORD
CAVERSHAM’S _arm_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  What a charming house you have, Lady Chiltern!  I have
spent a delightful evening.  It has been so interesting getting to know
your husband.

LADY CHILTERN.  Why did you wish to meet my husband, Mrs. Cheveley?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh, I will tell you.  I wanted to interest him in this
Argentine Canal scheme, of which I dare say you have heard.  And I found
him most susceptible,—susceptible to reason, I mean.  A rare thing in a
man.  I converted him in ten minutes.  He is going to make a speech in
the House to-morrow night in favour of the idea.  We must go to the
Ladies’ Gallery and hear him!  It will be a great occasion!

LADY CHILTERN.  There must be some mistake.  That scheme could never have
my husband’s support.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh, I assure you it’s all settled.  I don’t regret my
tedious journey from Vienna now.  It has been a great success.  But, of
course, for the next twenty-four hours the whole thing is a dead secret.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Gently_.]  A secret?  Between whom?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_With a flash of amusement in her eyes_.]  Between your
husband and myself.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Entering_.]  Your carriage is here, Mrs.
Cheveley!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thanks!  Good evening, Lady Chiltern!  Good-night, Lord
Goring!  I am at Claridge’s.  Don’t you think you might leave a card?

LORD GORING.  If you wish it, Mrs. Cheveley!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh, don’t be so solemn about it, or I shall be obliged to
leave a card on you.  In England I suppose that would hardly be
considered en règle.  Abroad, we are more civilised.  Will you see me
down, Sir Robert?  Now that we have both the same interests at heart we
shall be great friends, I hope!

[_Sails out on_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN’S _arm_.  LADY CHILTERN _goes to the
top of the staircase and looks down at them as they descend_.  _Her
expression is troubled_.  _After a little time she is joined by some of
the guests_, _and passes with them into another reception-room_.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  What a horrid woman!

LORD GORING.  You should go to bed, Miss Mabel.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Lord Goring!

LORD GORING.  My father told me to go to bed an hour ago.  I don’t see
why I shouldn’t give you the same advice.  I always pass on good advice.
It is the only thing to do with it.  It is never of any use to oneself.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Lord Goring, you are always ordering me out of the room.
I think it most courageous of you.  Especially as I am not going to bed
for hours.  [_Goes over to the sofa_.]  You can come and sit down if you
like, and talk about anything in the world, except the Royal Academy,
Mrs. Cheveley, or novels in Scotch dialect.  They are not improving
subjects.  [_Catches sight of something that is lying on the sofa half
hidden by the cushion_.]  What is this?  Some one has dropped a diamond
brooch!  Quite beautiful, isn’t it?  [_Shows it to him_.]  I wish it was
mine, but Gertrude won’t let me wear anything but pearls, and I am
thoroughly sick of pearls.  They make one look so plain, so good and so
intellectual.  I wonder whom the brooch belongs to.

LORD GORING.  I wonder who dropped it.

MABEL CHILTERN.  It is a beautiful brooch.

LORD GORING.  It is a handsome bracelet.

MABEL CHILTERN.  It isn’t a bracelet.  It’s a brooch.

LORD GORING.  It can be used as a bracelet.  [_Takes it from her_, _and_,
_pulling out a green letter-case_, _puts the ornament carefully in it_,
_and replaces the whole thing in his breast-pocket with the most perfect
sang froid_.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  What are you doing?

LORD GORING.  Miss Mabel, I am going to make a rather strange request to
you.

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Eagerly_.]  Oh, pray do!  I have been waiting for it
all the evening.

LORD GORING.  [_Is a little taken aback_, _but recovers himself_.]  Don’t
mention to anybody that I have taken charge of this brooch.  Should any
one write and claim it, let me know at once.

MABEL CHILTERN.  That is a strange request.

LORD GORING.  Well, you see I gave this brooch to somebody once, years
ago.

MABEL CHILTERN.  You did?

LORD GORING.  Yes.

[LADY CHILTERN _enters alone_.  _The other guests have gone_.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  Then I shall certainly bid you good-night.  Good-night,
Gertrude!  [_Exit_.]

LADY CHILTERN.  Good-night, dear!  [_To_ LORD GORING.]  You saw whom Lady
Markby brought here to-night?

LORD GORING.  Yes.  It was an unpleasant surprise.  What did she come
here for?

LADY CHILTERN.  Apparently to try and lure Robert to uphold some
fraudulent scheme in which she is interested.  The Argentine Canal, in
fact.

LORD GORING.  She has mistaken her man, hasn’t she?

LADY CHILTERN.  She is incapable of understanding an upright nature like
my husband’s!

LORD GORING.  Yes.  I should fancy she came to grief if she tried to get
Robert into her toils.  It is extraordinary what astounding mistakes
clever women make.

LADY CHILTERN.  I don’t call women of that kind clever.  I call them
stupid!

LORD GORING.  Same thing often.  Good-night, Lady Chiltern!

LADY CHILTERN.  Good-night!

[_Enter_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  My dear Arthur, you are not going?  Do stop a
little!

LORD GORING.  Afraid I can’t, thanks.  I have promised to look in at the
Hartlocks’.  I believe they have got a mauve Hungarian band that plays
mauve Hungarian music.  See you soon.  Good-bye!

[_Exit_]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  How beautiful you look to-night, Gertrude!

LADY CHILTERN.  Robert, it is not true, is it?  You are not going to lend
your support to this Argentine speculation?  You couldn’t!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Starting_.]  Who told you I intended to do so?

LADY CHILTERN.  That woman who has just gone out, Mrs. Cheveley, as she
calls herself now.  She seemed to taunt me with it.  Robert, I know this
woman.  You don’t.  We were at school together.  She was untruthful,
dishonest, an evil influence on every one whose trust or friendship she
could win.  I hated, I despised her.  She stole things, she was a thief.
She was sent away for being a thief.  Why do you let her influence you?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Gertrude, what you tell me may be true, but it
happened many years ago.  It is best forgotten!  Mrs. Cheveley may have
changed since then.  No one should be entirely judged by their past.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Sadly_.]  One’s past is what one is.  It is the only
way by which people should be judged.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  That is a hard saying, Gertrude!

LADY CHILTERN.  It is a true saying, Robert.  And what did she mean by
boasting that she had got you to lend your support, your name, to a thing
I have heard you describe as the most dishonest and fraudulent scheme
there has ever been in political life?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Biting his lip_.]  I was mistaken in the view I
took.  We all may make mistakes.

LADY CHILTERN.  But you told me yesterday that you had received the
report from the Commission, and that it entirely condemned the whole
thing.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Walking up and down_.]  I have reasons now to
believe that the Commission was prejudiced, or, at any rate, misinformed.
Besides, Gertrude, public and private life are different things.  They
have different laws, and move on different lines.

LADY CHILTERN.  They should both represent man at his highest.  I see no
difference between them.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Stopping_.]  In the present case, on a matter of
practical politics, I have changed my mind.  That is all.

LADY CHILTERN.  All!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Sternly_.]  Yes!

LADY CHILTERN.  Robert!  Oh! it is horrible that I should have to ask you
such a question—Robert, are you telling me the whole truth?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Why do you ask me such a question?

LADY CHILTERN.  [_After a pause_.]  Why do you not answer it?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Sitting down_.]  Gertrude, truth is a very
complex thing, and politics is a very complex business.  There are wheels
within wheels.  One may be under certain obligations to people that one
must pay.  Sooner or later in political life one has to compromise.
Every one does.

LADY CHILTERN.  Compromise?  Robert, why do you talk so differently
to-night from the way I have always heard you talk?  Why are you changed?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I am not changed.  But circumstances alter things.

LADY CHILTERN.  Circumstances should never alter principles!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  But if I told you—

LADY CHILTERN.  What?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  That it was necessary, vitally necessary?

LADY CHILTERN.  It can never be necessary to do what is not honourable.
Or if it be necessary, then what is it that I have loved!  But it is not,
Robert; tell me it is not.  Why should it be?  What gain would you get?
Money?  We have no need of that!  And money that comes from a tainted
source is a degradation.  Power?  But power is nothing in itself.  It is
power to do good that is fine—that, and that only.  What is it, then?
Robert, tell me why you are going to do this dishonourable thing!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Gertrude, you have no right to use that word.  I
told you it was a question of rational compromise.  It is no more than
that.

LADY CHILTERN.  Robert, that is all very well for other men, for men who
treat life simply as a sordid speculation; but not for you, Robert, not
for you.  You are different.  All your life you have stood apart from
others.  You have never let the world soil you.  To the world, as to
myself, you have been an ideal always.  Oh! be that ideal still.  That
great inheritance throw not away—that tower of ivory do not destroy.
Robert, men can love what is beneath them—things unworthy, stained,
dishonoured.  We women worship when we love; and when we lose our
worship, we lose everything.  Oh! don’t kill my love for you, don’t kill
that!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Gertrude!

LADY CHILTERN.  I know that there are men with horrible secrets in their
lives—men who have done some shameful thing, and who in some critical
moment have to pay for it, by doing some other act of shame—oh! don’t
tell me you are such as they are!  Robert, is there in your life any
secret dishonour or disgrace?  Tell me, tell me at once, that—

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  That what?

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Speaking very slowly_.]  That our lives may drift
apart.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Drift apart?

LADY CHILTERN.  That they may be entirely separate.  It would be better
for us both.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Gertrude, there is nothing in my past life that you
might not know.

LADY CHILTERN.  I was sure of it, Robert, I was sure of it.  But why did
you say those dreadful things, things so unlike your real self?  Don’t
let us ever talk about the subject again.  You will write, won’t you, to
Mrs. Cheveley, and tell her that you cannot support this scandalous
scheme of hers?  If you have given her any promise you must take it back,
that is all!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Must I write and tell her that?

LADY CHILTERN.  Surely, Robert!  What else is there to do?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I might see her personally.  It would be better.

LADY CHILTERN.  You must never see her again, Robert.  She is not a woman
you should ever speak to.  She is not worthy to talk to a man like you.
No; you must write to her at once, now, this moment, and let your letter
show her that your decision is quite irrevocable!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Write this moment!

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  But it is so late.  It is close on twelve.

LADY CHILTERN.  That makes no matter.  She must know at once that she has
been mistaken in you—and that you are not a man to do anything base or
underhand or dishonourable.  Write here, Robert.  Write that you decline
to support this scheme of hers, as you hold it to be a dishonest scheme.
Yes—write the word dishonest.  She knows what that word means.  [SIR
ROBERT CHILTERN _sits down and writes a letter_.  _His wife takes it up
and reads it_.]  Yes; that will do.  [_Rings bell_.]  And now the
envelope.  [_He writes the envelope slowly_.  _Enter_ MASON.]  Have this
letter sent at once to Claridge’s Hotel.  There is no answer.  [_Exit_
MASON.  LADY CHILTERN _kneels down beside her husband_, _and puts her
arms around him_.]  Robert, love gives one an instinct to things.  I feel
to-night that I have saved you from something that might have been a
danger to you, from something that might have made men honour you less
than they do.  I don’t think you realise sufficiently, Robert, that you
have brought into the political life of our time a nobler atmosphere, a
finer attitude towards life, a freer air of purer aims and higher
ideals—I know it, and for that I love you, Robert.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Oh, love me always, Gertrude, love me always!

LADY CHILTERN.  I will love you always, because you will always be worthy
of love.  We needs must love the highest when we see it!  [_Kisses him
and rises and goes out_.]

[SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _walks up and down for a moment_; _then sits down
and buries his face in his hands_.  _The Servant enters and begins
pulling out the lights_.  SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _looks up_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Put out the lights, Mason, put out the lights!

[_The Servant puts out the lights_.  _The room becomes almost dark_.
_The only light there is comes from the great chandelier that hangs over
the staircase and illumines the tapestry of the Triumph of Love_.]

                                 ACT DROP




SECOND ACT


SCENE


_Morning-room at Sir Robert Chiltern’s house_.

[LORD GORING, _dressed in the height of fashion_, _is lounging in an
armchair_.  SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _is standing in front of the fireplace_.
_He is evidently in a state of great mental excitement and distress_.
_As the scene progresses he paces nervously up and down the room_.]

LORD GORING.  My dear Robert, it’s a very awkward business, very awkward
indeed.  You should have told your wife the whole thing.  Secrets from
other people’s wives are a necessary luxury in modern life.  So, at
least, I am always told at the club by people who are bald enough to know
better.  But no man should have a secret from his own wife.  She
invariably finds it out.  Women have a wonderful instinct about things.
They can discover everything except the obvious.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Arthur, I couldn’t tell my wife.  When could I have
told her?  Not last night.  It would have made a life-long separation
between us, and I would have lost the love of the one woman in the world
I worship, of the only woman who has ever stirred love within me.  Last
night it would have been quite impossible.  She would have turned from me
in horror . . . in horror and in contempt.

LORD GORING.  Is Lady Chiltern as perfect as all that?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Yes; my wife is as perfect as all that.

LORD GORING.  [_Taking off his left-hand glove_.]  What a pity!  I beg
your pardon, my dear fellow, I didn’t quite mean that.  But if what you
tell me is true, I should like to have a serious talk about life with
Lady Chiltern.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  It would be quite useless.

LORD GORING.  May I try?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Yes; but nothing could make her alter her views.

LORD GORING.  Well, at the worst it would simply be a psychological
experiment.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  All such experiments are terribly dangerous.

LORD GORING.  Everything is dangerous, my dear fellow.  If it wasn’t so,
life wouldn’t be worth living. . . . Well, I am bound to say that I think
you should have told her years ago.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  When?  When we were engaged?  Do you think she
would have married me if she had known that the origin of my fortune is
such as it is, the basis of my career such as it is, and that I had done
a thing that I suppose most men would call shameful and dishonourable?

LORD GORING.  [_Slowly_.]  Yes; most men would call it ugly names.  There
is no doubt of that.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Bitterly_.]  Men who every day do something of
the same kind themselves.  Men who, each one of them, have worse secrets
in their own lives.

LORD GORING.  That is the reason they are so pleased to find out other
people’s secrets.  It distracts public attention from their own.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  And, after all, whom did I wrong by what I did?  No
one.

LORD GORING.  [_Looking at him steadily_.]  Except yourself, Robert.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_After a pause_.]  Of course I had private
information about a certain transaction contemplated by the Government of
the day, and I acted on it.  Private information is practically the
source of every large modern fortune.

LORD GORING.  [_Tapping his boot with his cane_.]  And public scandal
invariably the result.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Pacing up and down the room_.]  Arthur, do you
think that what I did nearly eighteen years ago should be brought up
against me now?  Do you think it fair that a man’s whole career should be
ruined for a fault done in one’s boyhood almost?  I was twenty-two at the
time, and I had the double misfortune of being well-born and poor, two
unforgiveable things nowadays.  Is it fair that the folly, the sin of
one’s youth, if men choose to call it a sin, should wreck a life like
mine, should place me in the pillory, should shatter all that I have
worked for, all that I have built up.  Is it fair, Arthur?

LORD GORING.  Life is never fair, Robert.  And perhaps it is a good thing
for most of us that it is not.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Every man of ambition has to fight his century with
its own weapons.  What this century worships is wealth.  The God of this
century is wealth.  To succeed one must have wealth.  At all costs one
must have wealth.

LORD GORING.  You underrate yourself, Robert.  Believe me, without wealth
you could have succeeded just as well.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  When I was old, perhaps.  When I had lost my
passion for power, or could not use it.  When I was tired, worn out,
disappointed.  I wanted my success when I was young.  Youth is the time
for success.  I couldn’t wait.

LORD GORING.  Well, you certainly have had your success while you are
still young.  No one in our day has had such a brilliant success.
Under-Secretary for Foreign Affairs at the age of forty—that’s good
enough for any one, I should think.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  And if it is all taken away from me now?  If I lose
everything over a horrible scandal?  If I am hounded from public life?

LORD GORING.  Robert, how could you have sold yourself for money?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Excitedly_.]  I did not sell myself for money.  I
bought success at a great price.  That is all.

LORD GORING.  [_Gravely_.]  Yes; you certainly paid a great price for it.
But what first made you think of doing such a thing?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Baron Arnheim.

LORD GORING.  Damned scoundrel!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  No; he was a man of a most subtle and refined
intellect.  A man of culture, charm, and distinction.  One of the most
intellectual men I ever met.

LORD GORING.  Ah! I prefer a gentlemanly fool any day.  There is more to
be said for stupidity than people imagine.  Personally I have a great
admiration for stupidity.  It is a sort of fellow-feeling, I suppose.
But how did he do it?  Tell me the whole thing.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Throws himself into an armchair by the
writing-table_.]  One night after dinner at Lord Radley’s the Baron began
talking about success in modern life as something that one could reduce
to an absolutely definite science.  With that wonderfully fascinating
quiet voice of his he expounded to us the most terrible of all
philosophies, the philosophy of power, preached to us the most marvellous
of all gospels, the gospel of gold.  I think he saw the effect he had
produced on me, for some days afterwards he wrote and asked me to come
and see him.  He was living then in Park Lane, in the house Lord Woolcomb
has now.  I remember so well how, with a strange smile on his pale,
curved lips, he led me through his wonderful picture gallery, showed me
his tapestries, his enamels, his jewels, his carved ivories, made me
wonder at the strange loveliness of the luxury in which he lived; and
then told me that luxury was nothing but a background, a painted scene in
a play, and that power, power over other men, power over the world, was
the one thing worth having, the one supreme pleasure worth knowing, the
one joy one never tired of, and that in our century only the rich
possessed it.

LORD GORING.  [_With great deliberation_.]  A thoroughly shallow creed.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Rising_.]  I didn’t think so then.  I don’t think
so now.  Wealth has given me enormous power.  It gave me at the very
outset of my life freedom, and freedom is everything.  You have never
been poor, and never known what ambition is.  You cannot understand what
a wonderful chance the Baron gave me.  Such a chance as few men get.

LORD GORING.  Fortunately for them, if one is to judge by results.  But
tell me definitely, how did the Baron finally persuade you to—well, to do
what you did?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  When I was going away he said to me that if I ever
could give him any private information of real value he would make me a
very rich man.  I was dazed at the prospect he held out to me, and my
ambition and my desire for power were at that time boundless.  Six weeks
later certain private documents passed through my hands.

LORD GORING.  [_Keeping his eyes steadily fixed on the carpet_.]  State
documents?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Yes.  [LORD GORING _sighs_, _then passes his hand
across his forehead and looks up_.]

LORD GORING.  I had no idea that you, of all men in the world, could have
been so weak, Robert, as to yield to such a temptation as Baron Arnheim
held out to you.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Weak?  Oh, I am sick of hearing that phrase.  Sick
of using it about others.  Weak?  Do you really think, Arthur, that it is
weakness that yields to temptation?  I tell you that there are terrible
temptations that it requires strength, strength and courage, to yield to.
To stake all one’s life on a single moment, to risk everything on one
throw, whether the stake be power or pleasure, I care not—there is no
weakness in that.  There is a horrible, a terrible courage.  I had that
courage.  I sat down the same afternoon and wrote Baron Arnheim the
letter this woman now holds.  He made three-quarters of a million over
the transaction.

LORD GORING.  And you?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I received from the Baron £110,000.

LORD GORING.  You were worth more, Robert.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  No; that money gave me exactly what I wanted, power
over others.  I went into the House immediately.  The Baron advised me in
finance from time to time.  Before five years I had almost trebled my
fortune.  Since then everything that I have touched has turned out a
success.  In all things connected with money I have had a luck so
extraordinary that sometimes it has made me almost afraid.  I remember
having read somewhere, in some strange book, that when the gods wish to
punish us they answer our prayers.

LORD GORING.  But tell me, Robert, did you never suffer any regret for
what you had done?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  No.  I felt that I had fought the century with its
own weapons, and won.

LORD GORING.  [_Sadly_.]  You thought you had won.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I thought so.  [_After a long pause_.]  Arthur, do
you despise me for what I have told you?

LORD GORING.  [_With deep feeling in his voice_.]  I am very sorry for
you, Robert, very sorry indeed.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I don’t say that I suffered any remorse.  I didn’t.
Not remorse in the ordinary, rather silly sense of the word.  But I have
paid conscience money many times.  I had a wild hope that I might disarm
destiny.  The sum Baron Arnheim gave me I have distributed twice over in
public charities since then.

LORD GORING.  [_Looking up_.]  In public charities?  Dear me! what a lot
of harm you must have done, Robert!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Oh, don’t say that, Arthur; don’t talk like that!

LORD GORING.  Never mind what I say, Robert!  I am always saying what I
shouldn’t say.  In fact, I usually say what I really think.  A great
mistake nowadays.  It makes one so liable to be misunderstood.  As
regards this dreadful business, I will help you in whatever way I can.
Of course you know that.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Thank you, Arthur, thank you.  But what is to be
done?  What can be done?

LORD GORING.  [_Leaning back with his hands in his pockets_.]  Well, the
English can’t stand a man who is always saying he is in the right, but
they are very fond of a man who admits that he has been in the wrong.  It
is one of the best things in them.  However, in your case, Robert, a
confession would not do.  The money, if you will allow me to say so, is
. . . awkward.  Besides, if you did make a clean breast of the whole
affair, you would never be able to talk morality again.  And in England a
man who can’t talk morality twice a week to a large, popular, immoral
audience is quite over as a serious politician.  There would be nothing
left for him as a profession except Botany or the Church.  A confession
would be of no use.  It would ruin you.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  It would ruin me.  Arthur, the only thing for me to
do now is to fight the thing out.

LORD GORING.  [_Rising from his chair_.]  I was waiting for you to say
that, Robert.  It is the only thing to do now.  And you must begin by
telling your wife the whole story.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  That I will not do.

LORD GORING.  Robert, believe me, you are wrong.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I couldn’t do it.  It would kill her love for me.
And now about this woman, this Mrs. Cheveley.  How can I defend myself
against her?  You knew her before, Arthur, apparently.

LORD GORING.  Yes.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Did you know her well?

LORD GORING.  [_Arranging his necktie_.]  So little that I got engaged to
be married to her once, when I was staying at the Tenbys’.  The affair
lasted for three days . . . nearly.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Why was it broken off?

LORD GORING.  [_Airily_.]  Oh, I forget.  At least, it makes no matter.
By the way, have you tried her with money?  She used to be confoundedly
fond of money.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I offered her any sum she wanted.  She refused.

LORD GORING.  Then the marvellous gospel of gold breaks down sometimes.
The rich can’t do everything, after all.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Not everything.  I suppose you are right.  Arthur,
I feel that public disgrace is in store for me.  I feel certain of it.  I
never knew what terror was before.  I know it now.  It is as if a hand of
ice were laid upon one’s heart.  It is as if one’s heart were beating
itself to death in some empty hollow.

LORD GORING.  [_Striking the table_.]  Robert, you must fight her.  You
must fight her.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  But how?

LORD GORING.  I can’t tell you how at present.  I have not the smallest
idea.  But every one has some weak point.  There is some flaw in each one
of us.  [_Strolls to the fireplace and looks at himself in the glass_.]
My father tells me that even I have faults.  Perhaps I have.  I don’t
know.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  In defending myself against Mrs. Cheveley, I have a
right to use any weapon I can find, have I not?

LORD GORING.  [_Still looking in the glass_.]  In your place I don’t
think I should have the smallest scruple in doing so.  She is thoroughly
well able to take care of herself.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Sits down at the table and takes a pen in his
hand_.]  Well, I shall send a cipher telegram to the Embassy at Vienna,
to inquire if there is anything known against her.  There may be some
secret scandal she might be afraid of.

LORD GORING.  [_Settling his buttonhole_.]  Oh, I should fancy Mrs.
Cheveley is one of those very modern women of our time who find a new
scandal as becoming as a new bonnet, and air them both in the Park every
afternoon at five-thirty.  I am sure she adores scandals, and that the
sorrow of her life at present is that she can’t manage to have enough of
them.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Writing_.]  Why do you say that?

LORD GORING.  [_Turning round_.]  Well, she wore far too much rouge last
night, and not quite enough clothes.  That is always a sign of despair in
a woman.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Striking a bell_.]  But it is worth while my
wiring to Vienna, is it not?

LORD GORING.  It is always worth while asking a question, though it is
not always worth while answering one.

[_Enter_ MASON.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Is Mr. Trafford in his room?

MASON.  Yes, Sir Robert.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Puts what he has written into an envelope_,
_which he then carefully closes_.]  Tell him to have this sent off in
cipher at once.  There must not be a moment’s delay.

MASON.  Yes, Sir Robert.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Oh! just give that back to me again.

[_Writes something on the envelope_.  MASON _then goes out with the
letter_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  She must have had some curious hold over Baron
Arnheim.  I wonder what it was.

LORD GORING.  [_Smiling_.]  I wonder.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I will fight her to the death, as long as my wife
knows nothing.

LORD GORING.  [_Strongly_.]  Oh, fight in any case—in any case.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_With a gesture of despair_.]  If my wife found
out, there would be little left to fight for.  Well, as soon as I hear
from Vienna, I shall let you know the result.  It is a chance, just a
chance, but I believe in it.  And as I fought the age with its own
weapons, I will fight her with her weapons.  It is only fair, and she
looks like a woman with a past, doesn’t she?

LORD GORING.  Most pretty women do.  But there is a fashion in pasts just
as there is a fashion in frocks.  Perhaps Mrs. Cheveley’s past is merely
a slightly décolleté one, and they are excessively popular nowadays.
Besides, my dear Robert, I should not build too high hopes on frightening
Mrs. Cheveley.  I should not fancy Mrs. Cheveley is a woman who would be
easily frightened.  She has survived all her creditors, and she shows
wonderful presence of mind.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Oh! I live on hopes now.  I clutch at every chance.
I feel like a man on a ship that is sinking.  The water is round my feet,
and the very air is bitter with storm.  Hush! I hear my wife’s voice.

[_Enter_ LADY CHILTERN _in walking dress_.]

LADY CHILTERN.  Good afternoon, Lord Goring!

LORD GORING.  Good afternoon, Lady Chiltern!  Have you been in the Park?

LADY CHILTERN.  No; I have just come from the Woman’s Liberal
Association, where, by the way, Robert, your name was received with loud
applause, and now I have come in to have my tea.  [_To_ LORD GORING.]
You will wait and have some tea, won’t you?

LORD GORING.  I’ll wait for a short time, thanks.

LADY CHILTERN.  I will be back in a moment.  I am only going to take my
hat off.

LORD GORING.  [_In his most earnest manner_.]  Oh! please don’t.  It is
so pretty.  One of the prettiest hats I ever saw.  I hope the Woman’s
Liberal Association received it with loud applause.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_With a smile_.]  We have much more important work to do
than look at each other’s bonnets, Lord Goring.

LORD GORING.  Really?  What sort of work?

LADY CHILTERN.  Oh! dull, useful, delightful things, Factory Acts, Female
Inspectors, the Eight Hours’ Bill, the Parliamentary Franchise. . . .
Everything, in fact, that you would find thoroughly uninteresting.

LORD GORING.  And never bonnets?

LADY CHILTERN.  [_With mock indignation_.]  Never bonnets, never!

[LADY CHILTERN _goes out through the door leading to her boudoir_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Takes_ LORD GORING’S _hand_.]  You have been a
good friend to me, Arthur, a thoroughly good friend.

LORD GORING.  I don’t know that I have been able to do much for you,
Robert, as yet.  In fact, I have not been able to do anything for you, as
far as I can see.  I am thoroughly disappointed with myself.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  You have enabled me to tell you the truth.  That is
something.  The truth has always stifled me.

LORD GORING.  Ah! the truth is a thing I get rid of as soon as possible!
Bad habit, by the way.  Makes one very unpopular at the club . . . with
the older members.  They call it being conceited.  Perhaps it is.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I would to God that I had been able to tell the
truth . . . to live the truth.  Ah! that is the great thing in life, to
live the truth.  [_Sighs_, _and goes towards the door_.]  I’ll see you
soon again, Arthur, shan’t I?

LORD GORING.  Certainly.  Whenever you like.  I’m going to look in at the
Bachelors’ Ball to-night, unless I find something better to do.  But I’ll
come round to-morrow morning.  If you should want me to-night by any
chance, send round a note to Curzon Street.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Thank you.

[_As he reaches the door_, LADY CHILTERN _enters from her boudoir_.]

LADY CHILTERN.  You are not going, Robert?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I have some letters to write, dear.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Going to him_.]  You work too hard, Robert.  You seem
never to think of yourself, and you are looking so tired.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  It is nothing, dear, nothing.

[_He kisses her and goes out_.]

LADY CHILTERN.  [_To_ LORD GORING.]  Do sit down.  I am so glad you have
called.  I want to talk to you about . . . well, not about bonnets, or
the Woman’s Liberal Association.  You take far too much interest in the
first subject, and not nearly enough in the second.

LORD GORING.  You want to talk to me about Mrs. Cheveley?

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes.  You have guessed it.  After you left last night I
found out that what she had said was really true.  Of course I made
Robert write her a letter at once, withdrawing his promise.

LORD GORING.  So he gave me to understand.

LADY CHILTERN.  To have kept it would have been the first stain on a
career that has been stainless always.  Robert must be above reproach.
He is not like other men.  He cannot afford to do what other men do.
[_She looks at_ LORD GORING, _who remains silent_.]  Don’t you agree with
me?  You are Robert’s greatest friend.  You are our greatest friend, Lord
Goring.  No one, except myself, knows Robert better than you do.  He has
no secrets from me, and I don’t think he has any from you.

LORD GORING.  He certainly has no secrets from me.  At least I don’t
think so.

LADY CHILTERN.  Then am I not right in my estimate of him?  I know I am
right.  But speak to me frankly.

LORD GORING.  [_Looking straight at her_.]  Quite frankly?

LADY CHILTERN.  Surely.  You have nothing to conceal, have you?

LORD GORING.  Nothing.  But, my dear Lady Chiltern, I think, if you will
allow me to say so, that in practical life—

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Smiling_.]  Of which you know so little, Lord Goring—

LORD GORING.  Of which I know nothing by experience, though I know
something by observation.  I think that in practical life there is
something about success, actual success, that is a little unscrupulous,
something about ambition that is unscrupulous always.  Once a man has set
his heart and soul on getting to a certain point, if he has to climb the
crag, he climbs the crag; if he has to walk in the mire—

LADY CHILTERN.  Well?

LORD GORING.  He walks in the mire.  Of course I am only talking
generally about life.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Gravely_.]  I hope so.  Why do you look at me so
strangely, Lord Goring?

LORD GORING.  Lady Chiltern, I have sometimes thought that . . . perhaps
you are a little hard in some of your views on life.  I think that . . .
often you don’t make sufficient allowances.  In every nature there are
elements of weakness, or worse than weakness.  Supposing, for instance,
that—that any public man, my father, or Lord Merton, or Robert, say, had,
years ago, written some foolish letter to some one . . .

LADY CHILTERN.  What do you mean by a foolish letter?

LORD GORING.  A letter gravely compromising one’s position.  I am only
putting an imaginary case.

LADY CHILTERN.  Robert is as incapable of doing a foolish thing as he is
of doing a wrong thing.

LORD GORING.  [_After a long pause_.]  Nobody is incapable of doing a
foolish thing.  Nobody is incapable of doing a wrong thing.

LADY CHILTERN.  Are you a Pessimist?  What will the other dandies say?
They will all have to go into mourning.

LORD GORING.  [_Rising_.]  No, Lady Chiltern, I am not a Pessimist.
Indeed I am not sure that I quite know what Pessimism really means.  All
I do know is that life cannot be understood without much charity, cannot
be lived without much charity.  It is love, and not German philosophy,
that is the true explanation of this world, whatever may be the
explanation of the next.  And if you are ever in trouble, Lady Chiltern,
trust me absolutely, and I will help you in every way I can.  If you ever
want me, come to me for my assistance, and you shall have it.  Come at
once to me.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Looking at him in surprise_.]  Lord Goring, you are
talking quite seriously.  I don’t think I ever heard you talk seriously
before.

LORD GORING.  [_Laughing_.]  You must excuse me, Lady Chiltern.  It won’t
occur again, if I can help it.

LADY CHILTERN.  But I like you to be serious.

[_Enter_ MABEL CHILTERN, _in the most ravishing frock_.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  Dear Gertrude, don’t say such a dreadful thing to Lord
Goring.  Seriousness would be very unbecoming to him.  Good afternoon
Lord Goring!  Pray be as trivial as you can.

LORD GORING.  I should like to, Miss Mabel, but I am afraid I am . . . a
little out of practice this morning; and besides, I have to be going now.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Just when I have come in!  What dreadful manners you
have!  I am sure you were very badly brought up.

LORD GORING.  I was.

MABEL CHILTERN.  I wish I had brought you up!

LORD GORING.  I am so sorry you didn’t.

MABEL CHILTERN.  It is too late now, I suppose?

LORD GORING.  [_Smiling_.]  I am not so sure.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Will you ride to-morrow morning?

LORD GORING.  Yes, at ten.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Don’t forget.

LORD GORING.  Of course I shan’t.  By the way, Lady Chiltern, there is no
list of your guests in _The Morning Post_ of to-day.  It has apparently
been crowded out by the County Council, or the Lambeth Conference, or
something equally boring.  Could you let me have a list?  I have a
particular reason for asking you.

LADY CHILTERN.  I am sure Mr. Trafford will be able to give you one.

LORD GORING.  Thanks, so much.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Tommy is the most useful person in London.

LORD GORING [_Turning to her_.]  And who is the most ornamental?

MABEL CHILTERN [_Triumphantly_.]  I am.

LORD GORING.  How clever of you to guess it!  [_Takes up his hat and
cane_.]  Good-bye, Lady Chiltern!  You will remember what I said to you,
won’t you?

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes; but I don’t know why you said it to me.

LORD GORING.  I hardly know myself.  Good-bye, Miss Mabel!

MABEL CHILTERN [_With a little moue of disappointment_.]  I wish you were
not going.  I have had four wonderful adventures this morning; four and a
half, in fact.  You might stop and listen to some of them.

LORD GORING.  How very selfish of you to have four and a half!  There
won’t be any left for me.

MABEL CHILTERN.  I don’t want you to have any.  They would not be good
for you.

LORD GORING.  That is the first unkind thing you have ever said to me.
How charmingly you said it!  Ten to-morrow.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Sharp.

LORD GORING.  Quite sharp.  But don’t bring Mr. Trafford.

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_With a little toss of the head_.]  Of course I shan’t
bring Tommy Trafford.  Tommy Trafford is in great disgrace.

LORD GORING.  I am delighted to hear it.  [_Bows and goes out_.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  Gertrude, I wish you would speak to Tommy Trafford.

LADY CHILTERN.  What has poor Mr. Trafford done this time?  Robert says
he is the best secretary he has ever had.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Well, Tommy has proposed to me again.  Tommy really does
nothing but propose to me.  He proposed to me last night in the
music-room, when I was quite unprotected, as there was an elaborate trio
going on.  I didn’t dare to make the smallest repartee, I need hardly
tell you.  If I had, it would have stopped the music at once.  Musical
people are so absurdly unreasonable.  They always want one to be
perfectly dumb at the very moment when one is longing to be absolutely
deaf.  Then he proposed to me in broad daylight this morning, in front of
that dreadful statue of Achilles.  Really, the things that go on in front
of that work of art are quite appalling.  The police should interfere.
At luncheon I saw by the glare in his eye that he was going to propose
again, and I just managed to check him in time by assuring him that I was
a bimetallist.  Fortunately I don’t know what bimetallism means.  And I
don’t believe anybody else does either.  But the observation crushed
Tommy for ten minutes.  He looked quite shocked.  And then Tommy is so
annoying in the way he proposes.  If he proposed at the top of his voice,
I should not mind so much.  That might produce some effect on the public.
But he does it in a horrid confidential way.  When Tommy wants to be
romantic he talks to one just like a doctor.  I am very fond of Tommy,
but his methods of proposing are quite out of date.  I wish, Gertrude,
you would speak to him, and tell him that once a week is quite often
enough to propose to any one, and that it should always be done in a
manner that attracts some attention.

LADY CHILTERN.  Dear Mabel, don’t talk like that.  Besides, Robert thinks
very highly of Mr. Trafford.  He believes he has a brilliant future
before him.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Oh! I wouldn’t marry a man with a future before him for
anything under the sun.

LADY CHILTERN.  Mabel!

MABEL CHILTERN.  I know, dear.  You married a man with a future, didn’t
you?  But then Robert was a genius, and you have a noble,
self-sacrificing character.  You can stand geniuses.  I have no character
at all, and Robert is the only genius I could ever bear.  As a rule, I
think they are quite impossible.  Geniuses talk so much, don’t they?
Such a bad habit!  And they are always thinking about themselves, when I
want them to be thinking about me.  I must go round now and rehearse at
Lady Basildon’s.  You remember, we are having tableaux, don’t you?  The
Triumph of something, I don’t know what!  I hope it will be triumph of
me.  Only triumph I am really interested in at present.  [_Kisses_ LADY
CHILTERN _and goes out_; _then comes running back_.]  Oh, Gertrude, do
you know who is coming to see you?  That dreadful Mrs. Cheveley, in a
most lovely gown.  Did you ask her?

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Rising_.]  Mrs. Cheveley!  Coming to see me?
Impossible!

MABEL CHILTERN.  I assure you she is coming upstairs, as large as life
and not nearly so natural.

LADY CHILTERN.  You need not wait, Mabel.  Remember, Lady Basildon is
expecting you.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Oh! I must shake hands with Lady Markby.  She is
delightful.  I love being scolded by her.

[_Enter_ MASON.]

MASON.  Lady Markby.  Mrs. Cheveley.

[_Enter_ LADY MARKBY _and_ MRS. CHEVELEY.]

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Advancing to meet them_.]  Dear Lady Markby, how nice
of you to come and see me!  [_Shakes hands with her_, _and bows somewhat
distantly to_ MRS. CHEVELEY.]  Won’t you sit down, Mrs. Cheveley?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thanks.  Isn’t that Miss Chiltern?  I should like so much
to know her.

LADY CHILTERN.  Mabel, Mrs. Cheveley wishes to know you.

[MABEL CHILTERN _gives a little nod_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY [_Sitting down_.]  I thought your frock so charming last
night, Miss Chiltern.  So simple and . . . suitable.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Really?  I must tell my dressmaker.  It will be such a
surprise to her.  Good-bye, Lady Markby!

LADY MARKBY.  Going already?

MABEL CHILTERN.  I am so sorry but I am obliged to.  I am just off to
rehearsal.  I have got to stand on my head in some tableaux.

LADY MARKBY.  On your head, child?  Oh! I hope not.  I believe it is most
unhealthy.  [_Takes a seat on the sofa next_ LADY CHILTERN.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  But it is for an excellent charity: in aid of the
Undeserving, the only people I am really interested in.  I am the
secretary, and Tommy Trafford is treasurer.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  And what is Lord Goring?

MABEL CHILTERN.  Oh! Lord Goring is president.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  The post should suit him admirably, unless he has
deteriorated since I knew him first.

LADY MARKBY.  [_Reflecting_.]  You are remarkably modern, Mabel.  A
little too modern, perhaps.  Nothing is so dangerous as being too modern.
One is apt to grow old-fashioned quite suddenly.  I have known many
instances of it.

MABEL CHILTERN.  What a dreadful prospect!

LADY MARKBY.  Ah! my dear, you need not be nervous.  You will always be
as pretty as possible.  That is the best fashion there is, and the only
fashion that England succeeds in setting.

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_With a curtsey_.]  Thank you so much, Lady Markby, for
England . . . and myself.  [_Goes out_.]

LADY MARKBY.  [_Turning to_ LADY CHILTERN.]  Dear Gertrude, we just
called to know if Mrs. Cheveley’s diamond brooch has been found.

LADY CHILTERN.  Here?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Yes.  I missed it when I got back to Claridge’s, and I
thought I might possibly have dropped it here.

LADY CHILTERN.  I have heard nothing about it.  But I will send for the
butler and ask.  [_Touches the bell_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh, pray don’t trouble, Lady Chiltern.  I dare say I lost
it at the Opera, before we came on here.

LADY MARKBY.  Ah yes, I suppose it must have been at the Opera.  The fact
is, we all scramble and jostle so much nowadays that I wonder we have
anything at all left on us at the end of an evening.  I know myself that,
when I am coming back from the Drawing Room, I always feel as if I hadn’t
a shred on me, except a small shred of decent reputation, just enough to
prevent the lower classes making painful observations through the windows
of the carriage.  The fact is that our Society is terribly
over-populated.  Really, some one should arrange a proper scheme of
assisted emigration.  It would do a great deal of good.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I quite agree with you, Lady Markby.  It is nearly six
years since I have been in London for the Season, and I must say Society
has become dreadfully mixed.  One sees the oddest people everywhere.

LADY MARKBY.  That is quite true, dear.  But one needn’t know them.  I’m
sure I don’t know half the people who come to my house.  Indeed, from all
I hear, I shouldn’t like to.

[_Enter_ MASON.]

LADY CHILTERN.  What sort of a brooch was it that you lost, Mrs.
Cheveley?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  A diamond snake-brooch with a ruby, a rather large ruby.

LADY MARKBY.  I thought you said there was a sapphire on the head, dear?

MRS. CHEVELEY [_Smiling_.]  No, lady Markby—a ruby.

LADY MARKBY.  [_Nodding her head_.]  And very becoming, I am quite sure.

LADY CHILTERN.  Has a ruby and diamond brooch been found in any of the
rooms this morning, Mason?

MASON.  No, my lady.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  It really is of no consequence, Lady Chiltern.  I am so
sorry to have put you to any inconvenience.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Coldly_.]  Oh, it has been no inconvenience.  That will
do, Mason.  You can bring tea.

[_Exit_ MASON.]

LADY MARKBY.  Well, I must say it is most annoying to lose anything.  I
remember once at Bath, years ago, losing in the Pump Room an exceedingly
handsome cameo bracelet that Sir John had given me.  I don’t think he has
ever given me anything since, I am sorry to say.  He has sadly
degenerated.  Really, this horrid House of Commons quite ruins our
husbands for us.  I think the Lower House by far the greatest blow to a
happy married life that there has been since that terrible thing called
the Higher Education of Women was invented.

LADY CHILTERN.  Ah! it is heresy to say that in this house, Lady Markby.
Robert is a great champion of the Higher Education of Women, and so, I am
afraid, am I.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  The higher education of men is what I should like to see.
Men need it so sadly.

LADY MARKBY.  They do, dear.  But I am afraid such a scheme would be
quite unpractical.  I don’t think man has much capacity for development.
He has got as far as he can, and that is not far, is it?  With regard to
women, well, dear Gertrude, you belong to the younger generation, and I
am sure it is all right if you approve of it.  In my time, of course, we
were taught not to understand anything.  That was the old system, and
wonderfully interesting it was.  I assure you that the amount of things I
and my poor dear sister were taught not to understand was quite
extraordinary.  But modern women understand everything, I am told.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Except their husbands.  That is the one thing the modern
woman never understands.

LADY MARKBY.  And a very good thing too, dear, I dare say.  It might
break up many a happy home if they did.  Not yours, I need hardly say,
Gertrude.  You have married a pattern husband.  I wish I could say as
much for myself.  But since Sir John has taken to attending the debates
regularly, which he never used to do in the good old days, his language
has become quite impossible.  He always seems to think that he is
addressing the House, and consequently whenever he discusses the state of
the agricultural labourer, or the Welsh Church, or something quite
improper of that kind, I am obliged to send all the servants out of the
room.  It is not pleasant to see one’s own butler, who has been with one
for twenty-three years, actually blushing at the side-board, and the
footmen making contortions in corners like persons in circuses.  I assure
you my life will be quite ruined unless they send John at once to the
Upper House.  He won’t take any interest in politics then, will he?  The
House of Lords is so sensible.  An assembly of gentlemen.  But in his
present state, Sir John is really a great trial.  Why, this morning
before breakfast was half over, he stood up on the hearthrug, put his
hands in his pockets, and appealed to the country at the top of his
voice.  I left the table as soon as I had my second cup of tea, I need
hardly say.  But his violent language could be heard all over the house!
I trust, Gertrude, that Sir Robert is not like that?

LADY CHILTERN.  But I am very much interested in politics, Lady Markby.
I love to hear Robert talk about them.

LADY MARKBY.  Well, I hope he is not as devoted to Blue Books as Sir John
is.  I don’t think they can be quite improving reading for any one.

MRS. CHEVELEY [_Languidly_.]  I have never read a Blue Book.  I prefer
books . . . in yellow covers.

LADY MARKBY.  [_Genially unconscious_.]  Yellow is a gayer colour, is it
not?  I used to wear yellow a good deal in my early days, and would do so
now if Sir John was not so painfully personal in his observations, and a
man on the question of dress is always ridiculous, is he not?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh, no!  I think men are the only authorities on dress.

LADY MARKBY.  Really?  One wouldn’t say so from the sort of hats they
wear? would one?

[_The butler enters_, _followed by the footman_.  _Tea is set on a small
table close to_ LADY CHILTERN.]

LADY CHILTERN.  May I give you some tea, Mrs. Cheveley?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thanks.  [_The butler hands_ MRS. CHEVELEY _a cup of tea
on a salver_.]

LADY CHILTERN.  Some tea, Lady Markby?

LADY MARKBY.  No thanks, dear.  [_The servants go out_.]  The fact is, I
have promised to go round for ten minutes to see poor Lady Brancaster,
who is in very great trouble.  Her daughter, quite a well-brought-up
girl, too, has actually become engaged to be married to a curate in
Shropshire.  It is very sad, very sad indeed.  I can’t understand this
modern mania for curates.  In my time we girls saw them, of course,
running about the place like rabbits.  But we never took any notice of
them, I need hardly say.  But I am told that nowadays country society is
quite honeycombed with them.  I think it most irreligious.  And then the
eldest son has quarrelled with his father, and it is said that when they
meet at the club Lord Brancaster always hides himself behind the money
article in _The Times_.  However, I believe that is quite a common
occurrence nowadays and that they have to take in extra copies of _The
Times_ at all the clubs in St. James’s Street; there are so many sons who
won’t have anything to do with their fathers, and so many fathers who
won’t speak to their sons.  I think myself, it is very much to be
regretted.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  So do I.  Fathers have so much to learn from their sons
nowadays.

LADY MARKBY.  Really, dear?  What?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  The art of living.  The only really Fine Art we have
produced in modern times.

LADY MARKBY.  [_Shaking her head_.]  Ah!  I am afraid Lord Brancaster
knew a good deal about that.  More than his poor wife ever did.
[_Turning to_ LADY CHILTERN.]  You know Lady Brancaster, don’t you, dear?

LADY CHILTERN.  Just slightly.  She was staying at Langton last autumn,
when we were there.

LADY MARKBY.  Well, like all stout women, she looks the very picture of
happiness, as no doubt you noticed.  But there are many tragedies in her
family, besides this affair of the curate.  Her own sister, Mrs. Jekyll,
had a most unhappy life; through no fault of her own, I am sorry to say.
She ultimately was so broken-hearted that she went into a convent, or on
to the operatic stage, I forget which.  No; I think it was decorative
art-needlework she took up.  I know she had lost all sense of pleasure in
life.  [_Rising_.]  And now, Gertrude, if you will allow me, I shall
leave Mrs. Cheveley in your charge and call back for her in a quarter of
an hour.  Or perhaps, dear Mrs. Cheveley, you wouldn’t mind waiting in
the carriage while I am with Lady Brancaster.  As I intend it to be a
visit of condolence, I shan’t stay long.

MRS. CHEVELEY [_Rising_.]  I don’t mind waiting in the carriage at all,
provided there is somebody to look at one.

LADY MARKBY.  Well, I hear the curate is always prowling about the house.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I am afraid I am not fond of girl friends.

LADY CHILTERN [_Rising_.]  Oh, I hope Mrs. Cheveley will stay here a
little.  I should like to have a few minutes’ conversation with her.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  How very kind of you, Lady Chiltern!  Believe me, nothing
would give me greater pleasure.

LADY MARKBY.  Ah! no doubt you both have many pleasant reminiscences of
your schooldays to talk over together.  Good-bye, dear Gertrude!  Shall I
see you at Lady Bonar’s to-night?  She has discovered a wonderful new
genius.  He does . . . nothing at all, I believe.  That is a great
comfort, is it not?

LADY CHILTERN.  Robert and I are dining at home by ourselves to-night,
and I don’t think I shall go anywhere afterwards.  Robert, of course,
will have to be in the House.  But there is nothing interesting on.

LADY MARKBY.  Dining at home by yourselves?  Is that quite prudent?  Ah,
I forgot, your husband is an exception.  Mine is the general rule, and
nothing ages a woman so rapidly as having married the general rule.
[_Exit_ LADY MARKBY.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Wonderful woman, Lady Markby, isn’t she?  Talks more and
says less than anybody I ever met.  She is made to be a public speaker.
Much more so than her husband, though he is a typical Englishman, always
dull and usually violent.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Makes no answer_, _but remains standing_.  _There is a
pause_.  _Then the eyes of the two women meet_.  LADY CHILTERN _looks
stern and pale_.  MRS. CHEVELEY _seem rather amused_.]  Mrs. Cheveley, I
think it is right to tell you quite frankly that, had I known who you
really were, I should not have invited you to my house last night.

MRS. CHEVELEY [_With an impertinent smile_.]  Really?

LADY CHILTERN.  I could not have done so.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I see that after all these years you have not changed a
bit, Gertrude.

LADY CHILTERN.  I never change.

MRS. CHEVELEY [_Elevating her eyebrows_.]  Then life has taught you
nothing?

LADY CHILTERN.  It has taught me that a person who has once been guilty
of a dishonest and dishonourable action may be guilty of it a second
time, and should be shunned.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Would you apply that rule to every one?

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes, to every one, without exception.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Then I am sorry for you, Gertrude, very sorry for you.

LADY CHILTERN.  You see now, I was sure, that for many reasons any
further acquaintance between us during your stay in London is quite
impossible?

MRS. CHEVELEY [_Leaning back in her chair_.]  Do you know, Gertrude, I
don’t mind your talking morality a bit.  Morality is simply the attitude
we adopt towards people whom we personally dislike.  You dislike me.  I
am quite aware of that.  And I have always detested you.  And yet I have
come here to do you a service.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Contemptuously_.]  Like the service you wished to
render my husband last night, I suppose.  Thank heaven, I saved him from
that.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Starting to her feet_.]  It was you who made him write
that insolent letter to me?  It was you who made him break his promise?

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Then you must make him keep it.  I give you till
to-morrow morning—no more.  If by that time your husband does not
solemnly bind himself to help me in this great scheme in which I am
interested—

LADY CHILTERN.  This fraudulent speculation—

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Call it what you choose.  I hold your husband in the
hollow of my hand, and if you are wise you will make him do what I tell
him.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Rising and going towards her_.]  You are impertinent.
What has my husband to do with you?  With a woman like you?

MRS. CHEVELEY [_With a bitter laugh_.]  In this world like meets with
like.  It is because your husband is himself fraudulent and dishonest
that we pair so well together.  Between you and him there are chasms.  He
and I are closer than friends.  We are enemies linked together.  The same
sin binds us.

LADY CHILTERN.  How dare you class my husband with yourself?  How dare
you threaten him or me?  Leave my house.  You are unfit to enter it.

[SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _enters from behind_.  _He hears his wife’s last
words_, _and sees to whom they are addressed_.  _He grows deadly pale_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Your house!  A house bought with the price of dishonour.
A house, everything in which has been paid for by fraud.  [_Turns round
and sees_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.]  Ask him what the origin of his fortune
is!  Get him to tell you how he sold to a stockbroker a Cabinet secret.
Learn from him to what you owe your position.

LADY CHILTERN.  It is not true!  Robert!  It is not true!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Pointing at him with outstretched finger_.]  Look at
him!  Can he deny it?  Does he dare to?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Go!  Go at once.  You have done your worst now.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  My worst?  I have not yet finished with you, with either
of you.  I give you both till to-morrow at noon.  If by then you don’t do
what I bid you to do, the whole world shall know the origin of Robert
Chiltern.

[SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _strikes the bell_.  _Enter_ MASON.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Show Mrs. Cheveley out.

[MRS. CHEVELEY _starts_; _then bows with somewhat exaggerated politeness
to_ LADY CHILTERN, _who makes no sign of response_.  _As she passes by_
SIR ROBERT CHILTERN, _who is standing close to the door_, _she pauses for
a moment and looks him straight in the face_.  _She then goes out_,
_followed by the servant_, _who closes the door after him_.  _The husband
and wife are left alone_.  LADY CHILTERN _stands like some one in a
dreadful dream_.  _Then she turns round and looks at her husband_.  _She
looks at him with strange eyes_, _as though she were seeing him for the
first time_.]

LADY CHILTERN.  You sold a Cabinet secret for money!  You began your life
with fraud!  You built up your career on dishonour!  Oh, tell me it is
not true!  Lie to me!  Lie to me!  Tell me it is not true!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  What this woman said is quite true.  But, Gertrude,
listen to me.  You don’t realise how I was tempted.  Let me tell you the
whole thing. [_Goes towards her_.]

LADY CHILTERN.  Don’t come near me.  Don’t touch me.  I feel as if you
had soiled me for ever.  Oh! what a mask you have been wearing all these
years!  A horrible painted mask!  You sold yourself for money.  Oh! a
common thief were better.  You put yourself up to sale to the highest
bidder!  You were bought in the market.  You lied to the whole world.
And yet you will not lie to me.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Rushing towards her_.]  Gertrude!  Gertrude!

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Thrusting him back with outstretched hands_.]  No,
don’t speak!  Say nothing!  Your voice wakes terrible memories—memories
of things that made me love you—memories of words that made me love
you—memories that now are horrible to me.  And how I worshipped you!  You
were to me something apart from common life, a thing pure, noble, honest,
without stain.  The world seemed to me finer because you were in it, and
goodness more real because you lived.  And now—oh, when I think that I
made of a man like you my ideal! the ideal of my life!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  There was your mistake.  There was your error.  The
error all women commit.  Why can’t you women love us, faults and all?
Why do you place us on monstrous pedestals?  We have all feet of clay,
women as well as men; but when we men love women, we love them knowing
their weaknesses, their follies, their imperfections, love them all the
more, it may be, for that reason.  It is not the perfect, but the
imperfect, who have need of love.  It is when we are wounded by our own
hands, or by the hands of others, that love should come to cure us—else
what use is love at all?  All sins, except a sin against itself, Love
should forgive.  All lives, save loveless lives, true Love should pardon.
A man’s love is like that.  It is wider, larger, more human than a
woman’s.  Women think that they are making ideals of men.  What they are
making of us are false idols merely.  You made your false idol of me, and
I had not the courage to come down, show you my wounds, tell you my
weaknesses.  I was afraid that I might lose your love, as I have lost it
now.  And so, last night you ruined my life for me—yes, ruined it!  What
this woman asked of me was nothing compared to what she offered to me.
She offered security, peace, stability.  The sin of my youth, that I had
thought was buried, rose up in front of me, hideous, horrible, with its
hands at my throat.  I could have killed it for ever, sent it back into
its tomb, destroyed its record, burned the one witness against me.  You
prevented me.  No one but you, you know it.  And now what is there before
me but public disgrace, ruin, terrible shame, the mockery of the world, a
lonely dishonoured life, a lonely dishonoured death, it may be, some day?
Let women make no more ideals of men! let them not put them on alters and
bow before them, or they may ruin other lives as completely as you—you
whom I have so wildly loved—have ruined mine!

[_He passes from the room_.  LADY CHILTERN _rushes towards him_, _but the
door is closed when she reaches it_.  _Pale with anguish_, _bewildered_,
_helpless_, _she sways like a plant in the water_.  _Her hands_,
_outstretched_, _seem to tremble in the air like blossoms in the mind_.
_Then she flings herself down beside a sofa and buries her face_.  _Her
sobs are like the sobs of a child_.]

                                 ACT DROP




THIRD ACT


SCENE


_The Library in Lord Goring’s house_.  _An Adam room_.  _On the right is
the door leading into the hall_.  _On the left_, _the door of the
smoking-room_.  _A pair of folding doors at the back open into the
drawing-room_.  _The fire is lit_.  _Phipps_, _the butler_, _is arranging
some newspapers on the writing-table_.  _The distinction of Phipps is his
impassivity_. _He has been termed by enthusiasts the Ideal Butler_.  _The
Sphinx is not so incommunicable_.  _He is a mask with a manner_.  _Of his
intellectual or emotional life_, _history knows nothing_.  _He represents
the dominance of form_.

[_Enter_ LORD GORING _in evening dress with a buttonhole_.  _He is
wearing a silk hat and Inverness cape_.  _White-gloved_, _he carries a
Louis Seize cane_.  _His are all the delicate fopperies of Fashion_.
_One sees that he stands in immediate relation to modern life_, _makes it
indeed_, _and so masters it_.  _He is the first well-dressed philosopher
in the history of thought_.]

LORD GORING.  Got my second buttonhole for me, Phipps?

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.  [_Takes his hat_, _cane_, _and cape_, _and
presents new buttonhole on salver_.]

LORD GORING.  Rather distinguished thing, Phipps.  I am the only person
of the smallest importance in London at present who wears a buttonhole.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.  I have observed that,

LORD GORING.  [_Taking out old buttonhole_.]  You see, Phipps, Fashion is
what one wears oneself.  What is unfashionable is what other people wear.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.

LORD GORING.  Just as vulgarity is simply the conduct of other people.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.

LORD GORING.  [_Putting in a new buttonhole_.]  And falsehoods the truths
of other people.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.

LORD GORING.  Other people are quite dreadful.  The only possible society
is oneself.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.

LORD GORING.  To love oneself is the beginning of a lifelong romance,
Phipps.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.

LORD GORING.  [_Looking at himself in the glass_.]  Don’t think I quite
like this buttonhole, Phipps.  Makes me look a little too old.  Makes me
almost in the prime of life, eh, Phipps?

PHIPPS.  I don’t observe any alteration in your lordship’s appearance.

LORD GORING.  You don’t, Phipps?

PHIPPS.  No, my lord.

LORD GORING.  I am not quite sure.  For the future a more trivial
buttonhole, Phipps, on Thursday evenings.

PHIPPS.  I will speak to the florist, my lord.  She has had a loss in her
family lately, which perhaps accounts for the lack of triviality your
lordship complains of in the buttonhole.

LORD GORING.  Extraordinary thing about the lower classes in England—they
are always losing their relations.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord!  They are extremely fortunate in that respect.

LORD GORING.  [_Turns round and looks at him_.  PHIPPS _remains
impassive_.]  Hum!  Any letters, Phipps?

PHIPPS.  Three, my lord.  [_Hands letters on a salver_.]

LORD GORING.  [_Takes letters_.]  Want my cab round in twenty minutes.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.  [_Goes towards door_.]

LORD GORING.  [_Holds up letter in pink envelope_.]  Ahem!  Phipps, when
did this letter arrive?

PHIPPS.  It was brought by hand just after your lordship went to the
club.

LORD GORING.  That will do.  [_Exit_ PHIPPS.]  Lady Chiltern’s
handwriting on Lady Chiltern’s pink notepaper.  That is rather curious.
I thought Robert was to write.  Wonder what Lady Chiltern has got to say
to me?  [_Sits at bureau and opens letter_, _and reads it_.]  ‘I want
you.  I trust you.  I am coming to you.  Gertrude.’  [_Puts down the
letter with a puzzled look_.  _Then takes it up_, _and reads it again
slowly_.]  ‘I want you.  I trust you.  I am coming to you.’  So she has
found out everything!  Poor woman!  Poor woman!  [ _Pulls out watch and
looks at it_.]  But what an hour to call!  Ten o’clock!  I shall have to
give up going to the Berkshires.  However, it is always nice to be
expected, and not to arrive.  I am not expected at the Bachelors’, so I
shall certainly go there.  Well, I will make her stand by her husband.
That is the only thing for her to do.  That is the only thing for any
woman to do.  It is the growth of the moral sense in women that makes
marriage such a hopeless, one-sided institution.  Ten o’clock.  She
should be here soon.  I must tell Phipps I am not in to any one else.
[_Goes towards bell_]

[_Enter_ PHIPPS.]

PHIPPS.  Lord Caversham.

LORD GORING.  Oh, why will parents always appear at the wrong time?  Some
extraordinary mistake in nature, I suppose.  [_Enter_ LORD CAVERSHAM.]
Delighted to see you, my dear father.  [_Goes to meet him_.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Take my cloak off.

LORD GORING.  Is it worth while, father?

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Of course it is worth while, sir.  Which is the most
comfortable chair?

LORD GORING.  This one, father.  It is the chair I use myself, when I
have visitors.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Thank ye.  No draught, I hope, in this room?

LORD GORING.  No, father.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Sitting down_.]  Glad to hear it.  Can’t stand
draughts.  No draughts at home.

LORD GORING.  Good many breezes, father.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Eh?  Eh?  Don’t understand what you mean.  Want to have
a serious conversation with you, sir.

LORD GORING.  My dear father!  At this hour?

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Well, sir, it is only ten o’clock.  What is your
objection to the hour?  I think the hour is an admirable hour!

LORD GORING.  Well, the fact is, father, this is not my day for talking
seriously.  I am very sorry, but it is not my day.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  What do you mean, sir?

LORD GORING.  During the Season, father, I only talk seriously on the
first Tuesday in every month, from four to seven.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Well, make it Tuesday, sir, make it Tuesday.

LORD GORING.  But it is after seven, father, and my doctor says I must
not have any serious conversation after seven.  It makes me talk in my
sleep.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Talk in your sleep, sir?  What does that matter?  You
are not married.

LORD GORING.  No, father, I am not married.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Hum!  That is what I have come to talk to you about,
sir.  You have got to get married, and at once.  Why, when I was your
age, sir, I had been an inconsolable widower for three months, and was
already paying my addresses to your admirable mother.  Damme, sir, it is
your duty to get married.  You can’t be always living for pleasure.
Every man of position is married nowadays.  Bachelors are not fashionable
any more.  They are a damaged lot.  Too much is known about them.  You
must get a wife, sir.  Look where your friend Robert Chiltern has got to
by probity, hard work, and a sensible marriage with a good woman.  Why
don’t you imitate him, sir?  Why don’t you take him for your model?

LORD GORING.  I think I shall, father.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  I wish you would, sir.  Then I should be happy.  At
present I make your mother’s life miserable on your account.  You are
heartless, sir, quite heartless.

LORD GORING.  I hope not, father.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  And it is high time for you to get married.  You are
thirty-four years of age, sir.

LORD GORING.  Yes, father, but I only admit to thirty-two—thirty-one and
a half when I have a really good buttonhole.  This buttonhole is not . . .
trivial enough.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  I tell you you are thirty-four, sir.  And there is a
draught in your room, besides, which makes your conduct worse.  Why did
you tell me there was no draught, sir?  I feel a draught, sir, I feel it
distinctly.

LORD GORING.  So do I, father.  It is a dreadful draught.  I will come
and see you to-morrow, father.  We can talk over anything you like.  Let
me help you on with your cloak, father.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  No, sir; I have called this evening for a definite
purpose, and I am going to see it through at all costs to my health or
yours.  Put down my cloak, sir.

LORD GORING.  Certainly, father.  But let us go into another room.
[_Rings bell_.]  There is a dreadful draught here.  [_Enter_ PHIPPS.]
Phipps, is there a good fire in the smoking-room?

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.

LORD GORING.  Come in there, father.  Your sneezes are quite
heartrending.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Well, sir, I suppose I have a right to sneeze when I
choose?

LORD GORING.  [_Apologetically_.]  Quite so, father.  I was merely
expressing sympathy.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Oh, damn sympathy.  There is a great deal too much of
that sort of thing going on nowadays.

LORD GORING.  I quite agree with you, father.  If there was less sympathy
in the world there would be less trouble in the world.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Going towards the smoking-room_.]  That is a paradox,
sir.  I hate paradoxes.

LORD GORING.  So do I, father.  Everybody one meets is a paradox
nowadays.  It is a great bore.  It makes society so obvious.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Turning round_, _and looking at his son beneath his
bushy eyebrows_.]  Do you always really understand what you say, sir?

LORD GORING.  [_After some hesitation_.]  Yes, father, if I listen
attentively.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Indignantly_.]  If you listen attentively! . . .
Conceited young puppy!

[_Goes off grumbling into the smoking-room_.  PHIPPS _enters_.]

LORD GORING.  Phipps, there is a lady coming to see me this evening on
particular business.  Show her into the drawing-room when she arrives.
You understand?

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.

LORD GORING.  It is a matter of the gravest importance, Phipps.

PHIPPS.  I understand, my lord.

LORD GORING.  No one else is to be admitted, under any circumstances.

PHIPPS.  I understand, my lord.  [_Bell rings_.]

LORD GORING.  Ah! that is probably the lady.  I shall see her myself.

[_Just as he is going towards the door_ LORD CAVERSHAM _enters from the
smoking-room_.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Well, sir? am I to wait attendance on you?

LORD GORING.  [_Considerably perplexed_.]  In a moment, father.  Do
excuse me.  [LORD CAVERSHAM _goes back_.]  Well, remember my
instructions, Phipps—into that room.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.

[LORD GORING _goes into the smoking-room_.  HAROLD, _the footman shows_
MRS. CHEVELEY _in_.  _Lamia-like_, _she is in green and silver_.  _She
has a cloak of black satin_, _lined with dead rose-leaf silk_.]

HAROLD.  What name, madam?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_To_ PHIPPS, _who advances towards her_.]  Is Lord
Goring not here?  I was told he was at home?

PHIPPS.  His lordship is engaged at present with Lord Caversham, madam.

[_Turns a cold_, _glassy eye on_ HAROLD, _who at once retires_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_To herself_.]  How very filial!

PHIPPS.  His lordship told me to ask you, madam, to be kind enough to
wait in the drawing-room for him.  His lordship will come to you there.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_With a look of surprise_.]  Lord Goring expects me?

PHIPPS.  Yes, madam.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Are you quite sure?

PHIPPS.  His lordship told me that if a lady called I was to ask her to
wait in the drawing-room.  [_Goes to the door of the drawing-room and
opens it_.]  His lordship’s directions on the subject were very precise.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_To herself_]  How thoughtful of him!  To expect the
unexpected shows a thoroughly modern intellect.  [_Goes towards the
drawing-room and looks in_.]  Ugh!  How dreary a bachelor’s drawing-room
always looks.  I shall have to alter all this.  [PHIPPS _brings the lamp
from the writing-table_.]  No, I don’t care for that lamp.  It is far too
glaring.  Light some candles.

PHIPPS.  [_Replaces lamp_.]  Certainly, madam.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I hope the candles have very becoming shades.

PHIPPS.  We have had no complaints about them, madam, as yet.

[_Passes into the drawing-room and begins to light the candles_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_To herself_.]  I wonder what woman he is waiting for
to-night.  It will be delightful to catch him.  Men always look so silly
when they are caught.  And they are always being caught.  [_Looks about
room and approaches the writing-table_.]  What a very interesting room!
What a very interesting picture!  Wonder what his correspondence is like.
[_Takes up letters_.]  Oh, what a very uninteresting correspondence!
Bills and cards, debts and dowagers!  Who on earth writes to him on pink
paper?  How silly to write on pink paper!  It looks like the beginning of
a middle-class romance.  Romance should never begin with sentiment.  It
should begin with science and end with a settlement.  [_Puts letter
down_, _then takes it up again_.]  I know that handwriting.  That is
Gertrude Chiltern’s.  I remember it perfectly.  The ten commandments in
every stroke of the pen, and the moral law all over the page.  Wonder
what Gertrude is writing to him about?  Something horrid about me, I
suppose.  How I detest that woman!  [_Reads it_.]  ‘I trust you.  I want
you.  I am coming to you.  Gertrude.’  ‘I trust you.  I want you.  I am
coming to you.’

[_A look of triumph comes over her face_.  _She is just about to steal
the letter_, _when_ PHIPPS _comes in_.]

PHIPPS.  The candles in the drawing-room are lit, madam, as you directed.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thank you.  [_Rises hastily and slips the letter under a
large silver-cased blotting-book that is lying on the table_.]

PHIPPS.  I trust the shades will be to your liking, madam.  They are the
most becoming we have.  They are the same as his lordship uses himself
when he is dressing for dinner.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_With a smile_.]  Then I am sure they will be perfectly
right.

PHIPPS.  [_Gravely_.]  Thank you, madam.

[MRS. CHEVELEY _goes into the drawing-room_.  PHIPPS _closes the door and
retires_.  _The door is then slowly opened_, _and_ MRS. CHEVELEY _comes
out and creeps stealthily towards the writing-table_.  _Suddenly voices
are heard from the smoking-room_.  MRS. CHEVELEY _grows pale_, _and
stops_.  _The voices grow louder_, _and she goes back into the
drawing-room_, _biting her lip_.]

[_Enter_ LORD GORING _and_ LORD CAVERSHAM.]

LORD GORING.  [_Expostulating_.]  My dear father, if I am to get married,
surely you will allow me to choose the time, place, and person?
Particularly the person.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Testily_.]  That is a matter for me, sir.  You would
probably make a very poor choice.  It is I who should be consulted, not
you.  There is property at stake.  It is not a matter for affection.
Affection comes later on in married life.

LORD GORING.  Yes.  In married life affection comes when people
thoroughly dislike each other, father, doesn’t it?  [_Puts on_ LORD
CAVERSHAM’S _cloak for him_.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Certainly, sir.  I mean certainly not, air.  You are
talking very foolishly to-night.  What I say is that marriage is a matter
for common sense.

LORD GORING.  But women who have common sense are so curiously plain,
father, aren’t they?  Of course I only speak from hearsay.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  No woman, plain or pretty, has any common sense at all,
sir.  Common sense is the privilege of our sex.

LORD GORING.  Quite so.  And we men are so self-sacrificing that we never
use it, do we, father?

LORD CAVERSHAM.  I use it, sir.  I use nothing else.

LORD GORING.  So my mother tells me.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  It is the secret of your mother’s happiness.  You are
very heartless, sir, very heartless.

LORD GORING.  I hope not, father.

[_Goes out for a moment_.  _Then returns_, _looking rather put out_,
_with_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  My dear Arthur, what a piece of good luck meeting
you on the doorstep!  Your servant had just told me you were not at home.
How extraordinary!

LORD GORING.  The fact is, I am horribly busy to-night, Robert, and I
gave orders I was not at home to any one.  Even my father had a
comparatively cold reception.  He complained of a draught the whole time.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Ah! you must be at home to me, Arthur.  You are my
best friend.  Perhaps by to-morrow you will be my only friend.  My wife
has discovered everything.

LORD GORING.  Ah! I guessed as much!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Looking at him_.]  Really!  How?

LORD GORING.  [_After some hesitation_.]  Oh, merely by something in the
expression of your face as you came in.  Who told her?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Mrs. Cheveley herself.  And the woman I love knows
that I began my career with an act of low dishonesty, that I built up my
life upon sands of shame—that I sold, like a common huckster, the secret
that had been intrusted to me as a man of honour.  I thank heaven poor
Lord Radley died without knowing that I betrayed him.  I would to God I
had died before I had been so horribly tempted, or had fallen so low.
[_Burying his face in his hands_.]

LORD GORING.  [_After a pause_.]  You have heard nothing from Vienna yet,
in answer to your wire?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Looking up_.]  Yes; I got a telegram from the
first secretary at eight o’clock to-night.

LORD GORING.  Well?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Nothing is absolutely known against her.  On the
contrary, she occupies a rather high position in society.  It is a sort
of open secret that Baron Arnheim left her the greater portion of his
immense fortune.  Beyond that I can learn nothing.

LORD GORING.  She doesn’t turn out to be a spy, then?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Oh! spies are of no use nowadays.  Their profession
is over.  The newspapers do their work instead.

LORD GORING.  And thunderingly well they do it.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Arthur, I am parched with thirst.  May I ring for
something?  Some hock and seltzer?

LORD GORING.  Certainly.  Let me.  [_Rings the bell_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Thanks!  I don’t know what to do, Arthur, I don’t
know what to do, and you are my only friend.  But what a friend you
are—the one friend I can trust.  I can trust you absolutely, can’t I?

[_Enter_ PHIPPS.]

LORD GORING.  My dear Robert, of course.  Oh!  [_To_ PHIPPS.]  Bring some
hock and seltzer.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.

LORD GORING.  And Phipps!

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.

LORD GORING.  Will you excuse me for a moment, Robert?  I want to give
some directions to my servant.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Certainly.

LORD GORING.  When that lady calls, tell her that I am not expected home
this evening.  Tell her that I have been suddenly called out of town.
You understand?

PHIPPS.  The lady is in that room, my lord.  You told me to show her into
that room, my lord.

LORD GORING.  You did perfectly right.  [_Exit_ PHIPPS.]  What a mess I
am in.  No; I think I shall get through it.  I’ll give her a lecture
through the door.  Awkward thing to manage, though.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Arthur, tell me what I should do.  My life seems to
have crumbled about me.  I am a ship without a rudder in a night without
a star.

LORD GORING.  Robert, you love your wife, don’t you?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I love her more than anything in the world.  I used
to think ambition the great thing.  It is not.  Love is the great thing
in the world.  There is nothing but love, and I love her.  But I am
defamed in her eyes.  I am ignoble in her eyes.  There is a wide gulf
between us now.  She has found me out, Arthur, she has found me out.

LORD GORING.  Has she never in her life done some folly—some
indiscretion—that she should not forgive your sin?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  My wife!  Never!  She does not know what weakness
or temptation is.  I am of clay like other men.  She stands apart as good
women do—pitiless in her perfection—cold and stern and without mercy.
But I love her, Arthur.  We are childless, and I have no one else to
love, no one else to love me.  Perhaps if God had sent us children she
might have been kinder to me.  But God has given us a lonely house.  And
she has cut my heart in two.  Don’t let us talk of it.  I was brutal to
her this evening.  But I suppose when sinners talk to saints they are
brutal always.  I said to her things that were hideously true, on my
side, from my stand-point, from the standpoint of men.  But don’t let us
talk of that.

LORD GORING.  Your wife will forgive you.  Perhaps at this moment she is
forgiving you.  She loves you, Robert.  Why should she not forgive?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  God grant it!  God grant it!  [_Buries his face in
his hands_.]  But there is something more I have to tell you, Arthur.

[_Enter_ PHIPPS _with drinks_.]

PHIPPS.  [_Hands hock and seltzer to_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.]  Hock and
seltzer, sir.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Thank you.

LORD GORING.  Is your carriage here, Robert?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  No; I walked from the club.

LORD GORING.  Sir Robert will take my cab, Phipps.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.  [_Exit_.]

LORD GORING.  Robert, you don’t mind my sending you away?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Arthur, you must let me stay for five minutes.  I
have made up my mind what I am going to do to-night in the House.  The
debate on the Argentine Canal is to begin at eleven.  [_A chair falls in
the drawing-room_.]  What is that?

LORD GORING.  Nothing.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I heard a chair fall in the next room.  Some one
has been listening.

LORD GORING.  No, no; there is no one there.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  There is some one.  There are lights in the room,
and the door is ajar.  Some one has been listening to every secret of my
life.  Arthur, what does this mean?

LORD GORING.  Robert, you are excited, unnerved.  I tell you there is no
one in that room. Sit down, Robert.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Do you give me your word that there is no one
there?

LORD GORING.  Yes.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Your word of honour?  [_Sits down_.]

LORD GORING.  Yes.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Rises_.]  Arthur, let me see for myself.

LORD GORING.  No, no.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  If there is no one there why should I not look in
that room?  Arthur, you must let me go into that room and satisfy myself.
Let me know that no eavesdropper has heard my life’s secret.  Arthur, you
don’t realise what I am going through.

LORD GORING.  Robert, this must stop.  I have told you that there is no
one in that room—that is enough.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Rushes to the door of the room_.]  It is not
enough.  I insist on going into this room.  You have told me there is no
one there, so what reason can you have for refusing me?

LORD GORING.  For God’s sake, don’t!  There is some one there.  Some one
whom you must not see.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Ah, I thought so!

LORD GORING.  I forbid you to enter that room.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Stand back.  My life is at stake.  And I don’t care
who is there.  I will know who it is to whom I have told my secret and my
shame.  [_Enters room_.]

LORD GORING.  Great heavens! his own wife!

[SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _comes back_, _with a look of scorn and anger on his
face_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  What explanation have you to give me for the
presence of that woman here?

LORD GORING.  Robert, I swear to you on my honour that that lady is
stainless and guiltless of all offence towards you.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  She is a vile, an infamous thing!

LORD GORING.  Don’t say that, Robert!  It was for your sake she came
here.  It was to try and save you she came here.  She loves you and no
one else.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  You are mad.  What have I to do with her intrigues
with you?  Let her remain your mistress!  You are well suited to each
other.  She, corrupt and shameful—you, false as a friend, treacherous as
an enemy even—

LORD GORING.  It is not true, Robert.  Before heaven, it is not true.  In
her presence and in yours I will explain all.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Let me pass, sir.  You have lied enough upon your
word of honour.

[SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _goes out_.  LORD GORING _rushes to the door of the
drawing-room_, _when_ MRS. CHEVELEY _comes out_, _looking radiant and
much amused_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_With a mock curtsey_]  Good evening, Lord Goring!

LORD GORING.  Mrs. Cheveley!  Great heavens! . . . May I ask what you
were doing in my drawing-room?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Merely listening.  I have a perfect passion for listening
through keyholes.  One always hears such wonderful things through them.

LORD GORING.  Doesn’t that sound rather like tempting Providence?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh! surely Providence can resist temptation by this time.
[_Makes a sign to him to take her cloak off_, _which he does_.]

LORD GORING.  I am glad you have called.  I am going to give you some
good advice.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh! pray don’t.  One should never give a woman anything
that she can’t wear in the evening.

LORD GORING.  I see you are quite as wilful as you used to be.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Far more!  I have greatly improved.  I have had more
experience.

LORD GORING.  Too much experience is a dangerous thing.  Pray have a
cigarette.  Half the pretty women in London smoke cigarettes.  Personally
I prefer the other half.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thanks.  I never smoke.  My dressmaker wouldn’t like it,
and a woman’s first duty in life is to her dressmaker, isn’t it?  What
the second duty is, no one has as yet discovered.

LORD GORING.  You have come here to sell me Robert Chiltern’s letter,
haven’t you?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  To offer it to you on conditions.  How did you guess
that?

LORD GORING.  Because you haven’t mentioned the subject.  Have you got it
with you?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Sitting down_.]  Oh, no!  A well-made dress has no
pockets.

LORD GORING.  What is your price for it?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  How absurdly English you are!  The English think that a
cheque-book can solve every problem in life.  Why, my dear Arthur, I have
very much more money than you have, and quite as much as Robert Chiltern
has got hold of.  Money is not what I want.

LORD GORING.  What do you want then, Mrs. Cheveley?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Why don’t you call me Laura?

LORD GORING.  I don’t like the name.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  You used to adore it.

LORD GORING.  Yes: that’s why.  [MRS. CHEVELEY _motions to him to sit
down beside her_.  _He smiles_, _and does so_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Arthur, you loved me once.

LORD GORING.  Yes.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  And you asked me to be your wife.

LORD GORING.  That was the natural result of my loving you.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  And you threw me over because you saw, or said you saw,
poor old Lord Mortlake trying to have a violent flirtation with me in the
conservatory at Tenby.

LORD GORING.  I am under the impression that my lawyer settled that
matter with you on certain terms . . . dictated by yourself.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  At that time I was poor; you were rich.

LORD GORING.  Quite so.  That is why you pretended to love me.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Shrugging her shoulders_.]  Poor old Lord Mortlake, who
had only two topics of conversation, his gout and his wife!  I never
could quite make out which of the two he was talking about.  He used the
most horrible language about them both.  Well, you were silly, Arthur.
Why, Lord Mortlake was never anything more to me than an amusement.  One
of those utterly tedious amusements one only finds at an English country
house on an English country Sunday.  I don’t think any one at all morally
responsible for what he or she does at an English country house.

LORD GORING.  Yes.  I know lots of people think that.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I loved you, Arthur.

LORD GORING.  My dear Mrs. Cheveley, you have always been far too clever
to know anything about love.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I did love you.  And you loved me.  You know you loved
me; and love is a very wonderful thing.  I suppose that when a man has
once loved a woman, he will do anything for her, except continue to love
her?  [_Puts her hand on his_.]

LORD GORING.  [_Taking his hand away quietly_.]  Yes: except that.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_After a pause_.]  I am tired of living abroad.  I want
to come back to London.  I want to have a charming house here.  I want to
have a salon.  If one could only teach the English how to talk, and the
Irish how to listen, society here would be quite civilised.  Besides, I
have arrived at the romantic stage.  When I saw you last night at the
Chilterns’, I knew you were the only person I had ever cared for, if I
ever have cared for anybody, Arthur.  And so, on the morning of the day
you marry me, I will give you Robert Chiltern’s letter.  That is my
offer.  I will give it to you now, if you promise to marry me.

LORD GORING.  Now?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Smiling_.]  To-morrow.

LORD GORING.  Are you really serious?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Yes, quite serious.

LORD GORING.  I should make you a very bad husband.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I don’t mind bad husbands.  I have had two.  They amused
me immensely.

LORD GORING.  You mean that you amused yourself immensely, don’t you?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  What do you know about my married life?

LORD GORING.  Nothing: but I can read it like a book.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  What book?

LORD GORING.  [_Rising_.]  The Book of Numbers.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Do you think it is quite charming of you to be so rude to
a woman in your own house?

LORD GORING.  In the case of very fascinating women, sex is a challenge,
not a defence.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I suppose that is meant for a compliment.  My dear
Arthur, women are never disarmed by compliments.  Men always are.  That
is the difference between the two sexes.

LORD GORING.  Women are never disarmed by anything, as far as I know
them.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_After a pause_.]  Then you are going to allow your
greatest friend, Robert Chiltern, to be ruined, rather than marry some
one who really has considerable attractions left.  I thought you would
have risen to some great height of self-sacrifice, Arthur.  I think you
should.  And the rest of your life you could spend in contemplating your
own perfections.

LORD GORING.  Oh! I do that as it is.  And self-sacrifice is a thing that
should be put down by law.  It is so demoralising to the people for whom
one sacrifices oneself.  They always go to the bad.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  As if anything could demoralise Robert Chiltern!  You
seem to forget that I know his real character.

LORD GORING.  What you know about him is not his real character.  It was
an act of folly done in his youth, dishonourable, I admit, shameful, I
admit, unworthy of him, I admit, and therefore . . . not his true
character.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  How you men stand up for each other!

LORD GORING.  How you women war against each other!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Bitterly_.]  I only war against one woman, against
Gertrude Chiltern.  I hate her.  I hate her now more than ever.

LORD GORING.  Because you have brought a real tragedy into her life, I
suppose.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_With a sneer_.]  Oh, there is only one real tragedy in
a woman’s life.  The fact that her past is always her lover, and her
future invariably her husband.

LORD GORING.  Lady Chiltern knows nothing of the kind of life to which
you are alluding.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  A woman whose size in gloves is seven and three-quarters
never knows much about anything.  You know Gertrude has always worn seven
and three-quarters?  That is one of the reasons why there was never any
moral sympathy between us. . . . Well, Arthur, I suppose this romantic
interview may be regarded as at an end.  You admit it was romantic, don’t
you?  For the privilege of being your wife I was ready to surrender a
great prize, the climax of my diplomatic career.  You decline.  Very
well.  If Sir Robert doesn’t uphold my Argentine scheme, I expose him.
Voilà tout.

LORD GORING.  You mustn’t do that.  It would be vile, horrible, infamous.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Shrugging her shoulders_.]  Oh! don’t use big words.
They mean so little.  It is a commercial transaction.  That is all.
There is no good mixing up sentimentality in it.  I offered to sell
Robert Chiltern a certain thing.  If he won’t pay me my price, he will
have to pay the world a greater price.  There is no more to be said.  I
must go.  Good-bye.  Won’t you shake hands?

LORD GORING.  With you?  No.  Your transaction with Robert Chiltern may
pass as a loathsome commercial transaction of a loathsome commercial age;
but you seem to have forgotten that you came here to-night to talk of
love, you whose lips desecrated the word love, you to whom the thing is a
book closely sealed, went this afternoon to the house of one of the most
noble and gentle women in the world to degrade her husband in her eyes,
to try and kill her love for him, to put poison in her heart, and
bitterness in her life, to break her idol, and, it may be, spoil her
soul.  That I cannot forgive you.  That was horrible.  For that there can
be no forgiveness.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Arthur, you are unjust to me.  Believe me, you are quite
unjust to me.  I didn’t go to taunt Gertrude at all.  I had no idea of
doing anything of the kind when I entered.  I called with Lady Markby
simply to ask whether an ornament, a jewel, that I lost somewhere last
night, had been found at the Chilterns’.  If you don’t believe me, you
can ask Lady Markby.  She will tell you it is true.  The scene that
occurred happened after Lady Markby had left, and was really forced on me
by Gertrude’s rudeness and sneers.  I called, oh!—a little out of malice
if you like—but really to ask if a diamond brooch of mine had been found.
That was the origin of the whole thing.

LORD GORING.  A diamond snake-brooch with a ruby?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Yes.  How do you know?

LORD GORING.  Because it is found.  In point of fact, I found it myself,
and stupidly forgot to tell the butler anything about it as I was
leaving.  [_Goes over to the writing-table and pulls out the drawers_.]
It is in this drawer.  No, that one.  This is the brooch, isn’t it?
[_Holds up the brooch_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Yes.  I am so glad to get it back.  It was . . a present.

LORD GORING.  Won’t you wear it?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Certainly, if you pin it in.  [LORD GORING _suddenly
clasps it on her arm_.]  Why do you put it on as a bracelet?  I never
knew it could he worn as a bracelet.

LORD GORING.  Really?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Holding out her handsome arm_.]  No; but it looks very
well on me as a bracelet, doesn’t it?

LORD GORING.  Yes; much better than when I saw it last.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  When did you see it last?

LORD GORING.  [_Calmly_.]  Oh, ten years ago, on Lady Berkshire, from
whom you stole it.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Starting_.]  What do you mean?

LORD GORING.  I mean that you stole that ornament from my cousin, Mary
Berkshire, to whom I gave it when she was married.  Suspicion fell on a
wretched servant, who was sent away in disgrace.  I recognised it last
night.  I determined to say nothing about it till I had found the thief.
I have found the thief now, and I have heard her own confession.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Tossing her head_.]  It is not true.

LORD GORING.  You know it is true.  Why, thief is written across your
face at this moment.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I will deny the whole affair from beginning to end.  I
will say that I have never seen this wretched thing, that it was never in
my possession.

[MRS. CHEVELEY _tries to get the bracelet off her arm_, _but fails_.
LORD GORING _looks on amused_.  _Her thin fingers tear at the jewel to no
purpose_.  _A curse breaks from her_.]

LORD GORING.  The drawback of stealing a thing, Mrs. Cheveley, is that
one never knows how wonderful the thing that one steals is.  You can’t
get that bracelet off, unless you know where the spring is.  And I see
you don’t know where the spring is.  It is rather difficult to find.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  You brute!  You coward!  [_She tries again to unclasp the
bracelet_, _but fails_.]

LORD GORING.  Oh! don’t use big words.  They mean so little.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Again tears at the bracelet in a paroxysm of rage_,
_with inarticulate sounds_.  _Then stops_, _and looks at_ LORD GORING.]
What are you going to do?

LORD GORING.  I am going to ring for my servant.  He is an admirable
servant.  Always comes in the moment one rings for him.  When he comes I
will tell him to fetch the police.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Trembling_.]  The police?  What for?

LORD GORING.  To-morrow the Berkshires will prosecute you.  That is what
the police are for.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Is now in an agony of physical terror_.  _Her face is
distorted_.  _Her mouth awry_.  _A mask has fallen from her_.  _She it_,
_for the moment_, _dreadful to look at_.]  Don’t do that.  I will do
anything you want.  Anything in the world you want.

LORD GORING.  Give me Robert Chiltern’s letter.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Stop! Stop!  Let me have time to think.

LORD GORING.  Give me Robert Chiltern’s letter.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I have not got it with me.  I will give it to you
to-morrow.

LORD GORING.  You know you are lying.  Give it to me at once.  [MRS.
CHEVELEY _pulls the letter out_, _and hands it to him_.  _She is horribly
pale_.]  This is it?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_In a hoarse voice_.]  Yes.

LORD GORING.  [_Takes the letter_, _examines it_, _sighs_, _and burns it
with the lamp_.]  For so well-dressed a woman, Mrs. Cheveley, you have
moments of admirable common sense.  I congratulate you.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Catches sight of_ LADY CHILTERN’S _letter_, _the cover
of which is just showing from under the blotting-book_.]  Please get me a
glass of water.

LORD GORING.  Certainly.  [_Goes to the corner of the room and pours out
a glass of water_.  _While his back is turned_ MRS. CHEVELEY _steals_
LADY CHILTERN’S _letter_.  _When_ LORD GORING _returns the glass she
refuses it with a gesture_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thank you.  Will you help me on with my cloak?

LORD GORING.  With pleasure.  [_Puts her cloak on_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thanks.  I am never going to try to harm Robert Chiltern
again.

LORD GORING.  Fortunately you have not the chance, Mrs. Cheveley.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Well, if even I had the chance, I wouldn’t.  On the
contrary, I am going to render him a great service.

LORD GORING.  I am charmed to hear it.  It is a reformation.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Yes.  I can’t bear so upright a gentleman, so honourable
an English gentleman, being so shamefully deceived, and so—

LORD GORING.  Well?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I find that somehow Gertrude Chiltern’s dying speech and
confession has strayed into my pocket.

LORD GORING.  What do you mean?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_With a bitter note of triumph in her voice_.]  I mean
that I am going to send Robert Chiltern the love-letter his wife wrote to
you to-night.

LORD GORING.  Love-letter?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Laughing_.]  ‘I want you.  I trust you.  I am coming to
you.  Gertrude.’

[LORD GORING _rushes to the bureau and takes up the envelope_, _finds is
empty_, _and turns round_.]

LORD GORING.  You wretched woman, must you always be thieving?  Give me
back that letter.  I’ll take it from you by force.  You shall not leave
my room till I have got it.

[_He rushes towards her_, _but_ MRS. CHEVELEY _at once puts her hand on
the electric bell that is on the table_. _The bell sounds with shrill
reverberations_, _and_ PHIPPS _enters_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_After a pause_.]  Lord Goring merely rang that you
should show me out.  Good-night, Lord Goring!

[_Goes out followed by_ PHIPPS.  _Her face is illumined with evil
triumph_.  _There is joy in her eyes_.  _Youth seems to have come back to
her_.  _Her last glance is like a swift arrow_.  LORD GORING _bites his
lip_, _and lights his a cigarette_.]

                                ACT DROPS




FOURTH ACT


SCENE


_Same as Act II_.

[LORD GORING _is standing by the fireplace with his hands in his
pockets_.  _He is looking rather bored_.]

LORD GORING.  [_Pulls out his watch_, _inspects it_, _and rings the
bell_.]  It is a great nuisance.  I can’t find any one in this house to
talk to.  And I am full of interesting information.  I feel like the
latest edition of something or other.

[_Enter servant_.]

JAMES.  Sir Robert is still at the Foreign Office, my lord.

LORD GORING.  Lady Chiltern not down yet?

JAMES.  Her ladyship has not yet left her room.  Miss Chiltern has just
come in from riding.

LORD GORING.  [_To himself_.]  Ah! that is something.

JAMES.  Lord Caversham has been waiting some time in the library for Sir
Robert.  I told him your lordship was here.

LORD GORING.  Thank you!  Would you kindly tell him I’ve gone?

JAMES.  [_Bowing_.]  I shall do so, my lord.

[_Exit servant_.]

LORD GORING.  Really, I don’t want to meet my father three days running.
It is a great deal too much excitement for any son.  I hope to goodness
he won’t come up.  Fathers should be neither seen nor heard.  That is the
only proper basis for family life.  Mothers are different.  Mothers are
darlings.  [_Throws himself down into a chair_, _picks up a paper and
begins to read it_.]

[_Enter_ LORD CAVERSHAM.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Well, sir, what are you doing here?  Wasting your time
as usual, I suppose?

LORD GORING.  [_Throws down paper and rises_.]  My dear father, when one
pays a visit it is for the purpose of wasting other people’s time, not
one’s own.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Have you been thinking over what I spoke to you about
last night?

LORD GORING.  I have been thinking about nothing else.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Engaged to be married yet?

LORD GORING.  [_Genially_.]  Not yet: but I hope to be before lunch-time.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Caustically_.]  You can have till dinner-time if it
would be of any convenience to you.

LORD GORING.  Thanks awfully, but I think I’d sooner be engaged before
lunch.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Humph!  Never know when you are serious or not.

LORD GORING.  Neither do I, father.

[_A pause_.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  I suppose you have read _The Times_ this morning?

LORD GORING.  [_Airily_.]  The Times?  Certainly not.  I only read _The
Morning Post_.  All that one should know about modern life is where the
Duchesses are; anything else is quite demoralising.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Do you mean to say you have not read _The Times_ leading
article on Robert Chiltern’s career?

LORD GORING.  Good heavens!  No.  What does it say?

LORD CAVERSHAM.  What should it say, sir?  Everything complimentary, of
course.  Chiltern’s speech last night on this Argentine Canal scheme was
one of the finest pieces of oratory ever delivered in the House since
Canning.

LORD GORING.  Ah!  Never heard of Canning.  Never wanted to.  And did . . .
did Chiltern uphold the scheme?

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Uphold it, sir?  How little you know him!  Why, he
denounced it roundly, and the whole system of modern political finance.
This speech is the turning-point in his career, as _The Times_ points
out.  You should read this article, sir.  [_Opens_ The Times.]  ‘Sir
Robert Chiltern . . . most rising of our young statesmen . . . Brilliant
Orator . . . Unblemished career . . . Well-known integrity of character
. . . Represents what is best in English public life . . . Noble contrast
to the lax morality so common among foreign politicians.’  They will
never say that of you, sir.

LORD GORING.  I sincerely hope not, father.  However, I am delighted at
what you tell me about Robert, thoroughly delighted.  It shows he has got
pluck.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  He has got more than pluck, sir, he has got genius.

LORD GORING.  Ah! I prefer pluck.  It is not so common, nowadays, as
genius is.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  I wish you would go into Parliament.

LORD GORING.  My dear father, only people who look dull ever get into the
House of Commons, and only people who are dull ever succeed there.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Why don’t you try to do something useful in life?

LORD GORING.  I am far too young.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Testily_.]  I hate this affectation of youth, sir.  It
is a great deal too prevalent nowadays.

LORD GORING.  Youth isn’t an affectation.  Youth is an art.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Why don’t you propose to that pretty Miss Chiltern?

LORD GORING.  I am of a very nervous disposition, especially in the
morning.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  I don’t suppose there is the smallest chance of her
accepting you.

LORD GORING.  I don’t know how the betting stands to-day.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  If she did accept you she would be the prettiest fool in
England.

LORD GORING.  That is just what I should like to marry.  A thoroughly
sensible wife would reduce me to a condition of absolute idiocy in less
than six months.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  You don’t deserve her, sir.

LORD GORING.  My dear father, if we men married the women we deserved, we
should have a very bad time of it.

[_Enter_ MABEL CHILTERN.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  Oh! . . . How do you do, Lord Caversham?  I hope Lady
Caversham is quite well?

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Lady Caversham is as usual, as usual.

LORD GORING.  Good morning, Miss Mabel!

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Taking no notice at all of_ LORD GORING, _and
addressing herself exclusively to_ LORD CAVERSHAM.]  And Lady Caversham’s
bonnets . . . are they at all better?

LORD CAVERSHAM.  They have had a serious relapse, I am sorry to say.

LORD GORING.  Good morning, Miss Mabel!

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_To_ LORD CAVERSHAM.]  I hope an operation will not be
necessary.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Smiling at her pertness_.]  If it is, we shall have to
give Lady Caversham a narcotic.  Otherwise she would never consent to
have a feather touched.

LORD GORING.  [_With increased emphasis_.]  Good morning, Miss Mabel!

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Turning round with feigned surprise_.]  Oh, are you
here?  Of course you understand that after your breaking your appointment
I am never going to speak to you again.

LORD GORING.  Oh, please don’t say such a thing.  You are the one person
in London I really like to have to listen to me.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Lord Goring, I never believe a single word that either
you or I say to each other.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  You are quite right, my dear, quite right . . . as far
as he is concerned, I mean.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Do you think you could possibly make your son behave a
little better occasionally?  Just as a change.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  I regret to say, Miss Chiltern, that I have no influence
at all over my son.  I wish I had.  If I had, I know what I would make
him do.

MABEL CHILTERN.  I am afraid that he has one of those terribly weak
natures that are not susceptible to influence.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  He is very heartless, very heartless.

LORD GORING.  It seems to me that I am a little in the way here.

MABEL CHILTERN.  It is very good for you to be in the way, and to know
what people say of you behind your back.

LORD GORING.  I don’t at all like knowing what people say of me behind my
back.  It makes me far too conceited.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  After that, my dear, I really must bid you good morning.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Oh! I hope you are not going to leave me all alone with
Lord Goring?  Especially at such an early hour in the day.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  I am afraid I can’t take him with me to Downing Street.
It is not the Prime Minster’s day for seeing the unemployed.

[_Shakes hands with_ MABEL CHILTERN, _takes up his hat and stick_, _and
goes out_, _with a parting glare of indignation at_ LORD GORING.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Takes up roses and begins to arrange them in a bowl on
the table_.]  People who don’t keep their appointments in the Park are
horrid.

LORD GORING.  Detestable.

MABEL CHILTERN.  I am glad you admit it.  But I wish you wouldn’t look so
pleased about it.

LORD GORING.  I can’t help it.  I always look pleased when I am with you.

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Sadly_.]  Then I suppose it is my duty to remain with
you?

LORD GORING.  Of course it is.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Well, my duty is a thing I never do, on principle.  It
always depresses me.  So I am afraid I must leave you.

LORD GORING.  Please don’t, Miss Mabel.  I have something very particular
to say to you.

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Rapturously_.]  Oh! is it a proposal?

LORD GORING.  [_Somewhat taken aback_.]  Well, yes, it is—I am bound to
say it is.

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_With a sigh of pleasure_.]  I am so glad.  That makes
the second to-day.

LORD GORING.  [_Indignantly_.]  The second to-day?  What conceited ass
has been impertinent enough to dare to propose to you before I had
proposed to you?

MABEL CHILTERN.  Tommy Trafford, of course.  It is one of Tommy’s days
for proposing.  He always proposes on Tuesdays and Thursdays, during the
Season.

LORD GORING.  You didn’t accept him, I hope?

MABEL CHILTERN.  I make it a rule never to accept Tommy.  That is why he
goes on proposing.  Of course, as you didn’t turn up this morning, I very
nearly said yes.  It would have been an excellent lesson both for him and
for you if I had.  It would have taught you both better manners.

LORD GORING.  Oh! bother Tommy Trafford.  Tommy is a silly little ass.  I
love you.

MABEL CHILTERN.  I know.  And I think you might have mentioned it before.
I am sure I have given you heaps of opportunities.

LORD GORING.  Mabel, do be serious.  Please be serious.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Ah! that is the sort of thing a man always says to a
girl before he has been married to her.  He never says it afterwards.

LORD GORING.  [_Taking hold of her hand_.]  Mabel, I have told you that I
love you.  Can’t you love me a little in return?

MABEL CHILTERN.  You silly Arthur!  If you knew anything about . . .
anything, which you don’t, you would know that I adore you.  Every one in
London knows it except you.  It is a public scandal the way I adore you.
I have been going about for the last six months telling the whole of
society that I adore you.  I wonder you consent to have anything to say
to me.  I have no character left at all.  At least, I feel so happy that
I am quite sure I have no character left at all.

LORD GORING.  [_Catches her in his arms and kisses her_.  _Then there is
a pause of bliss_.]  Dear!  Do you know I was awfully afraid of being
refused!

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Looking up at him_.]  But you never have been refused
yet by anybody, have you, Arthur?  I can’t imagine any one refusing you.

LORD GORING.  [_After kissing her again_.]  Of course I’m not nearly good
enough for you, Mabel.

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Nestling close to him_.]  I am so glad, darling.  I
was afraid you were.

LORD GORING.  [_After some hesitation_.]  And I’m . . . I’m a little over
thirty.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Dear, you look weeks younger than that.

LORD GORING.  [_Enthusiastically_.]  How sweet of you to say so! . . .
And it is only fair to tell you frankly that I am fearfully extravagant.

MABEL CHILTERN.  But so am I, Arthur.  So we’re sure to agree.  And now I
must go and see Gertrude.

LORD GORING.  Must you really?  [_Kisses her_.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  Yes.

LORD GORING.  Then do tell her I want to talk to her particularly.  I
have been waiting here all the morning to see either her or Robert.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Do you mean to say you didn’t come here expressly to
propose to me?

LORD GORING.  [_Triumphantly_.]  No; that was a flash of genius.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Your first.

LORD GORING.  [_With determination_.]  My last.

MABEL CHILTERN.  I am delighted to hear it.  Now don’t stir.  I’ll be
back in five minutes.  And don’t fall into any temptations while I am
away.

LORD GORING.  Dear Mabel, while you are away, there are none.  It makes
me horribly dependent on you.

[_Enter_ LADY CHILTERN.]

LADY CHILTERN.  Good morning, dear!  How pretty you are looking!

MABEL CHILTERN.  How pale you are looking, Gertrude!  It is most
becoming!

LADY CHILTERN.  Good morning, Lord Goring!

LORD GORING.  [_Bowing_.]  Good morning, Lady Chiltern!

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Aside to_ LORD GORING.]  I shall be in the
conservatory under the second palm tree on the left.

LORD GORING.  Second on the left?

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_With a look of mock surprise_.]  Yes; the usual palm
tree.

[_Blows a kiss to him_, _unobserved by_ LADY CHILTERN, _and goes out_.]

LORD GORING.  Lady Chiltern, I have a certain amount of very good news to
tell you.  Mrs. Cheveley gave me up Robert’s letter last night, and I
burned it.  Robert is safe.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Sinking on the sofa_.]  Safe!  Oh! I am so glad of
that.  What a good friend you are to him—to us!

LORD GORING.  There is only one person now that could be said to be in
any danger.

LADY CHILTERN.  Who is that?

LORD GORING.  [_Sitting down beside her_.]  Yourself.

LADY CHILTERN.  I?  In danger?  What do you mean?

LORD GORING.  Danger is too great a word.  It is a word I should not have
used.  But I admit I have something to tell you that may distress you,
that terribly distresses me.  Yesterday evening you wrote me a very
beautiful, womanly letter, asking me for my help.  You wrote to me as one
of your oldest friends, one of your husband’s oldest friends.  Mrs.
Cheveley stole that letter from my rooms.

LADY CHILTERN.  Well, what use is it to her?  Why should she not have it?

LORD GORING.  [_Rising_.]  Lady Chiltern, I will be quite frank with you.
Mrs. Cheveley puts a certain construction on that letter and proposes to
send it to your husband.

LADY CHILTERN.  But what construction could she put on it? . . . Oh! not
that! not that!  If I in—in trouble, and wanting your help, trusting you,
propose to come to you . . . that you may advise me . . . assist me . . .
Oh! are there women so horrible as that . . .?  And she proposes to send
it to my husband?  Tell me what happened.  Tell me all that happened.

LORD GORING.  Mrs. Cheveley was concealed in a room adjoining my library,
without my knowledge.  I thought that the person who was waiting in that
room to see me was yourself.  Robert came in unexpectedly.  A chair or
something fell in the room.  He forced his way in, and he discovered her.
We had a terrible scene.  I still thought it was you.  He left me in
anger.  At the end of everything Mrs. Cheveley got possession of your
letter—she stole it, when or how, I don’t know.

LADY CHILTERN.  At what hour did this happen?

LORD GORING.  At half-past ten.  And now I propose that we tell Robert
the whole thing at once.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Looking at him with amazement that is almost terror_.]
You want me to tell Robert that the woman you expected was not Mrs.
Cheveley, but myself?  That it was I whom you thought was concealed in a
room in your house, at half-past ten o’clock at night?  You want me to
tell him that?

LORD GORING.  I think it is better that he should know the exact truth.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Rising_.]  Oh, I couldn’t, I couldn’t!

LORD GORING.  May I do it?

LADY CHILTERN.  No.

LORD GORING.  [_Gravely_.]  You are wrong, Lady Chiltern.

LADY CHILTERN.  No.  The letter must be intercepted.  That is all.  But
how can I do it?  Letters arrive for him every moment of the day.  His
secretaries open them and hand them to him.  I dare not ask the servants
to bring me his letters.  It would be impossible.  Oh! why don’t you tell
me what to do?

LORD GORING.  Pray be calm, Lady Chiltern, and answer the questions I am
going to put to you.  You said his secretaries open his letters.

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes.

LORD GORING.  Who is with him to-day?  Mr. Trafford, isn’t it?

LADY CHILTERN.  No.  Mr. Montford, I think.

LORD GORING.  You can trust him?

LADY CHILTERN.  [_With a gesture of despair_.]  Oh! how do I know?

LORD GORING.  He would do what you asked him, wouldn’t he?

LADY CHILTERN.  I think so.

LORD GORING.  Your letter was on pink paper.  He could recognise it
without reading it, couldn’t he?  By the colour?

LADY CHILTERN.  I suppose so.

LORD GORING.  Is he in the house now?

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes.

LORD GORING.  Then I will go and see him myself, and tell him that a
certain letter, written on pink paper, is to be forwarded to Robert
to-day, and that at all costs it must not reach him.  [_Goes to the
door_, _and opens it_.]  Oh! Robert is coming upstairs with the letter in
his hand.  It has reached him already.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_With a cry of pain_.]  Oh! you have saved his life;
what have you done with mine?

[_Enter_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  _He has the letter in his hand_, _and is
reading it_.  _He comes towards his wife_, _not noticing_ LORD GORING’S
_presence_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  ‘I want you.  I trust you.  I am coming to you.
Gertrude.’  Oh, my love!  Is this true?  Do you indeed trust me, and want
me?  If so, it was for me to come to you, not for you to write of coming
to me.  This letter of yours, Gertrude, makes me feel that nothing that
the world may do can hurt me now.  You want me, Gertrude?

[LORD GORING, _unseen by_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN, _makes an imploring sign
to_ LADY CHILTERN _to accept the situation and_ SIR ROBERT’S _error_.]

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  You trust me, Gertrude?

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Ah! why did you not add you loved me?

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Taking his hand_.]  Because I loved you.

[LORD GORING _passes into the conservatory_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Kisses her_.]  Gertrude, you don’t know what I
feel.  When Montford passed me your letter across the table—he had opened
it by mistake, I suppose, without looking at the handwriting on the
envelope—and I read it—oh! I did not care what disgrace or punishment was
in store for me, I only thought you loved me still.

LADY CHILTERN.  There is no disgrace in store for you, nor any public
shame.  Mrs. Cheveley has handed over to Lord Goring the document that
was in her possession, and he has destroyed it.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Are you sure of this, Gertrude?

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes; Lord Goring has just told me.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Then I am safe!  Oh! what a wonderful thing to be
safe!  For two days I have been in terror.  I am safe now.  How did
Arthur destroy my letter?  Tell me.

LADY CHILTERN.  He burned it.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I wish I had seen that one sin of my youth burning
to ashes.  How many men there are in modern life who would like to see
their past burning to white ashes before them!  Is Arthur still here?

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes; he is in the conservatory.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I am so glad now I made that speech last night in
the House, so glad.  I made it thinking that public disgrace might be the
result.  But it has not been so.

LADY CHILTERN.  Public honour has been the result.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I think so.  I fear so, almost.  For although I am
safe from detection, although every proof against me is destroyed, I
suppose, Gertrude . . . I suppose I should retire from public life?  [_He
looks anxiously at his wife_.]

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Eagerly_.]  Oh yes, Robert, you should do that.  It is
your duty to do that.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  It is much to surrender.

LADY CHILTERN.  No; it will be much to gain.

[SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _walks up and down the room with a troubled
expression_.  _Then comes over to his wife_, _and puts his hand on her
shoulder_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  And you would be happy living somewhere alone with
me, abroad perhaps, or in the country away from London, away from public
life?  You would have no regrets?

LADY CHILTERN.  Oh! none, Robert.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Sadly_.]  And your ambition for me?  You used to
be ambitious for me.

LADY CHILTERN.  Oh, my ambition!  I have none now, but that we two may
love each other.  It was your ambition that led you astray.  Let us not
talk about ambition.

[LORD GORING _returns from the conservatory_, _looking very pleased with
himself_, _and with an entirely new buttonhole that some one has made for
him_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Going towards him_.]  Arthur, I have to thank you
for what you have done for me.  I don’t know how I can repay you.
[_Shakes hands with him_.]

LORD GORING.  My dear fellow, I’ll tell you at once.  At the present
moment, under the usual palm tree . . . I mean in the conservatory . . .

[_Enter_ MASON.]

MASON.  Lord Caversham.

LORD GORING.  That admirable father of mine really makes a habit of
turning up at the wrong moment.  It is very heartless of him, very
heartless indeed.

[_Enter_ LORD CAVERSHAM.  MASON _goes out_.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Good morning, Lady Chiltern!  Warmest congratulations to
you, Chiltern, on your brilliant speech last night.  I have just left the
Prime Minister, and you are to have the vacant seat in the Cabinet.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_With a look of joy and triumph_.]  A seat in the
Cabinet?

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Yes; here is the Prime Minister’s letter.  [_Hands
letter_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Takes letter and reads it_.]  A seat in the
Cabinet!

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Certainly, and you well deserve it too.  You have got
what we want so much in political life nowadays—high character, high
moral tone, high principles.  [_To_ LORD GORING.]  Everything that you
have not got, sir, and never will have.

LORD GORING.  I don’t like principles, father.  I prefer prejudices.

[SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _is on the brink of accepting the Prime Minister’s
offer_, _when he sees wife looking at him with her clear_, _candid eyes_.
_He then realises that it is impossible_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I cannot accept this offer, Lord Caversham.  I have
made up my mind to decline it.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Decline it, sir!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  My intention is to retire at once from public life.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Angrily_.]  Decline a seat in the Cabinet, and retire
from public life?  Never heard such damned nonsense in the whole course
of my existence.  I beg your pardon, Lady Chiltern.  Chiltern, I beg your
pardon.  [_To_ LORD GORING.]  Don’t grin like that, sir.

LORD GORING.  No, father.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Lady Chiltern, you are a sensible woman, the most
sensible woman in London, the most sensible woman I know.  Will you
kindly prevent your husband from making such a . . . from taking such
. . . Will you kindly do that, Lady Chiltern?

LADY CHILTERN.  I think my husband in right in his determination, Lord
Caversham.  I approve of it.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  You approve of it?  Good heavens!

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Taking her husband’s hand_.]  I admire him for it.  I
admire him immensely for it.  I have never admired him so much before.
He is finer than even I thought him.  [_To_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.]  You
will go and write your letter to the Prime Minister now, won’t you?
Don’t hesitate about it, Robert.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_With a touch of bitterness_.]  I suppose I had
better write it at once.  Such offers are not repeated.  I will ask you
to excuse me for a moment, Lord Caversham.

LADY CHILTERN.  I may come with you, Robert, may I not?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Yes, Gertrude.

[LADY CHILTERN _goes out with him_.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  What is the matter with this family?  Something wrong
here, eh?  [_Tapping his forehead_.]  Idiocy?  Hereditary, I suppose.
Both of them, too.  Wife as well as husband.  Very sad.  Very sad indeed!
And they are not an old family.  Can’t understand it.

LORD GORING.  It is not idiocy, father, I assure you.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  What is it then, sir?

LORD GORING.  [_After some hesitation_.]  Well, it is what is called
nowadays a high moral tone, father.  That is all.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Hate these new-fangled names.  Same thing as we used to
call idiocy fifty years ago.  Shan’t stay in this house any longer.

LORD GORING.  [_Taking his arm_.]  Oh! just go in here for a moment,
father.  Third palm tree to the left, the usual palm tree.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  What, sir?

LORD GORING.  I beg your pardon, father, I forgot.  The conservatory,
father, the conservatory—there is some one there I want you to talk to.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  What about, sir?

LORD GORING.  About me, father,

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Grimly_.]  Not a subject on which much eloquence is
possible.

LORD GORING.  No, father; but the lady is like me.  She doesn’t care much
for eloquence in others.  She thinks it a little loud.

[LORD CAVERSHAM _goes out into the conservatory_.  LADY CHILTERN
_enters_.]

LORD GORING.  Lady Chiltern, why are you playing Mrs. Cheveley’s cards?

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Startled_.]  I don’t understand you.

LORD GORING.  Mrs. Cheveley made an attempt to ruin your husband.  Either
to drive him from public life, or to make him adopt a dishonourable
position.  From the latter tragedy you saved him.  The former you are now
thrusting on him.  Why should you do him the wrong Mrs. Cheveley tried to
do and failed?

LADY CHILTERN.  Lord Goring?

LORD GORING.  [_Pulling himself together for a great effort_, _and
showing the philosopher that underlies the dandy_.]  Lady Chiltern, allow
me.  You wrote me a letter last night in which you said you trusted me
and wanted my help.  Now is the moment when you really want my help, now
is the time when you have got to trust me, to trust in my counsel and
judgment.  You love Robert.  Do you want to kill his love for you?  What
sort of existence will he have if you rob him of the fruits of his
ambition, if you take him from the splendour of a great political career,
if you close the doors of public life against him, if you condemn him to
sterile failure, he who was made for triumph and success?  Women are not
meant to judge us, but to forgive us when we need forgiveness.  Pardon,
not punishment, is their mission.  Why should you scourge him with rods
for a sin done in his youth, before he knew you, before he knew himself?
A man’s life is of more value than a woman’s.  It has larger issues,
wider scope, greater ambitions.  A woman’s life revolves in curves of
emotions.  It is upon lines of intellect that a man’s life progresses.
Don’t make any terrible mistake, Lady Chiltern.  A woman who can keep a
man’s love, and love him in return, has done all the world wants of
women, or should want of them.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Troubled and hesitating_.]  But it is my husband
himself who wishes to retire from public life.  He feels it is his duty.
It was he who first said so.

LORD GORING.  Rather than lose your love, Robert would do anything, wreck
his whole career, as he is on the brink of doing now.  He is making for
you a terrible sacrifice.  Take my advice, Lady Chiltern, and do not
accept a sacrifice so great.  If you do, you will live to repent it
bitterly.  We men and women are not made to accept such sacrifices from
each other.  We are not worthy of them.  Besides, Robert has been
punished enough.

LADY CHILTERN.  We have both been punished.  I set him up too high.

LORD GORING.  [_With deep feeling in his voice_.]  Do not for that reason
set him down now too low.  If he has fallen from his altar, do not thrust
him into the mire.  Failure to Robert would be the very mire of shame.
Power is his passion.  He would lose everything, even his power to feel
love.  Your husband’s life is at this moment in your hands, your
husband’s love is in your hands.  Don’t mar both for him.

[_Enter_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Gertrude, here is the draft of my letter.  Shall I
read it to you?

LADY CHILTERN.  Let me see it.

[SIR ROBERT _hands her the letter_.  _She reads it_, _and then_, _with a
gesture of passion_, _tears it up_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  What are you doing?

LADY CHILTERN.  A man’s life is of more value than a woman’s.  It has
larger issues, wider scope, greater ambitions.  Our lives revolve in
curves of emotions.  It is upon lines of intellect that a man’s life
progresses.  I have just learnt this, and much else with it, from Lord
Goring.  And I will not spoil your life for you, nor see you spoil it as
a sacrifice to me, a useless sacrifice!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Gertrude!  Gertrude!

LADY CHILTERN.  You can forget.  Men easily forget.  And I forgive.  That
is how women help the world.  I see that now.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Deeply overcome by emotion_, _embraces her_.]  My
wife! my wife!  [_To_ LORD GORING.]  Arthur, it seems that I am always to
be in your debt.

LORD GORING.  Oh dear no, Robert.  Your debt is to Lady Chiltern, not to
me!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I owe you much.  And now tell me what you were
going to ask me just now as Lord Caversham came in.

LORD GORING.  Robert, you are your sister’s guardian, and I want your
consent to my marriage with her.  That is all.

LADY CHILTERN.  Oh, I am so glad!  I am so glad!  [_Shakes hands with_
LORD GORING.]

LORD GORING.  Thank you, Lady Chiltern.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_With a troubled look_.]  My sister to be your
wife?

LORD GORING.  Yes.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Speaking with great firmness_.]  Arthur, I am
very sorry, but the thing is quite out of the question.  I have to think
of Mabel’s future happiness.  And I don’t think her happiness would be
safe in your hands.  And I cannot have her sacrificed!

LORD GORING.  Sacrificed!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Yes, utterly sacrificed.  Loveless marriages are
horrible.  But there is one thing worse than an absolutely loveless
marriage.  A marriage in which there is love, but on one side only;
faith, but on one side only; devotion, but on one side only, and in which
of the two hearts one is sure to be broken.

LORD GORING.  But I love Mabel.  No other woman has any place in my life.

LADY CHILTERN.  Robert, if they love each other, why should they not be
married?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Arthur cannot bring Mabel the love that she
deserves.

LORD GORING.  What reason have you for saying that?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_After a pause_.]  Do you really require me to
tell you?

LORD GORING.  Certainly I do.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  As you choose.  When I called on you yesterday
evening I found Mrs. Cheveley concealed in your rooms.  It was between
ten and eleven o’clock at night.  I do not wish to say anything more.
Your relations with Mrs. Cheveley have, as I said to you last night,
nothing whatsoever to do with me.  I know you were engaged to be married
to her once.  The fascination she exercised over you then seems to have
returned.  You spoke to me last night of her as of a woman pure and
stainless, a woman whom you respected and honoured.  That may be so.  But
I cannot give my sister’s life into your hands.  It would be wrong of me.
It would be unjust, infamously unjust to her.

LORD GORING.  I have nothing more to say.

LADY CHILTERN.  Robert, it was not Mrs. Cheveley whom Lord Goring
expected last night.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Not Mrs. Cheveley!  Who was it then?

LORD GORING.  Lady Chiltern!

LADY CHILTERN.  It was your own wife.  Robert, yesterday afternoon Lord
Goring told me that if ever I was in trouble I could come to him for
help, as he was our oldest and best friend.  Later on, after that
terrible scene in this room, I wrote to him telling him that I trusted
him, that I had need of him, that I was coming to him for help and
advice.  [SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _takes the letter out of his pocket_.]
Yes, that letter.  I didn’t go to Lord Goring’s, after all.  I felt that
it is from ourselves alone that help can come.  Pride made me think that.
Mrs. Cheveley went.  She stole my letter and sent it anonymously to you
this morning, that you should think . . . Oh! Robert, I cannot tell you
what she wished you to think. . . .

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  What!  Had I fallen so low in your eyes that you
thought that even for a moment I could have doubted your goodness?
Gertrude, Gertrude, you are to me the white image of all good things, and
sin can never touch you.  Arthur, you can go to Mabel, and you have my
best wishes!  Oh! stop a moment.  There is no name at the beginning of
this letter.  The brilliant Mrs. Cheveley does not seem to have noticed
that.  There should be a name.

LADY CHILTERN.  Let me write yours.  It is you I trust and need.  You and
none else.

LORD GORING.  Well, really, Lady Chiltern, I think I should have back my
own letter.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Smiling_.]  No; you shall have Mabel.  [_Takes the
letter and writes her husband’s name on it_.]

LORD GORING.  Well, I hope she hasn’t changed her mind.  It’s nearly
twenty minutes since I saw her last.

[_Enter_ MABEL CHILTERN _and_ LORD CAVERSHAM.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  Lord Goring, I think your father’s conversation much
more improving than yours.  I am only going to talk to Lord Caversham in
the future, and always under the usual palm tree.

LORD GORING.  Darling!  [_Kisses her_.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Considerably taken aback_.]  What does this mean, sir?
You don’t mean to say that this charming, clever young lady has been so
foolish as to accept you?

LORD GORING.  Certainly, father!  And Chiltern’s been wise enough to
accept the seat in the Cabinet.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  I am very glad to hear that, Chiltern . . . I
congratulate you, sir.  If the country doesn’t go to the dogs or the
Radicals, we shall have you Prime Minister, some day.

[_Enter_ MASON.]

MASON.  Luncheon is on the table, my Lady!

[MASON _goes out_.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  You’ll stop to luncheon, Lord Caversham, won’t you?

LORD CAVERSHAM.  With pleasure, and I’ll drive you down to Downing Street
afterwards, Chiltern.  You have a great future before you, a great
future.  Wish I could say the same for you, sir.  [_To_ LORD GORING.]
But your career will have to be entirely domestic.

LORD GORING.  Yes, father, I prefer it domestic.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  And if you don’t make this young lady an ideal husband,
I’ll cut you off with a shilling.

MABEL CHILTERN.  An ideal husband!  Oh, I don’t think I should like that.
It sounds like something in the next world.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  What do you want him to be then, dear?

MABEL CHILTERN.  He can be what he chooses.  All I want is to be . . . to
be . . . oh! a real wife to him.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Upon my word, there is a good deal of common sense in
that, Lady Chiltern.

[_They all go out except_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  _He sinks in a chair_,
_wrapt in thought_.  _After a little time_ LADY CHILTERN _returns to look
for him_.]

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Leaning over the back of the chair_.]  Aren’t you
coming in, Robert?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Taking her hand_.]  Gertrude, is it love you feel
for me, or is it pity merely?

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Kisses him_.]  It is love, Robert.  Love, and only
love.  For both of us a new life is beginning.

                                 CURTAIN

                                * * * * *

                                * * * * *

              THE NORTHUMBERLAND PRESS, NEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AN IDEAL HUSBAND***


******* This file should be named 885-0.txt or 885-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/8/8/885



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

﻿                          LADY WINDERMERE’S FAN


                                  A PLAY
                            ABOUT A GOOD WOMAN

                                    BY

                               OSCAR WILDE

                                * * * * *

                            METHUEN & CO. LTD.
                           36 ESSEX STREET W.C.
                                  LONDON

                           _Sixteenth Edition_

_First Published_                                               _1893_
_First Issued by Methuen & Co. Ltd._ (_Limited Editions on      _1908_
Hand-made Paper and Japanese Vellum_) _February_
_Third Edition_ (_F’cap_ 8_vo_, 5_s._ _net_) _September_        _1909_
_Fourth Edition_ (5_s._ _net_) _June_                           _1910_
_Fifth Edition_ (_F’cap_ 8_vo_, 1_s._ _net_) _November 3rd_     _1911_
_Sixth Edition_ (1_s._ _net_) _November_                        _1911_
_Eighth Edition_ (1_s._ _net_) _1912_, _Ninth and Tenth
Editions_ (1_s._ _net_) _1913_, _Eleventh Edition_ (1_s._
_net_) _1914_, _Twelfth Edition_ (1_s._ _net_) _1915_,
_Thirteenth Edition_ (1_s._ _net_) _1916_, _Fourteenth and
Fifteenth Edition_ (1_s._ _net_) _1917_
_Sixteenth Edition_ (5_s._ _net_)                               _1917_

_The literary and dramatic rights of_ “_Lady Windermere’s Fan_” _belong
to Sir George Alexander_, _by arrangement with whom this play is included
in this edition_.  _The acting version_ (_Samuel French_) _does not
contain the complete text_.

                                * * * * *

                                    TO
                             THE DEAR MEMORY
                                    OF
                          ROBERT EARL OF LYTTON
                               IN AFFECTION
                                   AND
                                ADMIRATION

                                * * * * *




THE PERSONS OF THE PLAY


Lord Windermere

Lord Darlington

Lord Augustus Lorton

Mr. Dumby

Mr. Cecil Graham

Mr. Hopper

Parker, Butler

                                * * * * *

Lady Windermere

The Duchess of Berwick

Lady Agatha Carlisle

Lady Plymdale

Lady Stutfield

Lady Jedburgh

Mrs. Cowper-Cowper

Mrs. Erlynne

Rosalie, Maid




THE SCENES OF THE PLAY

ACT I.        _Morning-room in Lord Windermere’s
              house_.
ACT II.       _Drawing-room in Lord Windermere’s
              house_.
ACT III.      _Lord Darlington’s rooms_.
ACT IV.       _Same as Act I._
TIME:         _The Present_.
PLACE:        _London_.

_The action of the play takes place within twenty-four hours_, _beginning
on a Tuesday afternoon at five o’clock_, _and ending the next day at_
1.30 _p.m._




LONDON: ST. JAMES’S THEATRE


               _Lessee and Manager_: _Mr. George Alexander_
                         _February_ 22_nd_, 1892.

LORD WINDERMERE             _Mr. George Alexander_.
LORD DARLINGTON             _Mr. Nutcombe Gould_.
LORD AUGUSTUS LORTON        _Mr. H. H. Vincent_.
MR. CECIL GRAHAM            _Mr. Ben Webster_.
MR. DUMBY                   _Mr. Vane-Tempest_.
MR. HOPPER                  _Mr. Alfred Holles_.
PARKER (_Butler_)           _Mr. V. Sansbury_.
LADY WINDERMERE             _Miss Lily Hanbury_.
THE DUCHESS OF BERWICK      _Miss Fanny Coleman_.
LADY AGATHA CARLISLE        _Miss Laura Graves_.
LADY PLYMDALE               _Miss Granville_.
LADY JEDBURGH               _Miss B. Page_.
LADY STUTFIELD              _Miss Madge Girdlestone_.
MRS. COWPER-COWPER          _Miss A. de Winton_.
MRS. ERLYNNE                _Miss Marion Terry_.
ROSALIE (_Maid_)            _Miss Winifred Dolan_.




FIRST ACT


                                  SCENE

_Morning-room of Lord Windermere’s house in Carlton House Terrace_.
_Doors C. and R.  Bureau with books and papers R._  _Sofa with small
tea-table L._  _Window opening on to terrace L._  _Table R._

[LADY WINDERMERE _is at table R._, _arranging roses in a blue bowl_.]

[_Enter_ PARKER.]

PARKER.  Is your ladyship at home this afternoon?

LADY WINDERMERE.  Yes—who has called?

PARKER.  Lord Darlington, my lady.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Hesitates for a moment_.]  Show him up—and I’m at
home to any one who calls.

PARKER.  Yes, my lady.

                                                               [_Exit C._]

LADY WINDERMERE.  It’s best for me to see him before to-night.  I’m glad
he’s come.

[_Enter_ PARKER _C._]

PARKER.  Lord Darlington,

[_Enter_ LORD DARLINGTON _C._]

                                                          [_Exit_ PARKER.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  How do you do, Lady Windermere?

LADY WINDERMERE.  How do you do, Lord Darlington?  No, I can’t shake
hands with you.  My hands are all wet with these roses.  Aren’t they
lovely?  They came up from Selby this morning.

LORD DARLINGTON.  They are quite perfect.  [_Sees a fan lying on the
table_.]  And what a wonderful fan!  May I look at it?

LADY WINDERMERE.  Do.  Pretty, isn’t it!  It’s got my name on it, and
everything.  I have only just seen it myself.  It’s my husband’s birthday
present to me.  You know to-day is my birthday?

LORD DARLINGTON.  No?  Is it really?

LADY WINDERMERE.  Yes, I’m of age to-day.  Quite an important day in my
life, isn’t it?  That is why I am giving this party to-night.  Do sit
down.  [_Still arranging flowers_.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Sitting down_.]  I wish I had known it was your
birthday, Lady Windermere.  I would have covered the whole street in
front of your house with flowers for you to walk on.  They are made for
you.

                                                        [_A short pause_.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  Lord Darlington, you annoyed me last night at the
Foreign Office.  I am afraid you are going to annoy me again.

LORD DARLINGTON.  I, Lady Windermere?

[_Enter_ PARKER _and_ FOOTMAN _C._, _with tray and tea things_.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  Put it there, Parker.  That will do.  [_Wipes her hands
with her pocket-handkerchief_, _goes to tea-table_, _and sits down_.]
Won’t you come over, Lord Darlington?

                                                      [_Exit_ PARKER _C._]

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Takes chair and goes across L.C._]  I am quite
miserable, Lady Windermere.  You must tell me what I did.  [_Sits down at
table L._]

LADY WINDERMERE.  Well, you kept paying me elaborate compliments the
whole evening.

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Smiling_.]  Ah, nowadays we are all of us so hard up,
that the only pleasant things to pay _are_ compliments.  They’re the only
things we _can_ pay.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Shaking her head_.]  No, I am talking very seriously.
You mustn’t laugh, I am quite serious.  I don’t like compliments, and I
don’t see why a man should think he is pleasing a woman enormously when
he says to her a whole heap of things that he doesn’t mean.

LORD DARLINGTON.  Ah, but I did mean them.  [_Takes tea which she offers
him_.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Gravely_.]  I hope not.  I should be sorry to have to
quarrel with you, Lord Darlington.  I like you very much, you know that.
But I shouldn’t like you at all if I thought you were what most other men
are.  Believe me, you are better than most other men, and I sometimes
think you pretend to be worse.

LORD DARLINGTON.  We all have our little vanities, Lady Windermere.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Why do you make that your special one?  [_Still seated
at table L._]

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Still seated L.C._]  Oh, nowadays so many conceited
people go about Society pretending to be good, that I think it shows
rather a sweet and modest disposition to pretend to be bad.  Besides,
there is this to be said.  If you pretend to be good, the world takes you
very seriously.  If you pretend to be bad, it doesn’t.  Such is the
astounding stupidity of optimism.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Don’t you _want_ the world to take you seriously then,
Lord Darlington?

LORD DARLINGTON.  No, not the world.  Who are the people the world takes
seriously?  All the dull people one can think of, from the Bishops down
to the bores.  I should like _you_ to take me very seriously, Lady
Windermere, _you_ more than any one else in life.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Why—why me?

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_After a slight hesitation_.]  Because I think we
might be great friends.  Let us be great friends.  You may want a friend
some day.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Why do you say that?

LORD DARLINGTON.  Oh!—we all want friends at times.

LADY WINDERMERE.  I think we’re very good friends already, Lord
Darlington.  We can always remain so as long as you don’t—

LORD DARLINGTON.  Don’t what?

LADY WINDERMERE.  Don’t spoil it by saying extravagant silly things to
me.  You think I am a Puritan, I suppose?  Well, I have something of the
Puritan in me.  I was brought up like that.  I am glad of it.  My mother
died when I was a mere child.  I lived always with Lady Julia, my
father’s elder sister, you know.  She was stern to me, but she taught me
what the world is forgetting, the difference that there is between what
is right and what is wrong.  _She_ allowed of no compromise.  _I_ allow
of none.

LORD DARLINGTON.  My dear Lady Windermere!

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Leaning back on the sofa_.]  You look on me as being
behind the age.—Well, I am!  I should be sorry to be on the same level as
an age like this.

LORD DARLINGTON.  You think the age very bad?

LADY WINDERMERE.  Yes.  Nowadays people seem to look on life as a
speculation.  It is not a speculation.  It is a sacrament.  Its ideal is
Love.  Its purification is sacrifice.

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Smiling_.]  Oh, anything is better than being
sacrificed!

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Leaning forward_.]  Don’t say that.

LORD DARLINGTON.  I do say it.  I feel it—I know it.

[_Enter_ PARKER _C._]

PARKER.  The men want to know if they are to put the carpets on the
terrace for to-night, my lady?

LADY WINDERMERE.  You don’t think it will rain, Lord Darlington, do you?

LORD DARLINGTON.  I won’t hear of its raining on your birthday!

LADY WINDERMERE.  Tell them to do it at once, Parker.

                                                      [_Exit_ PARKER _C._]

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Still seated_.]  Do you think then—of course I am
only putting an imaginary instance—do you think that in the case of a
young married couple, say about two years married, if the husband
suddenly becomes the intimate friend of a woman of—well, more than
doubtful character—is always calling upon her, lunching with her, and
probably paying her bills—do you think that the wife should not console
herself?

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Frowning_.]  Console herself?

LORD DARLINGTON.  Yes, I think she should—I think she has the right.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Because the husband is vile—should the wife be vile
also?

LORD DARLINGTON.  Vileness is a terrible word, Lady Windermere.

LADY WINDERMERE.  It is a terrible thing, Lord Darlington.

LORD DARLINGTON.  Do you know I am afraid that good people do a great
deal of harm in this world.  Certainly the greatest harm they do is that
they make badness of such extraordinary importance.  It is absurd to
divide people into good and bad.  People are either charming or tedious.
I take the side of the charming, and you, Lady Windermere, can’t help
belonging to them.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Now, Lord Darlington.  [_Rising and crossing R._,
_front of him_.]  Don’t stir, I am merely going to finish my flowers.
[_Goes to table R.C._]

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Rising and moving chair_.]  And I must say I think
you are very hard on modern life, Lady Windermere.  Of course there is
much against it, I admit.  Most women, for instance, nowadays, are rather
mercenary.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Don’t talk about such people.

LORD DARLINGTON.  Well then, setting aside mercenary people, who, of
course, are dreadful, do you think seriously that women who have
committed what the world calls a fault should never be forgiven?

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Standing at table_.]  I think they should never be
forgiven.

LORD DARLINGTON.  And men?  Do you think that there should be the same
laws for men as there are for women?

LADY WINDERMERE.  Certainly!

LORD DARLINGTON.  I think life too complex a thing to be settled by these
hard and fast rules.

LADY WINDERMERE.  If we had ‘these hard and fast rules,’ we should find
life much more simple.

LORD DARLINGTON.  You allow of no exceptions?

LADY WINDERMERE.  None!

LORD DARLINGTON.  Ah, what a fascinating Puritan you are, Lady
Windermere!

LADY WINDERMERE.  The adjective was unnecessary, Lord Darlington.

LORD DARLINGTON.  I couldn’t help it.  I can resist everything except
temptation.

LADY WINDERMERE.  You have the modern affectation of weakness.

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Looking at her_.]  It’s only an affectation, Lady
Windermere.

[_Enter_ PARKER _C._]

PARKER.  The Duchess of Berwick and Lady Agatha Carlisle.

[_Enter the_ DUCHESS OF BERWICK and LADY AGATHA CARLISLE _C._]

                                                      [_Exit_ PARKER _C._]

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  [_Coming down C._, _and shaking hands_.]  Dear
Margaret, I am so pleased to see you.  You remember Agatha, don’t you?
[_Crossing L.C._]  How do you do, Lord Darlington?  I won’t let you know
my daughter, you are far too wicked.

LORD DARLINGTON.  Don’t say that, Duchess.  As a wicked man I am a
complete failure.  Why, there are lots of people who say I have never
really done anything wrong in the whole course of my life.  Of course
they only say it behind my back.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Isn’t he dreadful?  Agatha, this is Lord Darlington.
Mind you don’t believe a word he says.  [LORD DARLINGTON _crosses R.C._]
No, no tea, thank you, dear.  [_Crosses and sits on sofa_.]  We have just
had tea at Lady Markby’s.  Such bad tea, too.  It was quite undrinkable.
I wasn’t at all surprised.  Her own son-in-law supplies it.  Agatha is
looking forward so much to your ball to-night, dear Margaret.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Seated L.C._]  Oh, you mustn’t think it is going to
be a ball, Duchess.  It is only a dance in honour of my birthday.  A
small and early.

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Standing L.C._]  Very small, very early, and very
select, Duchess.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  [_On sofa L._]  Of course it’s going to be select.
But we know _that_, dear Margaret, about _your_ house.  It is really one
of the few houses in London where I can take Agatha, and where I feel
perfectly secure about dear Berwick.  I don’t know what society is coming
to.  The most dreadful people seem to go everywhere.  They certainly come
to my parties—the men get quite furious if one doesn’t ask them.  Really,
some one should make a stand against it.

LADY WINDERMERE.  _I_ will, Duchess.  I will have no one in my house
about whom there is any scandal.

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_R.C._]  Oh, don’t say that, Lady Windermere.  I
should never be admitted!  [_Sitting_.]

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Oh, men don’t matter.  With women it is different.
We’re good.  Some of us are, at least.  But we are positively getting
elbowed into the corner.  Our husbands would really forget our existence
if we didn’t nag at them from time to time, just to remind them that we
have a perfect legal right to do so.

LORD DARLINGTON.  It’s a curious thing, Duchess, about the game of
marriage—a game, by the way, that is going out of fashion—the wives hold
all the honours, and invariably lose the odd trick.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.   The odd trick?  Is that the husband, Lord
Darlington?

LORD DARLINGTON.  It would be rather a good name for the modern husband.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Dear Lord Darlington, how thoroughly depraved you
are!

LADY WINDERMERE.  Lord Darlington is trivial.

LORD DARLINGTON.  Ah, don’t say that, Lady Windermere.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Why do you _talk_ so trivially about life, then?

LORD DARLINGTON.  Because I think that life is far too important a thing
ever to talk seriously about it.  [_Moves up C._]

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  What does he mean?  Do, as a concession to my poor
wits, Lord Darlington, just explain to me what you really mean.

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Coming down back of table_.]  I think I had better
not, Duchess.  Nowadays to be intelligible is to be found out.  Good-bye!
[_Shakes hands with_ DUCHESS.]  And now—[_goes up stage_] Lady
Windermere, good-bye.  I may come to-night, mayn’t I?  Do let me come.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Standing up stage with_ LORD DARLINGTON.]  Yes,
certainly.  But you are not to say foolish, insincere things to people.

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Smiling_.]  Ah! you are beginning to reform me.  It
is a dangerous thing to reform any one, Lady Windermere.  [_Bows_, _and
exit C._]

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  [_Who has risen_, _goes C._]  What a charming,
wicked creature!  I like him so much.  I’m quite delighted he’s gone!
How sweet you’re looking!  Where _do_ you get your gowns?  And now I must
tell you how sorry I am for you, dear Margaret.  [_Crosses to sofa and
sits with_ LADY WINDERMERE.]  Agatha, darling!

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma.  [_Rises_.]

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Will you go and look over the photograph album that
I see there?

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma.  [_Goes to table up L._]

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Dear girl!  She is so fond of photographs of
Switzerland.  Such a pure taste, I think.  But I really am so sorry for
you, Margaret.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Smiling_.]  Why, Duchess?

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Oh, on account of that horrid woman.  She dresses so
well, too, which makes it much worse, sets such a dreadful example.
Augustus—you know my disreputable brother—such a trial to us all—well,
Augustus is completely infatuated about her.  It is quite scandalous, for
she is absolutely inadmissible into society.  Many a woman has a past,
but I am told that she has at least a dozen, and that they all fit.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Whom are you talking about, Duchess?

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  About Mrs. Erlynne.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Mrs. Erlynne?  I never heard of her, Duchess.  And what
_has_ she to do with me?

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  My poor child!  Agatha, darling!

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Will you go out on the terrace and look at the
sunset?

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma.

                                             [_Exit through window_, _L._]

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Sweet girl!  So devoted to sunsets!  Shows such
refinement of feeling, does it not?  After all, there is nothing like
Nature, is there?

LADY WINDERMERE.  But what is it, Duchess?  Why do you talk to me about
this person?

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Don’t you really know?  I assure you we’re all so
distressed about it.  Only last night at dear Lady Jansen’s every one was
saying how extraordinary it was that, of all men in London, Windermere
should behave in such a way.

LADY WINDERMERE.  My husband—what has _he_ got to do with any woman of
that kind?

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Ah, what indeed, dear?  That is the point.  He goes
to see her continually, and stops for hours at a time, and while he is
there she is not at home to any one.  Not that many ladies call on her,
dear, but she has a great many disreputable men friends—my own brother
particularly, as I told you—and that is what makes it so dreadful about
Windermere.  We looked upon _him_ as being such a model husband, but I am
afraid there is no doubt about it.  My dear nieces—you know the Saville
girls, don’t you?—such nice domestic creatures—plain, dreadfully plain,
but so good—well, they’re always at the window doing fancy work, and
making ugly things for the poor, which I think so useful of them in these
dreadful socialistic days, and this terrible woman has taken a house in
Curzon Street, right opposite them—such a respectable street, too!  I
don’t know what we’re coming to!  And they tell me that Windermere goes
there four and five times a week—they _see_ him.  They can’t help it—and
although they never talk scandal, they—well, of course—they remark on it
to every one.  And the worst of it all is that I have been told that this
woman has got a great deal of money out of somebody, for it seems that
she came to London six months ago without anything at all to speak of,
and now she has this charming house in Mayfair, drives her ponies in the
Park every afternoon and all—well, all—since she has known poor dear
Windermere.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Oh, I can’t believe it!

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  But it’s quite true, my dear.  The whole of London
knows it.  That is why I felt it was better to come and talk to you, and
advise you to take Windermere away at once to Homburg or to Aix, where
he’ll have something to amuse him, and where you can watch him all day
long.  I assure you, my dear, that on several occasions after I was first
married, I had to pretend to be very ill, and was obliged to drink the
most unpleasant mineral waters, merely to get Berwick out of town.  He
was so extremely susceptible.  Though I am bound to say he never gave
away any large sums of money to anybody.  He is far too high-principled
for that!

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Interrupting_.]  Duchess, Duchess, it’s impossible!
[_Rising and crossing stage to C._]  We are only married two years.  Our
child is but six months old.  [_Sits in chair R. of L. table_.]

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Ah, the dear pretty baby!  How is the little
darling?  Is it a boy or a girl?  I hope a girl—Ah, no, I remember it’s a
boy!  I’m so sorry.  Boys are so wicked.  My boy is excessively immoral.
You wouldn’t believe at what hours he comes home.  And he’s only left
Oxford a few months—I really don’t know what they teach them there.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Are _all_ men bad?

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Oh, all of them, my dear, all of them, without any
exception.  And they never grow any better.  Men become old, but they
never become good.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Windermere and I married for love.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Yes, we begin like that.  It was only Berwick’s
brutal and incessant threats of suicide that made me accept him at all,
and before the year was out, he was running after all kinds of
petticoats, every colour, every shape, every material.  In fact, before
the honeymoon was over, I caught him winking at my maid, a most pretty,
respectable girl.  I dismissed her at once without a character.—No, I
remember I passed her on to my sister; poor dear Sir George is so
short-sighted, I thought it wouldn’t matter.  But it did, though—it was
most unfortunate.  [_Rises_.]  And now, my dear child, I must go, as we
are dining out.  And mind you don’t take this little aberration of
Windermere’s too much to heart.  Just take him abroad, and he’ll come
back to you all right.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Come back to me?  [_C._]

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.   [_L.C._]  Yes, dear, these wicked women get our
husbands away from us, but they always come back, slightly damaged, of
course.  And don’t make scenes, men hate them!

LADY WINDERMERE.  It is very kind of you, Duchess, to come and tell me
all this.  But I can’t believe that my husband is untrue to me.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Pretty child!  I was like that once.  Now I know
that all men are monsters.  [LADY WINDERMERE _rings bell_.]  The only
thing to do is to feed the wretches well.  A good cook does wonders, and
that I know you have.  My dear Margaret, you are not going to cry?

LADY WINDERMERE.  You needn’t be afraid, Duchess, I never cry.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  That’s quite right, dear.  Crying is the refuge of
plain women but the ruin of pretty ones.  Agatha, darling!

LADY AGATHA.  [_Entering L._]  Yes, mamma.  [_Stands back of table L.C._]

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Come and bid good-bye to Lady Windermere, and thank
her for your charming visit.  [_Coming down again_.]  And by the way, I
must thank you for sending a card to Mr. Hopper—he’s that rich young
Australian people are taking such notice of just at present.  His father
made a great fortune by selling some kind of food in circular tins—most
palatable, I believe—I fancy it is the thing the servants always refuse
to eat.  But the son is quite interesting.  I think he’s attracted by
dear Agatha’s clever talk.  Of course, we should be very sorry to lose
her, but I think that a mother who doesn’t part with a daughter every
season has no real affection.  We’re coming to-night, dear.  [PARKER
_opens C. doors_.]  And remember my advice, take the poor fellow out of
town at once, it is the only thing to do.  Good-bye, once more; come,
Agatha.

                                 [_Exeunt_ DUCHESS _and_ LADY AGATHA _C._]

LADY WINDERMERE.  How horrible!  I understand now what Lord Darlington
meant by the imaginary instance of the couple not two years married.  Oh!
it can’t be true—she spoke of enormous sums of money paid to this woman.
I know where Arthur keeps his bank book—in one of the drawers of that
desk.  I might find out by that.  I _will_ find out.  [_Opens drawer_.]
No, it is some hideous mistake.  [_Rises and goes C._]  Some silly
scandal!  He loves _me_!  He loves _me_!  But why should I not look?  I
am his wife, I have a right to look!  [_Returns to bureau_, _takes out
book and examines it page by page_, _smiles and gives a sigh of relief_.]
I knew it! there is not a word of truth in this stupid story.  [_Puts
book back in dranver_.  _As the does so_, _starts and takes out another
book_.]  A second book—private—locked!  [_Tries to open it_, _but fails_.
_Sees paper knife on bureau_, _and with it cuts cover from book_.
_Begins to start at the first page_.]  ‘Mrs. Erlynne—£600—Mrs.
Erlynne—£700—Mrs. Erlynne—£400.’  Oh! it is true!  It is true!  How
horrible!  [_Throws book on floor_.]

                                            [_Enter_ LORD WINDERMERE _C._]

LORD WINDERMERE.  Well, dear, has the fan been sent home yet?  [_Going
R.C._  _Sees book_.]  Margaret, you have cut open my bank book.  You have
no right to do such a thing!

LADY WINDERMERE.  You think it wrong that you are found out, don’t you?

LORD WINDERMERE.  I think it wrong that a wife should spy on her husband.

LADY WINDERMERE.  I did not spy on you.  I never knew of this woman’s
existence till half an hour ago.  Some one who pitied me was kind enough
to tell me what every one in London knows already—your daily visits to
Curzon Street, your mad infatuation, the monstrous sums of money you
squander on this infamous woman!  [_Crossing L._]

LORD WINDERMERE.  Margaret! don’t talk like that of Mrs. Erlynne, you
don’t know how unjust it is!

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Turning to him_.]  You are very jealous of Mrs.
Erlynne’s honour.  I wish you had been as jealous of mine.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Your honour is untouched, Margaret.  You don’t think
for a moment that—[_Puts book back into desk_.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  I think that you spend your money strangely.  That is
all.  Oh, don’t imagine I mind about the money.  As far as I am
concerned, you may squander everything we have.  But what I _do_ mind is
that you who have loved me, you who have taught me to love you, should
pass from the love that is given to the love that is bought.  Oh, it’s
horrible!  [_Sits on sofa_.]  And it is I who feel degraded! _you_ don’t
feel anything.  I feel stained, utterly stained.  You can’t realise how
hideous the last six months seems to me now—every kiss you have given me
is tainted in my memory.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Crossing to her_.]  Don’t say that, Margaret.  I
never loved any one in the whole world but you.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Rises_.]  Who is this woman, then?  Why do you take a
house for her?

LORD WINDERMERE.  I did not take a house for her.

LADY WINDERMERE.  You gave her the money to do it, which is the same
thing.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Margaret, as far as I have known Mrs. Erlynne—

LADY WINDERMERE.  Is there a Mr. Erlynne—or is he a myth?

LORD WINDERMERE.  Her husband died many years ago.  She is alone in the
world.

LADY WINDERMERE.  No relations?  [_A pause_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  None.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Rather curious, isn’t it?  [_L._]

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_L.C._]  Margaret, I was saying to you—and I beg you
to listen to me—that as far as I have known Mrs. Erlynne, she has
conducted herself well.  If years ago—

LADY WINDERMERE.  Oh!  [_Crossing R.C._]  I don’t want details about her
life!

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_C._]  I am not going to give you any details about
her life.  I tell you simply this—Mrs. Erlynne was once honoured, loved,
respected.  She was well born, she had position—she lost everything—threw
it away, if you like.  That makes it all the more bitter.  Misfortunes
one can endure—they come from outside, they are accidents.  But to suffer
for one’s own faults—ah!—there is the sting of life.  It was twenty years
ago, too.  She was little more than a girl then.  She had been a wife for
even less time than you have.

LADY WINDERMERE.  I am not interested in her—and—you should not mention
this woman and me in the same breath.  It is an error of taste.
[_Sitting R. at desk_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  Margaret, you could save this woman.  She wants to get
back into society, and she wants you to help her.  [_Crossing to her_.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  Me!

LORD WINDERMERE.  Yes, you.

LADY WINDERMERE.  How impertinent of her!  [_A pause_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  Margaret, I came to ask you a great favour, and I still
ask it of you, though you have discovered what I had intended you should
never have known that I have given Mrs. Erlynne a large sum of money.  I
want you to send her an invitation for our party to-night.  [_Standing L.
of her_.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  You are mad!  [_Rises_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  I entreat you.  People may chatter about her, do
chatter about her, of course, but they don’t know anything definite
against her.  She has been to several houses—not to houses where you
would go, I admit, but still to houses where women who are in what is
called Society nowadays do go.  That does not content her.  She wants you
to receive her once.

LADY WINDERMERE.  As a triumph for her, I suppose?

LORD WINDERMERE.  No; but because she knows that you are a good woman—and
that if she comes here once she will have a chance of a happier, a surer
life than she has had.  She will make no further effort to know you.
Won’t you help a woman who is trying to get back?

LADY WINDERMERE.  No!  If a woman really repents, she never wishes to
return to the society that has made or seen her ruin.

LORD WINDERMERE.  I beg of you.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Crossing to door R._]  I am going to dress for
dinner, and don’t mention the subject again this evening.  Arthur [_going
to him C._], you fancy because I have no father or mother that I am alone
in the world, and that you can treat me as you choose.  You are wrong, I
have friends, many friends.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_L.C._]  Margaret, you are talking foolishly,
recklessly.  I won’t argue with you, but I insist upon your asking Mrs.
Erlynne to-night.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_R.C._]  I shall do nothing of the kind.  [_Crossing
L.C._]

LORD WINDERMERE.  You refuse?  [_C._]

LADY WINDERMERE.  Absolutely!

LORD WINDERMERE.  Ah, Margaret, do this for my sake; it is her last
chance.

LADY WINDERMERE.  What has that to do with me?

LORD WINDERMERE.  How hard good women are!

LADY WINDERMERE.  How weak bad men are!

LORD WINDERMERE.  Margaret, none of us men may be good enough for the
women we marry—that is quite true—but you don’t imagine I would ever—oh,
the suggestion is monstrous!

LADY WINDERMERE.  Why should _you_ be different from other men?  I am
told that there is hardly a husband in London who does not waste his life
over _some_ shameful passion.

LORD WINDERMERE.  I am not one of them.

LADY WINDERMERE.  I am not sure of that!

LORD WINDERMERE.  You are sure in your heart.  But don’t make chasm after
chasm between us.  God knows the last few minutes have thrust us wide
enough apart.  Sit down and write the card.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Nothing in the whole world would induce me.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Crossing to bureau_.]  Then I will!  [_Rings electric
bell_, _sits and writes card_.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  You are going to invite this woman?  [_Crossing to
him_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  Yes.  [_Pause_.  _Enter_ PARKER.]  Parker!

PARKER.  Yes, my lord.  [_Comes down L.C._]

LORD WINDERMERE.  Have this note sent to Mrs. Erlynne at No. 84A Curzon
Street.  [_Crossing to L.C. and giving note to_ PARKER.]  There is no
answer!

                                                      [_Exit_ PARKER _C._]

LADY WINDERMERE.  Arthur, if that woman comes here, I shall insult her.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Margaret, don’t say that.

LADY WINDERMERE.  I mean it.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Child, if you did such a thing, there’s not a woman in
London who wouldn’t pity you.

LADY WINDERMERE.  There is not a _good_ woman in London who would not
applaud me.  We have been too lax.  We must make an example.  I propose
to begin to-night.  [_Picking up fan_.]  Yes, you gave me this fan
to-day; it was your birthday present.  If that woman crosses my
threshold, I shall strike her across the face with it.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Margaret, you couldn’t do such a thing.

LADY WINDERMERE.  You don’t know me!  [_Moves R._]

[_Enter_ PARKER.]

Parker!

PARKER.  Yes, my lady.

LADY WINDERMERE.  I shall dine in my own room.  I don’t want dinner, in
fact.  See that everything is ready by half-past ten.  And, Parker, be
sure you pronounce the names of the guests very distinctly to-night.
Sometimes you speak so fast that I miss them.  I am particularly anxious
to hear the names quite clearly, so as to make no mistake.  You
understand, Parker?

PARKER.  Yes, my lady.

LADY WINDERMERE.  That will do!

                                                      [_Exit_ PARKER _C._]

[_Speaking to_ LORD WINDERMERE.]  Arthur, if that woman comes here—I warn
you—

LORD WINDERMERE.  Margaret, you’ll ruin us!

LADY WINDERMERE.  Us!  From this moment my life is separate from yours.
But if you wish to avoid a public scandal, write at once to this woman,
and tell her that I forbid her to come here!

LORD WINDERMERE.  I will not—I cannot—she must come!

LADY WINDERMERE.  Then I shall do exactly as I have said.  [_Goes R._]
You leave me no choice.

                                                               [_Exit R._]

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Calling after her_.]  Margaret!  Margaret!  [_A
pause_.]  My God!  What shall I do?  I dare not tell her who this woman
really is.  The shame would kill her.  [_Sinks down into a chair and
buries his face in his hands_.]

                                * * * * *

                                 ACT DROP




SECOND ACT


                                  SCENE

_Drawing-room in Lord Windermere’s house_.  _Door R.U. opening into
ball-room_, _where band is playing_.  _Door L. through which guests are
entering_.  _Door L.U. opens on to illuminated terrace_.  _Palms_,
_flowers_, _and brilliant lights_.  _Room crowded with guests_.  _Lady
Windermere is receiving them_.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  [_Up C._]  So strange Lord Windermere isn’t here.
Mr. Hopper is very late, too.  You have kept those five dances for him,
Agatha?  [_Comes down_.]

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  [_Sitting on sofa_.]  Just let me see your card.
I’m so glad Lady Windermere has revived cards.—They’re a mother’s only
safeguard.  You dear simple little thing!  [_Scratches out two names_.]
No nice girl should ever waltz with such particularly younger sons!  It
looks so fast!  The last two dances you might pass on the terrace with
Mr. Hopper.

[_Enter_ MR. DUMBY _and_ LADY PLYMDALE _from the ball-room_.]

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  [_Fanning herself_.]  The air is so pleasant there.

PARKER.  Mrs. Cowper-Cowper.  Lady Stutfield.  Sir James Royston.  Mr.
Guy Berkeley.

[_These people enter as announced_.]

DUMBY.  Good evening, Lady Stutfield.  I suppose this will be the last
ball of the season?

LADY STUTFIELD.  I suppose so, Mr. Dumby.  It’s been a delightful season,
hasn’t it?

DUMBY.  Quite delightful!  Good evening, Duchess.  I suppose this will be
the last ball of the season?

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  I suppose so, Mr. Dumby.  It has been a very dull
season, hasn’t it?

DUMBY.  Dreadfully dull!  Dreadfully dull!

MR. COWPER-COWPER.  Good evening, Mr. Dumby.  I suppose this will be the
last ball of the season?

DUMBY.  Oh, I think not.  There’ll probably be two more.  [_Wanders back
to_ LADY PLYMDALE.]

PARKER.  Mr. Rufford.  Lady Jedburgh and Miss Graham.  Mr. Hopper.

[_These people enter as announced_.]

HOPPER.  How do you do, Lady Windermere?  How do you do, Duchess?  [_Bows
to_ LADY AGATHA.]

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Dear Mr. Hopper, how nice of you to come so early.
We all know how you are run after in London.

HOPPER.  Capital place, London!  They are not nearly so exclusive in
London as they are in Sydney.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Ah! we know your value, Mr. Hopper.  We wish there
were more like you.  It would make life so much easier.  Do you know, Mr.
Hopper, dear Agatha and I are so much interested in Australia.  It must
be so pretty with all the dear little kangaroos flying about.  Agatha has
found it on the map.  What a curious shape it is!  Just like a large
packing case.  However, it is a very young country, isn’t it?

HOPPER.  Wasn’t it made at the same time as the others, Duchess?

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  How clever you are, Mr. Hopper.  You have a
cleverness quite of your own.  Now I mustn’t keep you.

HOPPER.  But I should like to dance with Lady Agatha, Duchess.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Well, I hope she has a dance left.  Have you a dance
left, Agatha?

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  The next one?

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma.

HOPPER.  May I have the pleasure?  [LADY AGATHA _bows_.]

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Mind you take great care of my little chatterbox,
Mr. Hopper.

[LADY AGATHA _and_ MR. HOPPER _pass into ball-room_.]

[_Enter_ LORD WINDERMERE.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  Margaret, I want to speak to you.

LADY WINDERMERE.  In a moment.  [_The music drops_.]

PARKER.  Lord Augustus Lorton.

[_Enter_ LORD AUGUSTUS.]

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Good evening, Lady Windermere.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Sir James, will you take me into the ball-room?
Augustus has been dining with us to-night.  I really have had quite
enough of dear Augustus for the moment.

[SIR JAMES ROYSTON _gives the_ DUCHESS _his aim and escorts her into the
ball-room_.]

PARKER.  Mr. and Mrs. Arthur Bowden.  Lord and Lady Paisley.  Lord
Darlington.

[_These people enter as announced_.]

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [_Coming up to_ LORD WINDERMERE.]  Want to speak to you
particularly, dear boy.  I’m worn to a shadow.  Know I don’t look it.
None of us men do look what we really are.  Demmed good thing, too.  What
I want to know is this.  Who is she?  Where does she come from?  Why
hasn’t she got any demmed relations?  Demmed nuisance, relations!  But
they make one so demmed respectable.

LORD WINDERMERE.  You are talking of Mrs. Erlynne, I suppose?  I only met
her six months ago.  Till then, I never knew of her existence.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  You have seen a good deal of her since then.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Coldly_.]  Yes, I have seen a good deal of her since
then.  I have just seen her.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Egad! the women are very down on her.  I have been dining
with Arabella this evening!  By Jove! you should have heard what she said
about Mrs. Erlynne.  She didn’t leave a rag on her. . . . [_Aside_.]
Berwick and I told her that didn’t matter much, as the lady in question
must have an extremely fine figure.  You should have seen Arabella’s
expression! . . . But, look here, dear boy.  I don’t know what to do
about Mrs. Erlynne.  Egad!  I might be married to her; she treats me with
such demmed indifference.  She’s deuced clever, too!  She explains
everything.  Egad! she explains you.  She has got any amount of
explanations for you—and all of them different.

LORD WINDERMERE.  No explanations are necessary about my friendship with
Mrs. Erlynne.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Hem!  Well, look here, dear old fellow.  Do you think she
will ever get into this demmed thing called Society?  Would you introduce
her to your wife?  No use beating about the confounded bush.  Would you
do that?

LORD WINDERMERE.  Mrs. Erlynne is coming here to-night.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Your wife has sent her a card?

LORD WINDERMERE.  Mrs. Erlynne has received a card.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Then she’s all right, dear boy.  But why didn’t you tell
me that before?  It would have saved me a heap of worry and demmed
misunderstandings!

[LADY AGATHA _and_ MR. HOPPER _cross and exit on terrace L.U.E._]

PARKER.  Mr. Cecil Graham!

[_Enter_ MR. CECIL GRAHAM.]

CECIL GRAHAM.  [_Bows to_ LADY WINDERMERE, _passes over and shakes hands
with_ LORD WINDERMERE.]  Good evening, Arthur.  Why don’t you ask me how
I am?  I like people to ask me how I am.  It shows a wide-spread interest
in my health.  Now, to-night I am not at all well.  Been dining with my
people.  Wonder why it is one’s people are always so tedious?  My father
would talk morality after dinner.  I told him he was old enough to know
better.  But my experience is that as soon as people are old enough to
know better, they don’t know anything at all.  Hallo, Tuppy!  Hear you’re
going to be married again; thought you were tired of that game.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  You’re excessively trivial, my dear boy, excessively
trivial!

CECIL GRAHAM.  By the way, Tuppy, which is it?  Have you been twice
married and once divorced, or twice divorced and once married?  I say
you’ve been twice divorced and once married.  It seems so much more
probable.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  I have a very bad memory.  I really don’t remember which.
[_Moves away R._]

LADY PLYMDALE.  Lord Windermere, I’ve something most particular to ask
you.

LORD WINDERMERE.  I am afraid—if you will excuse me—I must join my wife.

LADY PLYMDALE.  Oh, you mustn’t dream of such a thing.  It’s most
dangerous nowadays for a husband to pay any attention to his wife in
public.  It always makes people think that he beats her when they’re
alone.  The world has grown so suspicious of anything that looks like a
happy married life.  But I’ll tell you what it is at supper.  [_Moves
towards door of ball-room_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_C._]  Margaret!  I _must_ speak to you.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Will you hold my fan for me, Lord Darlington?  Thanks.
[_Comes down to him_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Crossing to her_.]  Margaret, what you said before
dinner was, of course, impossible?

LADY WINDERMERE.  That woman is not coming here to-night!

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_R.C._]  Mrs. Erlynne is coming here, and if you in
any way annoy or wound her, you will bring shame and sorrow on us both.
Remember that!  Ah, Margaret! only trust me!  A wife should trust her
husband!

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_C._]  London is full of women who trust their
husbands.  One can always recognise them.  They look so thoroughly
unhappy.  I am not going to be one of them.  [_Moves up_.]  Lord
Darlington, will you give me back my fan, please?  Thanks. . . . A useful
thing a fan, isn’t it? . . . I want a friend to-night, Lord Darlington: I
didn’t know I would want one so soon.

LORD DARLINGTON.  Lady Windermere!  I knew the time would come some day;
but why to-night?

LORD WINDERMERE.  I _will_ tell her.  I must.  It would be terrible if
there were any scene.  Margaret . . .

PARKER.  Mrs. Erlynne!

[LORD WINDERMERE _starts_.  MRS. ERLYNNE _enters_, _very beautifully
dressed and very dignified_.  LADY WINDERMERE _clutches at her fan_,
_then lets it drop on the door_.  _She bows coldly to_ MRS. ERLYNNE, _who
bows to her sweetly in turn_, _and sails into the room_.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  You have dropped your fan, Lady Windermere.  [_Picks it
up and hands it to her_.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_C._]  How do you do, again, Lord Windermere?  How
charming your sweet wife looks!  Quite a picture!

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_In a low voice_.]  It was terribly rash of you to
come!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Smiling_.]  The wisest thing I ever did in my life.
And, by the way, you must pay me a good deal of attention this evening.
I am afraid of the women.  You must introduce me to some of them.  The
men I can always manage.  How do you do, Lord Augustus?  You have quite
neglected me lately.  I have not seen you since yesterday.  I am afraid
you’re faithless.  Every one told me so.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [_R._]  Now really, Mrs. Erlynne, allow me to explain.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_R.C._]  No, dear Lord Augustus, you can’t explain
anything.  It is your chief charm.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Ah! if you find charms in me, Mrs. Erlynne—

[_They converse together_.  LORD WINDERMERE _moves uneasily about the
room watching_ MRS. ERLYNNE.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_To_ LADY WINDERMERE.]  How pale you are!

LADY WINDERMERE.  Cowards are always pale!

LORD DARLINGTON.  You look faint.  Come out on the terrace.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Yes.  [_To_ PARKER.]  Parker, send my cloak out.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Crossing to her_.]  Lady Windermere, how beautifully
your terrace is illuminated.  Reminds me of Prince Doria’s at Rome.

[LADY WINDERMERE _bows coldly_, _and goes off with_ LORD DARLINGTON.]

Oh, how do you do, Mr. Graham?  Isn’t that your aunt, Lady Jedburgh?  I
should so much like to know her.

CECIL GRAHAM.  [_After a moment’s hesitation and embarrassment_.]  Oh,
certainly, if you wish it.  Aunt Caroline, allow me to introduce Mrs.
Erlynne.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  So pleased to meet you, Lady Jedburgh.  [_Sits beside her
on the sofa_.]  Your nephew and I are great friends.  I am so much
interested in his political career.  I think he’s sure to be a wonderful
success.  He thinks like a Tory, and talks like a Radical, and that’s so
important nowadays.  He’s such a brilliant talker, too.  But we all know
from whom he inherits that.  Lord Allandale was saying to me only
yesterday, in the Park, that Mr. Graham talks almost as well as his aunt.

LADY JEDBURGH.  [_R._]  Most kind of you to say these charming things to
me!  [MRS. ERLYNNE _smiles_, _and continues conversation_.]

DUMBY.  [_To_ CECIL GRAHAM.]  Did you introduce Mrs. Erlynne to Lady
Jedburgh?

CECIL GRAHAM.  Had to, my dear fellow.  Couldn’t help it!  That woman can
make one do anything she wants.  How, I don’t know.

DUMBY.  Hope to goodness she won’t speak to me!  [_Saunters towards_ LADY
PLYMDALE.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_C._  _To_ LADY JEDBURGH.]  On Thursday?  With great
pleasure.  [_Rises_, _and speaks to_ LORD WINDERMERE, _laughing_.]  What
a bore it is to have to be civil to these old dowagers!  But they always
insist on it!

LADY PLYMDALE.  [_To_ MR. DUMBY.]  Who is that well-dressed woman talking
to Windermere?

DUMBY.  Haven’t got the slightest idea!  Looks like an _édition de luxe_
of a wicked French novel, meant specially for the English market.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  So that is poor Dumby with Lady Plymdale?  I hear she is
frightfully jealous of him.  He doesn’t seem anxious to speak to me
to-night.  I suppose he is afraid of her.  Those straw-coloured women
have dreadful tempers.  Do you know, I think I’ll dance with you first,
Windermere.  [LORD WINDERMERE _bits his lip and frowns_.]  It will make
Lord Augustus so jealous!  Lord Augustus!  [LORD AUGUSTUS _comes down_.]
Lord Windermere insists on my dancing with him first, and, as it’s his
own house, I can’t well refuse.  You know I would much sooner dance with
you.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [_With a low bow_.]  I wish I could think so, Mrs.
Erlynne.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  You know it far too well.  I can fancy a person dancing
through life with you and finding it charming.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [_Placing his hand on his white waistcoat_.]  Oh, thank
you, thank you.  You are the most adorable of all ladies!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  What a nice speech!  So simple and so sincere!  Just the
sort of speech I like.  Well, you shall hold my bouquet.  [_Goes towards
ball-room on_ LORD WINDERMERE’S _arm_.]  Ah, Mr. Dumby, how are you?  I
am so sorry I have been out the last three times you have called.  Come
and lunch on Friday.

DUMBY.  [_With perfect nonchalance_.]  Delighted!

[LADY PLYMDALE _glares with indignation at_ MR. DUMBY.  LORD AUGUSTUS
_follows_ MRS. ERLYNNE _and_ LORD WINDERMERE _into the ball-room holding
bouquet_.]

LADY PLYMDALE.  [_To_ MR. DUMBY.]  What an absolute brute you are!  I
never can believe a word you say!  Why did you tell me you didn’t know
her?  What do you mean by calling on her three times running?  You are
not to go to lunch there; of course you understand that?

DUMBY.  My dear Laura, I wouldn’t dream of going!

LADY PLYMDALE.  You haven’t told me her name yet!  Who is she?

DUMBY.  [_Coughs slightly and smooths his hair_.]  She’s a Mrs. Erlynne.

LADY PLYMDALE.  That woman!

DUMBY.  Yes; that is what every one calls her.

LADY PLYMDALE.  How very interesting!  How intensely interesting!  I
really must have a good stare at her.  [_Goes to door of ball-room and
looks in_.]  I have heard the most shocking things about her.  They say
she is ruining poor Windermere.  And Lady Windermere, who goes in for
being so proper, invites her!  How extremely amusing!  It takes a
thoroughly good woman to do a thoroughly stupid thing.  You are to lunch
there on Friday!

DUMBY.  Why?

LADY PLYMDALE.  Because I want you to take my husband with you.  He has
been so attentive lately, that he has become a perfect nuisance.  Now,
this woman is just the thing for him.  He’ll dance attendance upon her as
long as she lets him, and won’t bother me.  I assure you, women of that
kind are most useful.  They form the basis of other people’s marriages.

DUMBY.  What a mystery you are!

LADY PLYMDALE.  [_Looking at him_.]  I wish _you_ were!

DUMBY.  I am—to myself.  I am the only person in the world I should like
to know thoroughly; but I don’t see any chance of it just at present.

[_They pass into the ball-room_, _and_ LADY WINDERMERE _and_ LORD
DARLINGTON _enter from the terrace_.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  Yes.  Her coming here is monstrous, unbearable.  I know
now what you meant to-day at tea-time.  Why didn’t you tell me right out?
You should have!

LORD DARLINGTON.  I couldn’t!  A man can’t tell these things about
another man!  But if I had known he was going to make you ask her here
to-night, I think I would have told you.  That insult, at any rate, you
would have been spared.

LADY WINDERMERE.  I did not ask her.  He insisted on her coming—against
my entreaties—against my commands.  Oh! the house is tainted for me!  I
feel that every woman here sneers at me as she dances by with my husband.
What have I done to deserve this?  I gave him all my life.  He took
it—used it—spoiled it!  I am degraded in my own eyes; and I lack
courage—I am a coward!  [_Sits down on sofa_.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  If I know you at all, I know that you can’t live with a
man who treats you like this!  What sort of life would you have with him?
You would feel that he was lying to you every moment of the day.  You
would feel that the look in his eyes was false, his voice false, his
touch false, his passion false.  He would come to you when he was weary
of others; you would have to comfort him.  He would come to you when he
was devoted to others; you would have to charm him.  You would have to be
to him the mask of his real life, the cloak to hide his secret.

LADY WINDERMERE.  You are right—you are terribly right.  But where am I
to turn?  You said you would be my friend, Lord Darlington.—Tell me, what
am I to do?  Be my friend now.

LORD DARLINGTON.  Between men and women there is no friendship possible.
There is passion, enmity, worship, love, but no friendship.  I love you—

LADY WINDERMERE.  No, no!  [_Rises_.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  Yes, I love you!  You are more to me than anything in
the whole world.  What does your husband give you?  Nothing.  Whatever is
in him he gives to this wretched woman, whom he has thrust into your
society, into your home, to shame you before every one.  I offer you my
life—

LADY WINDERMERE.  Lord Darlington!

LORD DARLINGTON.  My life—my whole life.  Take it, and do with it what
you will. . . . I love you—love you as I have never loved any living
thing.  From the moment I met you I loved you, loved you blindly,
adoringly, madly!  You did not know it then—you know it now!  Leave this
house to-night.  I won’t tell you that the world matters nothing, or the
world’s voice, or the voice of society.  They matter a great deal.  They
matter far too much.  But there are moments when one has to choose
between living one’s own life, fully, entirely, completely—or dragging
out some false, shallow, degrading existence that the world in its
hypocrisy demands.  You have that moment now.  Choose!  Oh, my love,
choose.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Moving slowly away from him_, _and looking at him
with startled eyes_.]  I have not the courage.

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Following her_.]  Yes; you have the courage.  There
may be six months of pain, of disgrace even, but when you no longer bear
his name, when you bear mine, all will be well.  Margaret, my love, my
wife that shall be some day—yes, my wife!  You know it!  What are you
now?  This woman has the place that belongs by right to you.  Oh! go—go
out of this house, with head erect, with a smile upon your lips, with
courage in your eyes.  All London will know why you did it; and who will
blame you?  No one.  If they do, what matter?  Wrong?  What is wrong?
It’s wrong for a man to abandon his wife for a shameless woman.  It is
wrong for a wife to remain with a man who so dishonours her.  You said
once you would make no compromise with things.  Make none now.  Be brave!
Be yourself!

LADY WINDERMERE.  I am afraid of being myself.  Let me think!  Let me
wait!  My husband may return to me.  [_Sits down on sofa_.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  And you would take him back!  You are not what I
thought you were.  You are just the same as every other woman.  You would
stand anything rather than face the censure of a world, whose praise you
would despise.  In a week you will be driving with this woman in the
Park.  She will be your constant guest—your dearest friend.  You would
endure anything rather than break with one blow this monstrous tie.  You
are right.  You have no courage; none!

LADY WINDERMERE.  Ah, give me time to think.  I cannot answer you now.
[_Passes her hand nervously over her brow_.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  It must be now or not at all.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Rising from the sofa_.]  Then, not at all!  [_A
pause_.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  You break my heart!

LADY WINDERMERE.  Mine is already broken.  [_A pause_.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  To-morrow I leave England.  This is the last time I
shall ever look on you.  You will never see me again.  For one moment our
lives met—our souls touched.  They must never meet or touch again.
Good-bye, Margaret.  [_Exit_.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  How alone I am in life!  How terribly alone!

[_The music stops_.  _Enter the_ DUCHESS OF BERWICK _and_ LORD PAISLEY
_laughing and talking_.  _Other guests come on from ball-room_.]

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Dear Margaret, I’ve just been having such a
delightful chat with Mrs. Erlynne.  I am so sorry for what I said to you
this afternoon about her.  Of course, she must be all right if _you_
invite her.  A most attractive woman, and has such sensible views on
life.  Told me she entirely disapproved of people marrying more than
once, so I feel quite safe about poor Augustus.  Can’t imagine why people
speak against her.  It’s those horrid nieces of mine—the Saville
girls—they’re always talking scandal.  Still, I should go to Homburg,
dear, I really should.  She is just a little too attractive.  But where
is Agatha?  Oh, there she is:  [LADY AGATHA _and_ MR. HOPPER _enter from
terrace L.U.E._]  Mr. Hopper, I am very, very angry with you.  You have
taken Agatha out on the terrace, and she is so delicate.

HOPPER.  Awfully sorry, Duchess.  We went out for a moment and then got
chatting together.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  [_C._]  Ah, about dear Australia, I suppose?

HOPPER.  Yes!

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Agatha, darling!  [_Beckons her over_.]

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma!

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  [_Aside_.]  Did Mr. Hopper definitely—

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  And what answer did you give him, dear child?

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  [_Affectionately_.]  My dear one!  You always say
the right thing.  Mr. Hopper!  James!  Agatha has told me everything.
How cleverly you have both kept your secret.

HOPPER.  You don’t mind my taking Agatha off to Australia, then, Duchess?

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  [_Indignantly_.]  To Australia?  Oh, don’t mention
that dreadful vulgar place.

HOPPER.  But she said she’d like to come with me.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  [_Severely_.]  Did you say that, Agatha?

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Agatha, you say the most silly things possible.  I
think on the whole that Grosvenor Square would be a more healthy place to
reside in.  There are lots of vulgar people live in Grosvenor Square, but
at any rate there are no horrid kangaroos crawling about.  But we’ll talk
about that to-morrow.  James, you can take Agatha down.  You’ll come to
lunch, of course, James.  At half-past one, instead of two.  The Duke
will wish to say a few words to you, I am sure.

HOPPER.  I should like to have a chat with the Duke, Duchess.  He has not
said a single word to me yet.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  I think you’ll find he will have a great deal to say
to you to-morrow.  [_Exit_ LADY AGATHA _with_ MR. HOPPER.]  And now
good-night, Margaret.  I’m afraid it’s the old, old story, dear.
Love—well, not love at first sight, but love at the end of the season,
which is so much more satisfactory.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Good-night, Duchess.

[_Exit the_ DUCHESS OF BERWICK _on_ LORD PAISLEY’S _arm_.]

LADY PLYMDALE.  My dear Margaret, what a handsome woman your husband has
been dancing with!  I should be quite jealous if I were you!  Is she a
great friend of yours?

LADY WINDERMERE.  No!

LADY PLYMDALE.  Really?  Good-night, dear.  [_Looks at_ MR. DUMBY _and
exit_.]

DUMBY.  Awful manners young Hopper has!

CECIL GRAHAM.  Ah!  Hopper is one of Nature’s gentlemen, the worst type
of gentleman I know.

DUMBY.  Sensible woman, Lady Windermere.  Lots of wives would have
objected to Mrs. Erlynne coming.  But Lady Windermere has that uncommon
thing called common sense.

CECIL GRAHAM.  And Windermere knows that nothing looks so like innocence
as an indiscretion.

DUMBY.  Yes; dear Windermere is becoming almost modern.  Never thought he
would.  [_Bows to_ LADY WINDERMERE _and exit_.]

LADY JEDBURGH.  Good night, Lady Windermere.  What a fascinating woman
Mrs. Erlynne is!  She is coming to lunch on Thursday, won’t you come too?
I expect the Bishop and dear Lady Merton.

LADY WINDERMERE.  I am afraid I am engaged, Lady Jedburgh.

LADY JEDBURGH.  So sorry.  Come, dear.  [_Exeunt_ LADY JEDBURGH _and_
MISS GRAHAM.]

[_Enter_ MRS. ERLYNNE _and_ LORD WINDERMERE.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Charming ball it has been!  Quite reminds me of old days.
[_Sits on sofa_.]  And I see that there are just as many fools in society
as there used to be.  So pleased to find that nothing has altered!
Except Margaret.  She’s grown quite pretty.  The last time I saw
her—twenty years ago, she was a fright in flannel.  Positive fright, I
assure you.  The dear Duchess! and that sweet Lady Agatha!  Just the type
of girl I like!  Well, really, Windermere, if I am to be the Duchess’s
sister-in-law—

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Sitting L. of her_.]  But are you—?

[_Exit_ MR. CECIL GRAHAM _with rest of guests_.  LADY WINDERMERE
_watches_, _with a look of scorn and pain_, MRS. ERLYNNE _and her
husband_.  _They are unconscious of her presence_.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Oh, yes!  He’s to call to-morrow at twelve o’clock!  He
wanted to propose to-night.  In fact he did.  He kept on proposing.  Poor
Augustus, you know how he repeats himself.  Such a bad habit!  But I told
him I wouldn’t give him an answer till to-morrow.  Of course I am going
to take him.  And I dare say I’ll make him an admirable wife, as wives
go.  And there is a great deal of good in Lord Augustus.  Fortunately it
is all on the surface.  Just where good qualities should be.  Of course
you must help me in this matter.

LORD WINDERMERE.  I am not called on to encourage Lord Augustus, I
suppose?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Oh, no!  I do the encouraging.  But you will make me a
handsome settlement, Windermere, won’t you?

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Frowning_.]  Is that what you want to talk to me
about to-night?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Yes.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_With a gesture of impatience_.]  I will not talk of
it here.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Laughing_.]  Then we will talk of it on the terrace.
Even business should have a picturesque background.  Should it not,
Windermere?  With a proper background women can do anything.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Won’t to-morrow do as well?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  No; you see, to-morrow I am going to accept him.  And I
think it would be a good thing if I was able to tell him that I had—well,
what shall I say?—£2000 a year left to me by a third cousin—or a second
husband—or some distant relative of that kind.  It would be an additional
attraction, wouldn’t it?  You have a delightful opportunity now of paying
me a compliment, Windermere.  But you are not very clever at paying
compliments.  I am afraid Margaret doesn’t encourage you in that
excellent habit.  It’s a great mistake on her part.  When men give up
saying what is charming, they give up thinking what is charming.  But
seriously, what do you say to £2000?  £2500, I think.  In modern life
margin is everything.  Windermere, don’t you think the world an intensely
amusing place?  I do!

[_Exit on terrace with_ LORD WINDERMERE.  Music strikes up in ball-room.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  To stay in this house any longer is impossible.
To-night a man who loves me offered me his whole life.  I refused it.  It
was foolish of me.  I will offer him mine now.  I will give him mine.  I
will go to him!  [_Puts on cloak and goes to the door_, _then turns
back_.  _Sits down at table and writes a letter_, _puts it into an
envelope_, _and leaves it on table_.]  Arthur has never understood me.
When he reads this, he will.  He may do as he chooses now with his life.
I have done with mine as I think best, as I think right.  It is he who
has broken the bond of marriage—not I.  I only break its bondage.

                                                                 [_Exit_.]

[_PARKER enters L. and crosses towards the ball-room R._  _Enter_ MRS.
ERLYNNE.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Is Lady Windermere in the ball-room?

PARKER.  Her ladyship has just gone out.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Gone out?  She’s not on the terrace?

PARKER.  No, madam.  Her ladyship has just gone out of the house.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Starts_, _and looks at the servant with a puzzled
expression in her face_.]  Out of the house?

PARKER.  Yes, madam—her ladyship told me she had left a letter for his
lordship on the table.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  A letter for Lord Windermere?

PARKER.  Yes, madam.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Thank you.

[_Exit_ PARKER.  _The music in the ball-room stops_.]  Gone out of her
house!  A letter addressed to her husband!  [_Goes over to bureau and
looks at letter_.  _Takes it up and lays it down again with a shudder of
fear_.]  No, no!  It would be impossible!  Life doesn’t repeat its
tragedies like that!  Oh, why does this horrible fancy come across me?
Why do I remember now the one moment of my life I most wish to forget?
Does life repeat its tragedies?  [_Tears letter open and reads it_, _then
sinks down into a chair with a gesture of anguish_.]  Oh, how terrible!
The same words that twenty years ago I wrote to her father! and how
bitterly I have been punished for it!  No; my punishment, my real
punishment is to-night, is now!  [_Still seated R._]

[_Enter_ LORD WINDERMERE _L.U.E._]

LORD WINDERMERE.  Have you said good-night to my wife?  [_Comes C._]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Crushing letter in her hand_.]  Yes.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Where is she?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  She is very tired.  She has gone to bed.  She said she had
a headache.

LORD WINDERMERE.  I must go to her.  You’ll excuse me?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Rising hurriedly_.]  Oh, no!  It’s nothing serious.
She’s only very tired, that is all.  Besides, there are people still in
the supper-room.  She wants you to make her apologies to them.  She said
she didn’t wish to be disturbed.  [_Drops letter_.]  She asked me to tell
you!

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Picks up letter_.]  You have dropped something.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Oh yes, thank you, that is mine.  [_Puts out her hand to
take it_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Still looking at letter_.]  But it’s my wife’s
handwriting, isn’t it?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Takes the letter quickly_.]  Yes, it’s—an address.  Will
you ask them to call my carriage, please?

LORD WINDERMERE.  Certainly.

                                                     [_Goes L. and Exit_.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Thanks!  What can I do?  What can I do?  I feel a passion
awakening within me that I never felt before.  What can it mean?  The
daughter must not be like the mother—that would be terrible.  How can I
save her?  How can I save my child?  A moment may ruin a life.  Who knows
that better than I?  Windermere must be got out of the house; that is
absolutely necessary.  [_Goes L._]  But how shall I do it?  It must be
done somehow.  Ah!

[_Enter_ LORD AUGUSTUS _R.U.E. carrying bouquet_.]

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Dear lady, I am in such suspense!  May I not have an
answer to my request?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Lord Augustus, listen to me.  You are to take Lord
Windermere down to your club at once, and keep him there as long as
possible.  You understand?

LORD AUGUSTUS.  But you said you wished me to keep early hours!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Nervously_.]  Do what I tell you.  Do what I tell you.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  And my reward?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Your reward?  Your reward?  Oh! ask me that to-morrow.
But don’t let Windermere out of your sight to-night.  If you do I will
never forgive you.  I will never speak to you again.  I’ll have nothing
to do with you.  Remember you are to keep Windermere at your club, and
don’t let him come back to-night.

                                                               [_Exit L._]

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Well, really, I might be her husband already.  Positively
I might.  [_Follows her in a bewildered manner_.]

                                * * * * *

                                ACT DROP.




THIRD ACT


                                  SCENE

_Lord Darlington’s Rooms_.  _A large sofa is in front of fireplace R._
_At the back of the stage a curtain is drawn across the window_.  _Doors
L. and R._  _Table R. with writing materials.  Table C. with syphons,
glasses, and Tantalus frame_.  _Table L. with cigar and cigarette box.
Lamps lit_.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Standing by the fireplace_.]  Why doesn’t he come?
This waiting is horrible.  He should be here.  Why is he not here, to
wake by passionate words some fire within me?  I am cold—cold as a
loveless thing.  Arthur must have read my letter by this time.  If he
cared for me, he would have come after me, would have taken me back by
force.  But he doesn’t care.  He’s entrammelled by this woman—fascinated
by her—dominated by her.  If a woman wants to hold a man, she has merely
to appeal to what is worst in him.  We make gods of men and they leave
us.  Others make brutes of them and they fawn and are faithful.  How
hideous life is! . . . Oh! it was mad of me to come here, horribly mad.
And yet, which is the worst, I wonder, to be at the mercy of a man who
loves one, or the wife of a man who in one’s own house dishonours one?
What woman knows?  What woman in the whole world?  But will he love me
always, this man to whom I am giving my life?  What do I bring him?  Lips
that have lost the note of joy, eyes that are blinded by tears, chill
hands and icy heart.  I bring him nothing.  I must go back—no; I can’t go
back, my letter has put me in their power—Arthur would not take me back!
That fatal letter!  No!  Lord Darlington leaves England to-morrow.  I
will go with him—I have no choice.  [_Sits down for a few moments_.
_Then starts up and puts on her cloak_.]  No, no!  I will go back, let
Arthur do with me what he pleases.  I can’t wait here.  It has been
madness my coming.  I must go at once.  As for Lord Darlington—Oh! here
he is!  What shall I do?  What can I say to him?  Will he let me go away
at all?  I have heard that men are brutal, horrible . . . Oh!  [_Hides
her face in her hands_.]

[_Enter_ MRS. ERLYNNE _L._]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Lady Windermere!  [LADY WINDERMERE _starts and looks up_.
_Then recoils in contempt_.]  Thank Heaven I am in time.  You must go
back to your husband’s house immediately.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Must?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Authoritatively_.]  Yes, you must!  There is not a
second to be lost.  Lord Darlington may return at any moment.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Don’t come near me!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Oh!  You are on the brink of ruin, you are on the brink of
a hideous precipice.  You must leave this place at once, my carriage is
waiting at the corner of the street.  You must come with me and drive
straight home.

[LADY WINDERMERE _throws off her cloak and flings it on the sofa_.]

What are you doing?

LADY WINDERMERE.  Mrs. Erlynne—if you had not come here, I would have
gone back.  But now that I see you, I feel that nothing in the whole
world would induce me to live under the same roof as Lord Windermere.
You fill me with horror.  There is something about you that stirs the
wildest—rage within me.  And I know why you are here.  My husband sent
you to lure me back that I might serve as a blind to whatever relations
exist between you and him.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Oh!  You don’t think that—you can’t.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Go back to my husband, Mrs. Erlynne.  He belongs to you
and not to me.  I suppose he is afraid of a scandal.  Men are such
cowards.  They outrage every law of the world, and are afraid of the
world’s tongue.  But he had better prepare himself.  He shall have a
scandal.  He shall have the worst scandal there has been in London for
years.  He shall see his name in every vile paper, mine on every hideous
placard.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  No—no—

LADY WINDERMERE.  Yes! he shall.  Had he come himself, I admit I would
have gone back to the life of degradation you and he had prepared for
me—I was going back—but to stay himself at home, and to send you as his
messenger—oh! it was infamous—infamous.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_C._]  Lady Windermere, you wrong me horribly—you wrong
your husband horribly.  He doesn’t know you are here—he thinks you are
safe in your own house.  He thinks you are asleep in your own room.  He
never read the mad letter you wrote to him!

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_R._]  Never read it!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  No—he knows nothing about it.

LADY WINDERMERE.  How simple you think me!  [_Going to her_.]  You are
lying to me!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Restraining herself_.]  I am not.  I am telling you the
truth.

LADY WINDERMERE.  If my husband didn’t read my letter, how is it that you
are here?  Who told you I had left the house you were shameless enough to
enter?  Who told you where I had gone to?  My husband told you, and sent
you to decoy me back.  [_Crosses L._]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_R.C._]  Your husband has never seen the letter.  I—saw
it, I opened it.  I—read it.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Turning to her_.]  You opened a letter of mine to my
husband?  You wouldn’t dare!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Dare!  Oh! to save you from the abyss into which you are
falling, there is nothing in the world I would not dare, nothing in the
whole world.  Here is the letter.  Your husband has never read it.  He
never shall read it.  [_Going to fireplace_.]  It should never have been
written.  [_Tears it and throws it into the fire_.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_With infinite contempt in her voice and look_.]  How
do I know that that was my letter after all?  You seem to think the
commonest device can take me in!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Oh! why do you disbelieve everything I tell you?  What
object do you think I have in coming here, except to save you from utter
ruin, to save you from the consequence of a hideous mistake?  That letter
that is burnt now _was_ your letter.  I swear it to you!

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Slowly_.]  You took good care to burn it before I had
examined it.  I cannot trust you.  You, whose whole life is a lie, could
you speak the truth about anything?  [_Sits down_.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Hurriedly_.]  Think as you like about me—say what you
choose against me, but go back, go back to the husband you love.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Sullenly_.]  I do _not_ love him!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  You do, and you know that he loves you.

LADY WINDERMERE.  He does not understand what love is.  He understands it
as little as you do—but I see what you want.  It would be a great
advantage for you to get me back.  Dear Heaven! what a life I would have
then!  Living at the mercy of a woman who has neither mercy nor pity in
her, a woman whom it is an infamy to meet, a degradation to know, a vile
woman, a woman who comes between husband and wife!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_With a gesture of despair_.]  Lady Windermere, Lady
Windermere, don’t say such terrible things.  You don’t know how terrible
they are, how terrible and how unjust.  Listen, you must listen!  Only go
back to your husband, and I promise you never to communicate with him
again on any pretext—never to see him—never to have anything to do with
his life or yours.  The money that he gave me, he gave me not through
love, but through hatred, not in worship, but in contempt.  The hold I
have over him—

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Rising_.]  Ah! you admit you have a hold!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Yes, and I will tell you what it is.  It is his love for
you, Lady Windermere.

LADY WINDERMERE.  You expect me to believe that?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  You must believe it!  It is true.  It is his love for you
that has made him submit to—oh! call it what you like, tyranny, threats,
anything you choose.  But it is his love for you.  His desire to spare
you—shame, yes, shame and disgrace.

LADY WINDERMERE.  What do you mean?  You are insolent!  What have I to do
with you?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Humbly_.]  Nothing.  I know it—but I tell you that your
husband loves you—that you may never meet with such love again in your
whole life—that such love you will never meet—and that if you throw it
away, the day may come when you will starve for love and it will not be
given to you, beg for love and it will be denied you—Oh! Arthur loves
you!

LADY WINDERMERE.  Arthur?  And you tell me there is nothing between you?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Lady Windermere, before Heaven your husband is guiltless
of all offence towards you!  And I—I tell you that had it ever occurred
to me that such a monstrous suspicion would have entered your mind, I
would have died rather than have crossed your life or his—oh! died,
gladly died!  [_Moves away to sofa R._]

LADY WINDERMERE.  You talk as if you had a heart.  Women like you have no
hearts.  Heart is not in you.  You are bought and sold.  [_Sits L.C._]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Starts_, _with a gesture of pain_.  _Then restrains
herself_, _and comes over to where_ LADY WINDERMERE _is sitting_.  _As
she speaks_, _she stretches out her hands towards her_, _but does not
dare to touch her_.]  Believe what you choose about me.  I am not worth a
moment’s sorrow.  But don’t spoil your beautiful young life on my
account!  You don’t know what may be in store for you, unless you leave
this house at once.  You don’t know what it is to fall into the pit, to
be despised, mocked, abandoned, sneered at—to be an outcast! to find the
door shut against one, to have to creep in by hideous byways, afraid
every moment lest the mask should be stripped from one’s face, and all
the while to hear the laughter, the horrible laughter of the world, a
thing more tragic than all the tears the world has ever shed.  You don’t
know what it is.  One pays for one’s sin, and then one pays again, and
all one’s life one pays.  You must never know that.—As for me, if
suffering be an expiation, then at this moment I have expiated all my
faults, whatever they have been; for to-night you have made a heart in
one who had it not, made it and broken it.—But let that pass.  I may have
wrecked my own life, but I will not let you wreck yours.  You—why, you
are a mere girl, you would be lost.  You haven’t got the kind of brains
that enables a woman to get back.  You have neither the wit nor the
courage.  You couldn’t stand dishonour!  No!  Go back, Lady Windermere,
to the husband who loves you, whom you love.  You have a child, Lady
Windermere.  Go back to that child who even now, in pain or in joy, may
be calling to you.  [LADY WINDERMERE _rises_.]  God gave you that child.
He will require from you that you make his life fine, that you watch over
him.  What answer will you make to God if his life is ruined through you?
Back to your house, Lady Windermere—your husband loves you!  He has never
swerved for a moment from the love he bears you.  But even if he had a
thousand loves, you must stay with your child.  If he was harsh to you,
you must stay with your child.  If he ill-treated you, you must stay with
your child.  If he abandoned you, your place is with your child.

[LADY WINDERMERE _bursts into tears and buries her face in her hands_.]

[_Rushing to her_.]  Lady Windermere!

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Holding out her hands to her_, _helplessly_, _as a
child might do_.]  Take me home.  Take me home.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Is about to embrace her_.  _Then restrains herself_.
_There is a look of wonderful joy in her face_.]  Come!  Where is your
cloak?  [_Getting it from sofa_.]  Here.  Put it on.  Come at once!

[_They go to the door_.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  Stop!  Don’t you hear voices?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  No, no!  There was no one!

LADY WINDERMERE.  Yes, there is!  Listen!  Oh! that is my husband’s
voice!  He is coming in!  Save me!  Oh, it’s some plot!  You have sent
for him.

[_Voices outside_.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Silence!  I’m here to save you, if I can.  But I fear it
is too late!  There! [_Points to the curtain across the window_.]  The
first chance you have, slip out, if you ever get a chance!

LADY WINDERMERE.  But you?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Oh! never mind me.  I’ll face them.

[LADY WINDERMERE _hides herself behind the curtain_.]

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [_Outside_.]  Nonsense, dear Windermere, you must not
leave me!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Lord Augustus!  Then it is I who am lost!  [_Hesitates for
a moment_, then _looks round and sees door R._, _and exits through it_.]

[_Enter_ LORD DARLINGTON, MR. DUMBY, LORD WINDERMERE, LORD AUGUSTUS
LORTON, _and_ MR. CECIL GRAHAM.

DUMBY.  What a nuisance their turning us out of the club at this hour!
It’s only two o’clock.  [_Sinks into a chair_.]  The lively part of the
evening is only just beginning.  [_Yawns and closes his eyes_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  It is very good of you, Lord Darlington, allowing
Augustus to force our company on you, but I’m afraid I can’t stay long.

LORD DARLINGTON.  Really!  I am so sorry!  You’ll take a cigar, won’t
you?

LORD WINDERMERE.  Thanks!  [_Sits down_.]

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [_To_ LORD WINDERMERE.]  My dear boy, you must not dream
of going.  I have a great deal to talk to you about, of demmed
importance, too.  [_Sits down with him at L. table_.]

CECIL GRAHAM.  Oh!  We all know what that is!  Tuppy can’t talk about
anything but Mrs. Erlynne.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Well, that is no business of yours, is it, Cecil?

CECIL GRAHAM.  None!  That is why it interests me.  My own business
always bores me to death.  I prefer other people’s.

LORD DARLINGTON.  Have something to drink, you fellows.  Cecil, you’ll
have a whisky and soda?

CECIL GRAHAM.  Thanks.  [_Goes to table with_ LORD DARLINGTON.]  Mrs.
Erlynne looked very handsome to-night, didn’t she?

LORD DARLINGTON.  I am not one of her admirers.

CECIL GRAHAM.  I usen’t to be, but I am now.  Why! she actually made me
introduce her to poor dear Aunt Caroline.  I believe she is going to
lunch there.

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_In Purple_.]  No?

CECIL GRAHAM.  She is, really.

LORD DARLINGTON.  Excuse me, you fellows.  I’m going away to-morrow.  And
I have to write a few letters.  [_Goes to writing table and sits down_.]

DUMBY.  Clever woman, Mrs. Erlynne.

CECIL GRAHAM.  Hallo, Dumby!  I thought you were asleep.

DUMBY.  I am, I usually am!

LORD AUGUSTUS.  A very clever woman.  Knows perfectly well what a demmed
fool I am—knows it as well as I do myself.

[CECIL GRAHAM _comes towards him laughing_.]

Ah, you may laugh, my boy, but it is a great thing to come across a woman
who thoroughly understands one.

DUMBY.  It is an awfully dangerous thing.  They always end by marrying
one.

CECIL GRAHAM.  But I thought, Tuppy, you were never going to see her
again!  Yes! you told me so yesterday evening at the club.  You said
you’d heard—

[_Whispering to him_.]

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Oh, she’s explained that.

CECIL GRAHAM.  And the Wiesbaden affair?

LORD AUGUSTUS.  She’s explained that too.

DUMBY.  And her income, Tuppy?  Has she explained that?

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [_In a very serious voice_.]  She’s going to explain that
to-morrow.

[CECIL GRAHAM _goes back to C. table_.]

DUMBY.  Awfully commercial, women nowadays.  Our grandmothers threw their
caps over the mills, of course, but, by Jove, their granddaughters only
throw their caps over mills that can raise the wind for them.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  You want to make her out a wicked woman.  She is not!

CECIL GRAHAM.  Oh!  Wicked women bother one.  Good women bore one.  That
is the only difference between them.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [_Puffing a cigar_.]  Mrs. Erlynne has a future before
her.

DUMBY.  Mrs. Erlynne has a past before her.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  I prefer women with a past.  They’re always so demmed
amusing to talk to.

CECIL GRAHAM.  Well, you’ll have lots of topics of conversation with
_her_, Tuppy.  [_Rising and going to him_.]

LORD AUGUSTUS.  You’re getting annoying, dear-boy; you’re getting demmed
annoying.

CECIL GRAHAM.  [_Puts his hands on his shoulders_.]  Now, Tuppy, you’ve
lost your figure and you’ve lost your character.  Don’t lose your temper;
you have only got one.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  My dear boy, if I wasn’t the most good-natured man in
London—

CECIL GRAHAM.  We’d treat you with more respect, wouldn’t we, Tuppy?
[_Strolls away_.]

DUMBY.  The youth of the present day are quite monstrous.  They have
absolutely no respect for dyed hair.  [LORD AUGUSTUS _looks round
angrily_.]

CECIL GRAHAM.  Mrs. Erlynne has a very great respect for dear Tuppy.

DUMBY.  Then Mrs. Erlynne sets an admirable example to the rest of her
sex.  It is perfectly brutal the way most women nowadays behave to men
who are not their husbands.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Dumby, you are ridiculous, and Cecil, you let your
tongue run away with you.  You must leave Mrs. Erlynne alone.  You don’t
really know anything about her, and you’re always talking scandal against
her.

CECIL GRAHAM.  [_Coming towards him L.C._]  My dear Arthur, I never talk
scandal.  _I_ only talk gossip.

LORD WINDERMERE.  What is the difference between scandal and gossip?

CECIL GRAHAM.  Oh! gossip is charming!  History is merely gossip.  But
scandal is gossip made tedious by morality.  Now, I never moralise.  A
man who moralises is usually a hypocrite, and a woman who moralises is
invariably plain.  There is nothing in the whole world so unbecoming to a
woman as a Nonconformist conscience.  And most women know it, I’m glad to
say.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Just my sentiments, dear boy, just my sentiments.

CECIL GRAHAM.  Sorry to hear it, Tuppy; whenever people agree with me, I
always feel I must be wrong.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  My dear boy, when I was your age—

CECIL GRAHAM.  But you never were, Tuppy, and you never will be.  [_Goes
up C._]  I say, Darlington, let us have some cards.  You’ll play, Arthur,
won’t you?

LORD WINDERMERE.  No, thanks, Cecil.

DUMBY.  [_With a sigh_.]  Good heavens! how marriage ruins a man!  It’s
as demoralising as cigarettes, and far more expensive.

CECIL GRAHAM.  You’ll play, of course, Tuppy?

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [_Pouring himself out a brandy and soda at table_.]
Can’t, dear boy.  Promised Mrs. Erlynne never to play or drink again.

CECIL GRAHAM.  Now, my dear Tuppy, don’t be led astray into the paths of
virtue.  Reformed, you would be perfectly tedious.  That is the worst of
women.  They always want one to be good.  And if we are good, when they
meet us, they don’t love us at all.  They like to find us quite
irretrievably bad, and to leave us quite unattractively good.

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Rising from R. table_, _where he has been writing
letters_.]  They always do find us bad!

DUMBY.  I don’t think we are bad.  I think we are all good, except Tuppy.

LORD DARLINGTON.  No, we are all in the gutter, but some of us are
looking at the stars.  [_Sits down at C. table_.]

DUMBY.  We are all in the gutter, but some of us are looking at the
stars?  Upon my word, you are very romantic to-night, Darlington.

CECIL GRAHAM.  Too romantic!  You must be in love.  Who is the girl?

LORD DARLINGTON.  The woman I love is not free, or thinks she isn’t.
[_Glances instinctively at_ LORD WINDERMERE _while he speaks_.]

CECIL GRAHAM.  A married woman, then!  Well, there’s nothing in the world
like the devotion of a married woman.  It’s a thing no married man knows
anything about.

LORD DARLINGTON.  Oh! she doesn’t love me.  She is a good woman.  She is
the only good woman I have ever met in my life.

CECIL GRAHAM.  The only good woman you have ever met in your life?

LORD DARLINGTON.  Yes!

CECIL GRAHAM.  [_Lighting a cigarette_.]  Well, you are a lucky fellow!
Why, I have met hundreds of good women.  I never seem to meet any but
good women.  The world is perfectly packed with good women.  To know them
is a middle-class education.

LORD DARLINGTON.  This woman has purity and innocence.  She has
everything we men have lost.

CECIL GRAHAM.  My dear fellow, what on earth should we men do going about
with purity and innocence?  A carefully thought-out buttonhole is much
more effective.

DUMBY.  She doesn’t really love you then?

LORD DARLINGTON.  No, she does not!

DUMBY.  I congratulate you, my dear fellow.  In this world there are only
two tragedies.  One is not getting what one wants, and the other is
getting it.  The last is much the worst; the last is a real tragedy!  But
I am interested to hear she does not love you.  How long could you love a
woman who didn’t love you, Cecil?

CECIL GRAHAM.  A woman who didn’t love me?  Oh, all my life!

DUMBY.  So could I.  But it’s so difficult to meet one.

LORD DARLINGTON.  How can you be so conceited, DUMBY?

DUMBY.  I didn’t say it as a matter of conceit.  I said it as a matter of
regret.  I have been wildly, madly adored.  I am sorry I have.  It has
been an immense nuisance.  I should like to be allowed a little time to
myself now and then.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [_Looking round_.]  Time to educate yourself, I suppose.

DUMBY.  No, time to forget all I have learned.  That is much more
important, dear Tuppy.  [LORD AUGUSTUS _moves uneasily in his chair_.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  What cynics you fellows are!

CECIL GRAHAM.  What is a cynic?  [_Sitting on the back of the sofa_.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  A man who knows the price of everything and the value
of nothing.

CECIL GRAHAM.  And a sentimentalist, my dear Darlington, is a man who
sees an absurd value in everything, and doesn’t know the market price of
any single thing.

LORD DARLINGTON.  You always amuse me, Cecil.  You talk as if you were a
man of experience.

CECIL GRAHAM.  I am.  [_Moves up to front off fireplace_.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  You are far too young!

CECIL GRAHAM.  That is a great error.  Experience is a question of
instinct about life.  I have got it.  Tuppy hasn’t.  Experience is the
name Tuppy gives to his mistakes.  That is all.  [LORD AUGUSTUS _looks
round indignantly_.]

DUMBY.  Experience is the name every one gives to their mistakes.

CECIL GRAHAM.  [_Standing with his back to the fireplace_.]  One
shouldn’t commit any.  [_Sees_ LADY WINDERMERE’S _fan on sofa_.]

DUMBY.  Life would be very dull without them.

CECIL GRAHAM.  Of course you are quite faithful to this woman you are in
love with, Darlington, to this good woman?

LORD DARLINGTON.  Cecil, if one really loves a woman, all other women in
the world become absolutely meaningless to one.  Love changes one—_I_ am
changed.

CECIL GRAHAM.  Dear me!  How very interesting!  Tuppy, I want to talk to
you.  [LORD AUGUSTUS _takes no notice_.]

DUMBY.  It’s no use talking to Tuppy.  You might just as well talk to a
brick wall.

CECIL GRAHAM.  But I like talking to a brick wall—it’s the only thing in
the world that never contradicts me!  Tuppy!

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Well, what is it?  What is it?  [_Rising and going over
to_ CECIL GRAHAM.]

CECIL GRAHAM.  Come over here.  I want you particularly.  [_Aside_.]
Darlington has been moralising and talking about the purity of love, and
that sort of thing, and he has got some woman in his rooms all the time.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  No, really! really!

CECIL GRAHAM.  [_In a low voice_.]  Yes, here is her fan.  [_Points to
the fan_.]

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [_Chuckling_.]  By Jove!  By Jove!

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Up by door_.]  I am really off now, Lord Darlington.
I am sorry you are leaving England so soon.  Pray call on us when you
come back!  My wife and I will be charmed to see you!

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Upstage with_ LORD WINDERMERE.]  I am afraid I shall
be away for many years.  Good-night!

CECIL GRAHAM.  Arthur!

LORD WINDERMERE.  What?

CECIL GRAHAM.  I want to speak to you for a moment.  No, do come!

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Putting on his coat_.]  I can’t—I’m off!

CECIL GRAHAM.  It is something very particular.  It will interest you
enormously.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Smiling_.]  It is some of your nonsense, Cecil.

CECIL GRAHAM.  It isn’t!  It isn’t really.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [_Going to him_.]  My dear fellow, you mustn’t go yet.  I
have a lot to talk to you about.  And Cecil has something to show you.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Walking over_.]  Well, what is it?

CECIL GRAHAM.  Darlington has got a woman here in his rooms.  Here is her
fan.  Amusing, isn’t it?  [_A pause_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  Good God!  [_Seizes the fan_—DUMBY _rises_.]

CECIL GRAHAM.  What is the matter?

LORD WINDERMERE.  Lord Darlington!

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Turning round_.]  Yes!

LORD WINDERMERE.  What is my wife’s fan doing here in your rooms?  Hands
off, Cecil.  Don’t touch me.

LORD DARLINGTON.  Your wife’s fan?

LORD WINDERMERE.  Yes, here it is!

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Walking towards him_.]  I don’t know!

LORD WINDERMERE.  You must know.  I demand an explanation.  Don’t hold
me, you fool.  [_To_ CECIL GRAHAM.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Aside_.]  She is here after all!

LORD WINDERMERE.  Speak, sir!  Why is my wife’s fan here?  Answer me!  By
God!  I’ll search your rooms, and if my wife’s here, I’ll—  [_Moves_.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  You shall not search my rooms.  You have no right to do
so.  I forbid you!

LORD WINDERMERE.  You scoundrel!  I’ll not leave your room till I have
searched every corner of it!  What moves behind that curtain?  [_Rushes
towards the curtain C._]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Enters behind R._]  Lord Windermere!

LORD WINDERMERE.  Mrs. Erlynne!

[_Every one starts and turns round_.  LADY WINDERMERE _slips out from
behind the curtain and glides from the room L._]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  I am afraid I took your wife’s fan in mistake for my own,
when I was leaving your house to-night.  I am so sorry.  [_Takes fan from
him_.  LORD WINDERMERE _looks at her in contempt_.  LORD DARLINGTON _in
mingled astonishment and anger_.  LORD AUGUSTUS _turns away_.  _The other
men smile at each other_.]

                                ACT DROP.




FOURTH ACT


                         SCENE—Same as in Act I.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Lying on sofa_.]  How can I tell him?  I can’t tell
him.  It would kill me.  I wonder what happened after I escaped from that
horrible room.  Perhaps she told them the true reason of her being there,
and the real meaning of that—fatal fan of mine.  Oh, if he knows—how can
I look him in the face again?  He would never forgive me.  [_Touches
bell_.]  How securely one thinks one lives—out of reach of temptation,
sin, folly.  And then suddenly—Oh!  Life is terrible.  It rules us, we do
not rule it.

[_Enter_ ROSALIE _R._]

ROSALIE.  Did your ladyship ring for me?

LADY WINDERMERE.  Yes.  Have you found out at what time Lord Windermere
came in last night?

ROSALIE.  His lordship did not come in till five o’clock.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Five o’clock?  He knocked at my door this morning,
didn’t he?

ROSALIE.  Yes, my lady—at half-past nine.  I told him your ladyship was
not awake yet.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Did he say anything?

ROSALIE.  Something about your ladyship’s fan.  I didn’t quite catch what
his lordship said.  Has the fan been lost, my lady?  I can’t find it, and
Parker says it was not left in any of the rooms.  He has looked in all of
them and on the terrace as well.

LADY WINDERMERE.  It doesn’t matter.  Tell Parker not to trouble.  That
will do.

                                                         [_Exit_ ROSALIE.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Rising_.]  She is sure to tell him.  I can fancy a
person doing a wonderful act of self-sacrifice, doing it spontaneously,
recklessly, nobly—and afterwards finding out that it costs too much.  Why
should she hesitate between her ruin and mine? . . . How strange!  I
would have publicly disgraced her in my own house.  She accepts public
disgrace in the house of another to save me. . . . There is a bitter
irony in things, a bitter irony in the way we talk of good and bad women.
. . . Oh, what a lesson! and what a pity that in life we only get our
lessons when they are of no use to us!  For even if she doesn’t tell, I
must.  Oh! the shame of it, the shame of it.  To tell it is to live
through it all again.  Actions are the first tragedy in life, words are
the second.  Words are perhaps the worst.  Words are merciless. . . . Oh!
[_Starts as_ LORD WINDERMERE _enters_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Kisses her_.]  Margaret—how pale you look!

LADY WINDERMERE.  I slept very badly.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Sitting on sofa with her_.]  I am so sorry.  I came
in dreadfully late, and didn’t like to wake you.  You are crying, dear.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Yes, I am crying, for I have something to tell you,
Arthur.

LORD WINDERMERE.  My dear child, you are not well.  You’ve been doing too
much.  Let us go away to the country.  You’ll be all right at Selby.  The
season is almost over.  There is no use staying on.  Poor darling!  We’ll
go away to-day, if you like.  [_Rises_.]  We can easily catch the 3.40.
I’ll send a wire to Fannen.  [_Crosses and sits down at table to write a
telegram_.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  Yes; let us go away to-day.  No; I can’t go to-day,
Arthur.  There is some one I must see before I leave town—some one who
has been kind to me.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Rising and leaning over sofa_.]  Kind to you?

LADY WINDERMERE.  Far more than that.  [_Rises and goes to him_.]  I will
tell you, Arthur, but only love me, love me as you used to love me.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Used to?  You are not thinking of that wretched woman
who came here last night?  [_Coming round and sitting R. of her_.]  You
don’t still imagine—no, you couldn’t.

LADY WINDERMERE.  I don’t.  I know now I was wrong and foolish.

LORD WINDERMERE.  It was very good of you to receive her last night—but
you are never to see her again.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Why do you say that?  [_A pause_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Holding her hand_.]  Margaret, I thought Mrs. Erlynne
was a woman more sinned against than sinning, as the phrase goes.  I
thought she wanted to be good, to get back into a place that she had lost
by a moment’s folly, to lead again a decent life.  I believed what she
told me—I was mistaken in her.  She is bad—as bad as a woman can be.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Arthur, Arthur, don’t talk so bitterly about any woman.
I don’t think now that people can be divided into the good and the bad as
though they were two separate races or creations.  What are called good
women may have terrible things in them, mad moods of recklessness,
assertion, jealousy, sin.  Bad women, as they are termed, may have in
them sorrow, repentance, pity, sacrifice.  And I don’t think Mrs. Erlynne
a bad woman—I know she’s not.

LORD WINDERMERE.  My dear child, the woman’s impossible.  No matter what
harm she tries to do us, you must never see her again.  She is
inadmissible anywhere.

LADY WINDERMERE.  But I want to see her.  I want her to come here.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Never!

LADY WINDERMERE.  She came here once as _your_ guest.  She must come now
as _mine_.  That is but fair.

LORD WINDERMERE.  She should never have come here.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Rising_.]  It is too late, Arthur, to say that now.
[_Moves away_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Rising_.]  Margaret, if you knew where Mrs. Erlynne
went last night, after she left this house, you would not sit in the same
room with her.  It was absolutely shameless, the whole thing.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Arthur, I can’t bear it any longer.  I must tell you.
Last night—

[_Enter_ PARKER _with a tray on which lie_ LADY WINDERMERE’S _fan and a
card_.]

PARKER.  Mrs. Erlynne has called to return your ladyship’s fan which she
took away by mistake last night.  Mrs. Erlynne has written a message on
the card.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Oh, ask Mrs. Erlynne to be kind enough to come up.
[_Reads card_.]  Say I shall be very glad to see her.

                                                          [_Exit_ PARKER.]

She wants to see me, Arthur.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Takes card and looks at it_.]  Margaret, I _beg_ you
not to.  Let me see her first, at any rate.  She’s a very dangerous
woman.  She is the most dangerous woman I know.  You don’t realise what
you’re doing.

LADY WINDERMERE.  It is right that I should see her.

LORD WINDERMERE.  My child, you may be on the brink of a great sorrow.
Don’t go to meet it.  It is absolutely necessary that I should see her
before you do.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Why should it be necessary?

[_Enter_ PARKER.]

PARKER.  Mrs. Erlynne.

[_Enter_ MRS. ERLYNNE.]

                                                          [_Exit_ PARKER.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  How do you do, Lady Windermere?  [_To_ LORD WINDERMERE.]
How do you do?  Do you know, Lady Windermere, I am so sorry about your
fan.  I can’t imagine how I made such a silly mistake.  Most stupid of
me.  And as I was driving in your direction, I thought I would take the
opportunity of returning your property in person with many apologies for
my carelessness, and of bidding you good-bye.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Good-bye?  [_Moves towards sofa with_ MRS. ERLYNNE _and
sits down beside her_.]  Are you going away, then, Mrs. Erlynne?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Yes; I am going to live abroad again.  The English climate
doesn’t suit me.  My—heart is affected here, and that I don’t like.  I
prefer living in the south.  London is too full of fogs and—and serious
people, Lord Windermere.  Whether the fogs produce the serious people or
whether the serious people produce the fogs, I don’t know, but the whole
thing rather gets on my nerves, and so I’m leaving this afternoon by the
Club Train.

LADY WINDERMERE.  This afternoon?  But I wanted so much to come and see
you.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  How kind of you!  But I am afraid I have to go.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Shall I never see you again, Mrs. Erlynne?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  I am afraid not.  Our lives lie too far apart.  But there
is a little thing I would like you to do for me.  I want a photograph of
you, Lady Windermere—would you give me one?  You don’t know how gratified
I should be.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Oh, with pleasure.  There is one on that table.  I’ll
show it to you. [_Goes across to the table_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Coming up to_ MRS. ERLYNNE _and speaking in a low
voice_.]  It is monstrous your intruding yourself here after your conduct
last night.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_With an amused smile_.]  My dear Windermere, manners
before morals!

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Returning_.]  I’m afraid it is very flattering—I am
not so pretty as that.  [_Showing photograph_.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  You are much prettier.  But haven’t you got one of
yourself with your little boy?

LADY WINDERMERE.  I have.  Would you prefer one of those?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Yes.

LADY WINDERMERE.  I’ll go and get it for you, if you’ll excuse me for a
moment.  I have one upstairs.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  So sorry, Lady Windermere, to give you so much trouble.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Moves to door R._]  No trouble at all, Mrs. Erlynne.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Thanks so much.

[_Exit_ LADY WINDERMERE _R._]  You seem rather out of temper this
morning, Windermere.  Why should you be?  Margaret and I get on
charmingly together.

LORD WINDERMERE.  I can’t bear to see you with her.  Besides, you have
not told me the truth, Mrs. Erlynne.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  I have not told _her_ the truth, you mean.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Standing C._]  I sometimes wish you had.  I should
have been spared then the misery, the anxiety, the annoyance of the last
six months.  But rather than my wife should know—that the mother whom she
was taught to consider as dead, the mother whom she has mourned as dead,
is living—a divorced woman, going about under an assumed name, a bad
woman preying upon life, as I know you now to be—rather than that, I was
ready to supply you with money to pay bill after bill, extravagance after
extravagance, to risk what occurred yesterday, the first quarrel I have
ever had with my wife.  You don’t understand what that means to me.  How
could you?  But I tell you that the only bitter words that ever came from
those sweet lips of hers were on your account, and I hate to see you next
her.  You sully the innocence that is in her. [_Moves L.C._]  And then I
used to think that with all your faults you were frank and honest.  You
are not.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Why do you say that?

LORD WINDERMERE.  You made me get you an invitation to my wife’s ball.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  For my daughter’s ball—yes.

LORD WINDERMERE.  You came, and within an hour of your leaving the house
you are found in a man’s rooms—you are disgraced before every one.
[_Goes up stage C._]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Yes.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Turning round on her_.]  Therefore I have a right to
look upon you as what you are—a worthless, vicious woman.  I have the
right to tell you never to enter this house, never to attempt to come
near my wife—

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Coldly_.]  My daughter, you mean.

LORD WINDERMERE.  You have no right to claim her as your daughter.  You
left her, abandoned her when she was but a child in the cradle, abandoned
her for your lover, who abandoned you in turn.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Rising_.]  Do you count that to his credit, Lord
Windermere—or to mine?

LORD WINDERMERE.  To his, now that I know you.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Take care—you had better be careful.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Oh, I am not going to mince words for you.  I know you
thoroughly.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Looks steadily at him_.]  I question that.

LORD WINDERMERE.  I _do_ know you.  For twenty years of your life you
lived without your child, without a thought of your child.  One day you
read in the papers that she had married a rich man.  You saw your hideous
chance.  You knew that to spare her the ignominy of learning that a woman
like you was her mother, I would endure anything.  You began your
blackmailing.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Shrugging her shoulders_.]  Don’t use ugly words,
Windermere.  They are vulgar.  I saw my chance, it is true, and took it.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Yes, you took it—and spoiled it all last night by being
found out.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_With a strange smile_.]  You are quite right, I spoiled
it all last night.

LORD WINDERMERE.  And as for your blunder in taking my wife’s fan from
here and then leaving it about in Darlington’s rooms, it is unpardonable.
I can’t bear the sight of it now.  I shall never let my wife use it
again.  The thing is soiled for me.  You should have kept it and not
brought it back.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  I think I shall keep it.  [_Goes up_.]  It’s extremely
pretty.  [_Takes up fan_.]  I shall ask Margaret to give it to me.

LORD WINDERMERE.  I hope my wife will give it you.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Oh, I’m sure she will have no objection.

LORD WINDERMERE.  I wish that at the same time she would give you a
miniature she kisses every night before she prays—It’s the miniature of a
young innocent-looking girl with beautiful _dark_ hair.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Ah, yes, I remember.  How long ago that seems!  [_Goes to
sofa and sits down_.]  It was done before I was married.  Dark hair and
an innocent expression were the fashion then, Windermere!  [_A pause_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  What do you mean by coming here this morning?  What is
your object?  [_Crossing L.C. and sitting_.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_With a note of irony in her voice_.]  To bid good-bye to
my dear daughter, of course.  [LORD WINDERMERE _bites his under lip in
anger_.  MRS. ERLYNNE _looks at him_, _and her voice and manner become
serious_.  _In her accents at she talks there is a note of deep tragedy_.
_For a moment she reveals herself_.]  Oh, don’t imagine I am going to
have a pathetic scene with her, weep on her neck and tell her who I am,
and all that kind of thing.  I have no ambition to play the part of a
mother.  Only once in my life have I known a mother’s feelings.  That was
last night.  They were terrible—they made me suffer—they made me suffer
too much.  For twenty years, as you say, I have lived childless,—I want
to live childless still.  [_Hiding her feelings with a trivial laugh_.]
Besides, my dear Windermere, how on earth could I pose as a mother with a
grown-up daughter?  Margaret is twenty-one, and I have never admitted
that I am more than twenty-nine, or thirty at the most.  Twenty-nine when
there are pink shades, thirty when there are not.  So you see what
difficulties it would involve.  No, as far as I am concerned, let your
wife cherish the memory of this dead, stainless mother.  Why should I
interfere with her illusions?  I find it hard enough to keep my own.  I
lost one illusion last night.  I thought I had no heart.  I find I have,
and a heart doesn’t suit me, Windermere.  Somehow it doesn’t go with
modern dress.  It makes one look old.  [_Takes up hand-mirror from table
and looks into it_.]  And it spoils one’s career at critical moments.

LORD WINDERMERE.  You fill me with horror—with absolute horror.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Rising_.]  I suppose, Windermere, you would like me to
retire into a convent, or become a hospital nurse, or something of that
kind, as people do in silly modern novels.  That is stupid of you,
Arthur; in real life we don’t do such things—not as long as we have any
good looks left, at any rate.  No—what consoles one nowadays is not
repentance, but pleasure.  Repentance is quite out of date.  And besides,
if a woman really repents, she has to go to a bad dressmaker, otherwise
no one believes in her.  And nothing in the world would induce me to do
that.  No; I am going to pass entirely out of your two lives.  My coming
into them has been a mistake—I discovered that last night.

LORD WINDERMERE.  A fatal mistake.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Smiling_.]  Almost fatal.

LORD WINDERMERE.  I am sorry now I did not tell my wife the whole thing
at once.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  I regret my bad actions.  You regret your good ones—that
is the difference between us.

LORD WINDERMERE.  I don’t trust you.  I _will_ tell my wife.  It’s better
for her to know, and from me.  It will cause her infinite pain—it will
humiliate her terribly, but it’s right that she should know.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  You propose to tell her?

LORD WINDERMERE.  I am going to tell her.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Going up to him_.]  If you do, I will make my name so
infamous that it will mar every moment of her life.  It will ruin her,
and make her wretched.  If you dare to tell her, there is no depth of
degradation I will not sink to, no pit of shame I will not enter.  You
shall not tell her—I forbid you.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Why?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_After a pause_.]  If I said to you that I cared for her,
perhaps loved her even—you would sneer at me, wouldn’t you?

LORD WINDERMERE.  I should feel it was not true.  A mother’s love means
devotion, unselfishness, sacrifice.  What could you know of such things?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  You are right.  What could I know of such things?  Don’t
let us talk any more about it—as for telling my daughter who I am, that I
do not allow.  It is my secret, it is not yours.  If I make up my mind to
tell her, and I think I will, I shall tell her before I leave the
house—if not, I shall never tell her.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Angrily_.]  Then let me beg of you to leave our house
at once.  I will make your excuses to Margaret.

[_Enter_ LADY WINDERMERE _R._  _She goes over to_ MRS. ERLYNNE _with the
photograph in her hand_.  LORD WINDERMERE _moves to back of sofa_, _and
anxiously watches_ MRS. ERLYNNE _as the scene progresses_.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  I am so sorry, Mrs. Erlynne, to have kept you waiting.
I couldn’t find the photograph anywhere.  At last I discovered it in my
husband’s dressing-room—he had stolen it.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Takes the photograph from her and looks at it_.]  I am
not surprised—it is charming.  [_Goes over to sofa with_ LADY WINDERMERE,
_and sits down beside her_.  _Looks again at the photograph_.]  And so
that is your little boy!  What is he called?

LADY WINDERMERE.  Gerard, after my dear father.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Laying the photograph down_.]  Really?

LADY WINDERMERE.  Yes.  If it had been a girl, I would have called it
after my mother.  My mother had the same name as myself, Margaret.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  My name is Margaret too.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Indeed!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Yes.  [_Pause_.]  You are devoted to your mother’s memory,
Lady Windermere, your husband tells me.

LADY WINDERMERE.  We all have ideals in life.  At least we all should
have.  Mine is my mother.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Ideals are dangerous things.  Realities are better.  They
wound, but they’re better.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Shaking her head_.]  If I lost my ideals, I should
lose everything.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Everything?

LADY WINDERMERE.  Yes.  [_Pause_.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Did your father often speak to you of your mother?

LADY WINDERMERE.  No, it gave him too much pain.  He told me how my
mother had died a few months after I was born.  His eyes filled with
tears as he spoke.  Then he begged me never to mention her name to him
again.  It made him suffer even to hear it.  My father—my father really
died of a broken heart.  His was the most ruined life know.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Rising_.]  I am afraid I must go now, Lady Windermere.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Rising_.]  Oh no, don’t.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  I think I had better.  My carriage must have come back by
this time.  I sent it to Lady Jedburgh’s with a note.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Arthur, would you mind seeing if Mrs. Erlynne’s
carriage has come back?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Pray don’t trouble, Lord Windermere.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Yes, Arthur, do go, please.

[LORD WINDERMERE _hesitated for a moment and looks at_ MRS. ERLYNNE.
_She remains quite impassive_.  _He leaves the room_.]

[_To_ MRS. ERLYNNE.]  Oh!  What am I to say to you?  You saved me last
night?  [_Goes towards her_.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Hush—don’t speak of it.

LADY WINDERMERE.  I must speak of it.  I can’t let you think that I am
going to accept this sacrifice.  I am not.  It is too great.  I am going
to tell my husband everything.  It is my duty.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  It is not your duty—at least you have duties to others
besides him.  You say you owe me something?

LADY WINDERMERE.  I owe you everything.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Then pay your debt by silence.  That is the only way in
which it can be paid.  Don’t spoil the one good thing I have done in my
life by telling it to any one.  Promise me that what passed last night
will remain a secret between us.  You must not bring misery into your
husband’s life.  Why spoil his love?  You must not spoil it.  Love is
easily killed.  Oh! how easily love is killed.  Pledge me your word, Lady
Windermere, that you will never tell him.  I insist upon it.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_With bowed head_.]  It is your will, not mine.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Yes, it is my will.  And never forget your child—I like to
think of you as a mother.  I like you to think of yourself as one.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Looking up_.]  I always will now.  Only once in my
life I have forgotten my own mother—that was last night.  Oh, if I had
remembered her I should not have been so foolish, so wicked.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_With a slight shudder_.]  Hush, last night is quite
over.

[_Enter_ LORD WINDERMERE.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  Your carriage has not come back yet, Mrs. Erlynne.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  It makes no matter.  I’ll take a hansom.  There is nothing
in the world so respectable as a good Shrewsbury and Talbot.  And now,
dear Lady Windermere, I am afraid it is really good-bye.  [_Moves up C._]
Oh, I remember.  You’ll think me absurd, but do you know I’ve taken a
great fancy to this fan that I was silly enough to run away with last
night from your ball.  Now, I wonder would you give it to me?  Lord
Windermere says you may.  I know it is his present.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Oh, certainly, if it will give you any pleasure.  But
it has my name on it.  It has ‘Margaret’ on it.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  But we have the same Christian name.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Oh, I forgot.  Of course, do have it.  What a wonderful
chance our names being the same!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Quite wonderful.  Thanks—it will always remind me of you.
[_Shakes hands with her_.]

[_Enter_ PARKER.]

PARKER.  Lord Augustus Lorton.  Mrs. Erlynne’s carriage has come.

[_Enter_ LORD AUGUSTUS.]

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Good morning, dear boy.  Good morning, Lady Windermere.
[_Sees_ MRS. ERLYNNE.]  Mrs. Erlynne!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  How do you do, Lord Augustus?  Are you quite well this
morning?

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [_Coldly_.]  Quite well, thank you, Mrs. Erlynne.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  You don’t look at all well, Lord Augustus.  You stop up
too late—it is so bad for you.  You really should take more care of
yourself.  Good-bye, Lord Windermere. [_Goes towards door with a bow to_
LORD AUGUSTUS.  _Suddenly smiles and looks back at him_.]  Lord Augustus!
Won’t you see me to my carriage?  You might carry the fan.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Allow me!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  No; I want Lord Augustus.  I have a special message for
the dear Duchess.  Won’t you carry the fan, Lord Augustus?

LORD AUGUSTUS.  If you really desire it, Mrs. Erlynne.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Laughing_.]  Of course I do.  You’ll carry it so
gracefully.  You would carry off anything gracefully, dear Lord Augustus.

[_When she reaches the door she looks back for a moment at_ LADY
WINDERMERE.  _Their eyes meet_.  _Then she turns_, _and exit C. followed
by_ LORD AUGUSTUS.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  You will never speak against Mrs. Erlynne again,
Arthur, will you?

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Gravely_.]  She is better than one thought her.

LADY WINDERMERE.  She is better than I am.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Smiling as he strokes her hair_.]  Child, you and she
belong to different worlds.  Into your world evil has never entered.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Don’t say that, Arthur.  There is the same world for
all of us, and good and evil, sin and innocence, go through it hand in
hand.  To shut one’s eyes to half of life that one may live securely is
as though one blinded oneself that one might walk with more safety in a
land of pit and precipice.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Moves down with her_.]  Darling, why do you say that?

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Sits on sofa_.]  Because I, who had shut my eyes to
life, came to the brink.  And one who had separated us—

LORD WINDERMERE.  We were never separated.

LADY WINDERMERE.  We never must be again.  O Arthur, don’t love me less,
and I will trust you more.  I will trust you absolutely.  Let us go to
Selby.  In the Rose Garden at Selby the roses are white and red.

[_Enter_ LORD AUGUSTUS _C._]

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Arthur, she has explained everything!

[LADY WINDERMERE _looks horribly frightened at this_.  LORD WINDERMERE
_starts_.  LORD AUGUSTUS _takes_ WINDERMERE _by the arm and brings him to
front of stage_.  _He talks rapidly and in a low voice_.  LADY WINDERMERE
_stands watching them in terror_.]  My dear fellow, she has explained
every demmed thing.  We all wronged her immensely.  It was entirely for
my sake she went to Darlington’s rooms.  Called first at the Club—fact
is, wanted to put me out of suspense—and being told I had gone
on—followed—naturally frightened when she heard a lot of us coming
in—retired to another room—I assure you, most gratifying to me, the whole
thing.  We all behaved brutally to her.  She is just the woman for me.
Suits me down to the ground.  All the conditions she makes are that we
live entirely out of England.  A very good thing too.  Demmed clubs,
demmed climate, demmed cooks, demmed everything.  Sick of it all!

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Frightened_.]  Has Mrs. Erlynne—?

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [_Advancing towards her with a low bow_.]  Yes, Lady
Windermere—  Mrs. Erlynne has done me the honour of accepting my hand.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Well, you are certainly marrying a very clever woman!

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Taking her husband’s hand_.]  Ah, you’re marrying a
very good woman!

                                * * * * *

                                 CURTAIN




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LADY WINDERMERE'S FAN***


******* This file should be named 790-0.txt or 790-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/7/9/790


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook, Lady Windermere's Fan, by Oscar Wilde


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: Lady Windermere's Fan
       A Play about a Good Woman


Author: Oscar Wilde



Release Date: October 26, 2014  [eBook #790]
[This file was first posted on January 25, 1997]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LADY WINDERMERE'S FAN***


Transcribed from the 1917 Methuen & Co. Ltd edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org





                          LADY WINDERMERE’S FAN


                                  A PLAY
                            ABOUT A GOOD WOMAN

                                    BY

                               OSCAR WILDE

                                * * * * *

                            METHUEN & CO. LTD.
                           36 ESSEX STREET W.C.
                                  LONDON

                           _Sixteenth Edition_

_First Published_                                               _1893_
_First Issued by Methuen & Co. Ltd._ (_Limited Editions on      _1908_
Hand-made Paper and Japanese Vellum_) _February_
_Third Edition_ (_F’cap_ 8_vo_, 5_s._ _net_) _September_        _1909_
_Fourth Edition_ (5_s._ _net_) _June_                           _1910_
_Fifth Edition_ (_F’cap_ 8_vo_, 1_s._ _net_) _November 3rd_     _1911_
_Sixth Edition_ (1_s._ _net_) _November_                        _1911_
_Eighth Edition_ (1_s._ _net_) _1912_, _Ninth and Tenth
Editions_ (1_s._ _net_) _1913_, _Eleventh Edition_ (1_s._
_net_) _1914_, _Twelfth Edition_ (1_s._ _net_) _1915_,
_Thirteenth Edition_ (1_s._ _net_) _1916_, _Fourteenth and
Fifteenth Edition_ (1_s._ _net_) _1917_
_Sixteenth Edition_ (5_s._ _net_)                               _1917_

_The literary and dramatic rights of_ “_Lady Windermere’s Fan_” _belong
to Sir George Alexander_, _by arrangement with whom this play is included
in this edition_.  _The acting version_ (_Samuel French_) _does not
contain the complete text_.

                                * * * * *

                                    TO
                             THE DEAR MEMORY
                                    OF
                          ROBERT EARL OF LYTTON
                               IN AFFECTION
                                   AND
                                ADMIRATION

                                * * * * *




THE PERSONS OF THE PLAY


Lord Windermere

Lord Darlington

Lord Augustus Lorton

Mr. Dumby

Mr. Cecil Graham

Mr. Hopper

Parker, Butler

                                * * * * *

Lady Windermere

The Duchess of Berwick

Lady Agatha Carlisle

Lady Plymdale

Lady Stutfield

Lady Jedburgh

Mrs. Cowper-Cowper

Mrs. Erlynne

Rosalie, Maid




THE SCENES OF THE PLAY

ACT I.        _Morning-room in Lord Windermere’s
              house_.
ACT II.       _Drawing-room in Lord Windermere’s
              house_.
ACT III.      _Lord Darlington’s rooms_.
ACT IV.       _Same as Act I._
TIME:         _The Present_.
PLACE:        _London_.

_The action of the play takes place within twenty-four hours_, _beginning
on a Tuesday afternoon at five o’clock_, _and ending the next day at_
1.30 _p.m._




LONDON: ST. JAMES’S THEATRE


               _Lessee and Manager_: _Mr. George Alexander_
                         _February_ 22_nd_, 1892.

LORD WINDERMERE             _Mr. George Alexander_.
LORD DARLINGTON             _Mr. Nutcombe Gould_.
LORD AUGUSTUS LORTON        _Mr. H. H. Vincent_.
MR. CECIL GRAHAM            _Mr. Ben Webster_.
MR. DUMBY                   _Mr. Vane-Tempest_.
MR. HOPPER                  _Mr. Alfred Holles_.
PARKER (_Butler_)           _Mr. V. Sansbury_.
LADY WINDERMERE             _Miss Lily Hanbury_.
THE DUCHESS OF BERWICK      _Miss Fanny Coleman_.
LADY AGATHA CARLISLE        _Miss Laura Graves_.
LADY PLYMDALE               _Miss Granville_.
LADY JEDBURGH               _Miss B. Page_.
LADY STUTFIELD              _Miss Madge Girdlestone_.
MRS. COWPER-COWPER          _Miss A. de Winton_.
MRS. ERLYNNE                _Miss Marion Terry_.
ROSALIE (_Maid_)            _Miss Winifred Dolan_.




FIRST ACT


                                  SCENE

_Morning-room of Lord Windermere’s house in Carlton House Terrace_.
_Doors C. and R.  Bureau with books and papers R._  _Sofa with small
tea-table L._  _Window opening on to terrace L._  _Table R._

[LADY WINDERMERE _is at table R._, _arranging roses in a blue bowl_.]

[_Enter_ PARKER.]

PARKER.  Is your ladyship at home this afternoon?

LADY WINDERMERE.  Yes—who has called?

PARKER.  Lord Darlington, my lady.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Hesitates for a moment_.]  Show him up—and I’m at
home to any one who calls.

PARKER.  Yes, my lady.

                                                               [_Exit C._]

LADY WINDERMERE.  It’s best for me to see him before to-night.  I’m glad
he’s come.

[_Enter_ PARKER _C._]

PARKER.  Lord Darlington,

[_Enter_ LORD DARLINGTON _C._]

                                                          [_Exit_ PARKER.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  How do you do, Lady Windermere?

LADY WINDERMERE.  How do you do, Lord Darlington?  No, I can’t shake
hands with you.  My hands are all wet with these roses.  Aren’t they
lovely?  They came up from Selby this morning.

LORD DARLINGTON.  They are quite perfect.  [_Sees a fan lying on the
table_.]  And what a wonderful fan!  May I look at it?

LADY WINDERMERE.  Do.  Pretty, isn’t it!  It’s got my name on it, and
everything.  I have only just seen it myself.  It’s my husband’s birthday
present to me.  You know to-day is my birthday?

LORD DARLINGTON.  No?  Is it really?

LADY WINDERMERE.  Yes, I’m of age to-day.  Quite an important day in my
life, isn’t it?  That is why I am giving this party to-night.  Do sit
down.  [_Still arranging flowers_.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Sitting down_.]  I wish I had known it was your
birthday, Lady Windermere.  I would have covered the whole street in
front of your house with flowers for you to walk on.  They are made for
you.

                                                        [_A short pause_.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  Lord Darlington, you annoyed me last night at the
Foreign Office.  I am afraid you are going to annoy me again.

LORD DARLINGTON.  I, Lady Windermere?

[_Enter_ PARKER _and_ FOOTMAN _C._, _with tray and tea things_.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  Put it there, Parker.  That will do.  [_Wipes her hands
with her pocket-handkerchief_, _goes to tea-table_, _and sits down_.]
Won’t you come over, Lord Darlington?

                                                      [_Exit_ PARKER _C._]

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Takes chair and goes across L.C._]  I am quite
miserable, Lady Windermere.  You must tell me what I did.  [_Sits down at
table L._]

LADY WINDERMERE.  Well, you kept paying me elaborate compliments the
whole evening.

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Smiling_.]  Ah, nowadays we are all of us so hard up,
that the only pleasant things to pay _are_ compliments.  They’re the only
things we _can_ pay.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Shaking her head_.]  No, I am talking very seriously.
You mustn’t laugh, I am quite serious.  I don’t like compliments, and I
don’t see why a man should think he is pleasing a woman enormously when
he says to her a whole heap of things that he doesn’t mean.

LORD DARLINGTON.  Ah, but I did mean them.  [_Takes tea which she offers
him_.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Gravely_.]  I hope not.  I should be sorry to have to
quarrel with you, Lord Darlington.  I like you very much, you know that.
But I shouldn’t like you at all if I thought you were what most other men
are.  Believe me, you are better than most other men, and I sometimes
think you pretend to be worse.

LORD DARLINGTON.  We all have our little vanities, Lady Windermere.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Why do you make that your special one?  [_Still seated
at table L._]

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Still seated L.C._]  Oh, nowadays so many conceited
people go about Society pretending to be good, that I think it shows
rather a sweet and modest disposition to pretend to be bad.  Besides,
there is this to be said.  If you pretend to be good, the world takes you
very seriously.  If you pretend to be bad, it doesn’t.  Such is the
astounding stupidity of optimism.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Don’t you _want_ the world to take you seriously then,
Lord Darlington?

LORD DARLINGTON.  No, not the world.  Who are the people the world takes
seriously?  All the dull people one can think of, from the Bishops down
to the bores.  I should like _you_ to take me very seriously, Lady
Windermere, _you_ more than any one else in life.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Why—why me?

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_After a slight hesitation_.]  Because I think we
might be great friends.  Let us be great friends.  You may want a friend
some day.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Why do you say that?

LORD DARLINGTON.  Oh!—we all want friends at times.

LADY WINDERMERE.  I think we’re very good friends already, Lord
Darlington.  We can always remain so as long as you don’t—

LORD DARLINGTON.  Don’t what?

LADY WINDERMERE.  Don’t spoil it by saying extravagant silly things to
me.  You think I am a Puritan, I suppose?  Well, I have something of the
Puritan in me.  I was brought up like that.  I am glad of it.  My mother
died when I was a mere child.  I lived always with Lady Julia, my
father’s elder sister, you know.  She was stern to me, but she taught me
what the world is forgetting, the difference that there is between what
is right and what is wrong.  _She_ allowed of no compromise.  _I_ allow
of none.

LORD DARLINGTON.  My dear Lady Windermere!

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Leaning back on the sofa_.]  You look on me as being
behind the age.—Well, I am!  I should be sorry to be on the same level as
an age like this.

LORD DARLINGTON.  You think the age very bad?

LADY WINDERMERE.  Yes.  Nowadays people seem to look on life as a
speculation.  It is not a speculation.  It is a sacrament.  Its ideal is
Love.  Its purification is sacrifice.

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Smiling_.]  Oh, anything is better than being
sacrificed!

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Leaning forward_.]  Don’t say that.

LORD DARLINGTON.  I do say it.  I feel it—I know it.

[_Enter_ PARKER _C._]

PARKER.  The men want to know if they are to put the carpets on the
terrace for to-night, my lady?

LADY WINDERMERE.  You don’t think it will rain, Lord Darlington, do you?

LORD DARLINGTON.  I won’t hear of its raining on your birthday!

LADY WINDERMERE.  Tell them to do it at once, Parker.

                                                      [_Exit_ PARKER _C._]

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Still seated_.]  Do you think then—of course I am
only putting an imaginary instance—do you think that in the case of a
young married couple, say about two years married, if the husband
suddenly becomes the intimate friend of a woman of—well, more than
doubtful character—is always calling upon her, lunching with her, and
probably paying her bills—do you think that the wife should not console
herself?

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Frowning_.]  Console herself?

LORD DARLINGTON.  Yes, I think she should—I think she has the right.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Because the husband is vile—should the wife be vile
also?

LORD DARLINGTON.  Vileness is a terrible word, Lady Windermere.

LADY WINDERMERE.  It is a terrible thing, Lord Darlington.

LORD DARLINGTON.  Do you know I am afraid that good people do a great
deal of harm in this world.  Certainly the greatest harm they do is that
they make badness of such extraordinary importance.  It is absurd to
divide people into good and bad.  People are either charming or tedious.
I take the side of the charming, and you, Lady Windermere, can’t help
belonging to them.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Now, Lord Darlington.  [_Rising and crossing R._,
_front of him_.]  Don’t stir, I am merely going to finish my flowers.
[_Goes to table R.C._]

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Rising and moving chair_.]  And I must say I think
you are very hard on modern life, Lady Windermere.  Of course there is
much against it, I admit.  Most women, for instance, nowadays, are rather
mercenary.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Don’t talk about such people.

LORD DARLINGTON.  Well then, setting aside mercenary people, who, of
course, are dreadful, do you think seriously that women who have
committed what the world calls a fault should never be forgiven?

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Standing at table_.]  I think they should never be
forgiven.

LORD DARLINGTON.  And men?  Do you think that there should be the same
laws for men as there are for women?

LADY WINDERMERE.  Certainly!

LORD DARLINGTON.  I think life too complex a thing to be settled by these
hard and fast rules.

LADY WINDERMERE.  If we had ‘these hard and fast rules,’ we should find
life much more simple.

LORD DARLINGTON.  You allow of no exceptions?

LADY WINDERMERE.  None!

LORD DARLINGTON.  Ah, what a fascinating Puritan you are, Lady
Windermere!

LADY WINDERMERE.  The adjective was unnecessary, Lord Darlington.

LORD DARLINGTON.  I couldn’t help it.  I can resist everything except
temptation.

LADY WINDERMERE.  You have the modern affectation of weakness.

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Looking at her_.]  It’s only an affectation, Lady
Windermere.

[_Enter_ PARKER _C._]

PARKER.  The Duchess of Berwick and Lady Agatha Carlisle.

[_Enter the_ DUCHESS OF BERWICK and LADY AGATHA CARLISLE _C._]

                                                      [_Exit_ PARKER _C._]

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  [_Coming down C._, _and shaking hands_.]  Dear
Margaret, I am so pleased to see you.  You remember Agatha, don’t you?
[_Crossing L.C._]  How do you do, Lord Darlington?  I won’t let you know
my daughter, you are far too wicked.

LORD DARLINGTON.  Don’t say that, Duchess.  As a wicked man I am a
complete failure.  Why, there are lots of people who say I have never
really done anything wrong in the whole course of my life.  Of course
they only say it behind my back.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Isn’t he dreadful?  Agatha, this is Lord Darlington.
Mind you don’t believe a word he says.  [LORD DARLINGTON _crosses R.C._]
No, no tea, thank you, dear.  [_Crosses and sits on sofa_.]  We have just
had tea at Lady Markby’s.  Such bad tea, too.  It was quite undrinkable.
I wasn’t at all surprised.  Her own son-in-law supplies it.  Agatha is
looking forward so much to your ball to-night, dear Margaret.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Seated L.C._]  Oh, you mustn’t think it is going to
be a ball, Duchess.  It is only a dance in honour of my birthday.  A
small and early.

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Standing L.C._]  Very small, very early, and very
select, Duchess.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  [_On sofa L._]  Of course it’s going to be select.
But we know _that_, dear Margaret, about _your_ house.  It is really one
of the few houses in London where I can take Agatha, and where I feel
perfectly secure about dear Berwick.  I don’t know what society is coming
to.  The most dreadful people seem to go everywhere.  They certainly come
to my parties—the men get quite furious if one doesn’t ask them.  Really,
some one should make a stand against it.

LADY WINDERMERE.  _I_ will, Duchess.  I will have no one in my house
about whom there is any scandal.

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_R.C._]  Oh, don’t say that, Lady Windermere.  I
should never be admitted!  [_Sitting_.]

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Oh, men don’t matter.  With women it is different.
We’re good.  Some of us are, at least.  But we are positively getting
elbowed into the corner.  Our husbands would really forget our existence
if we didn’t nag at them from time to time, just to remind them that we
have a perfect legal right to do so.

LORD DARLINGTON.  It’s a curious thing, Duchess, about the game of
marriage—a game, by the way, that is going out of fashion—the wives hold
all the honours, and invariably lose the odd trick.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.   The odd trick?  Is that the husband, Lord
Darlington?

LORD DARLINGTON.  It would be rather a good name for the modern husband.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Dear Lord Darlington, how thoroughly depraved you
are!

LADY WINDERMERE.  Lord Darlington is trivial.

LORD DARLINGTON.  Ah, don’t say that, Lady Windermere.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Why do you _talk_ so trivially about life, then?

LORD DARLINGTON.  Because I think that life is far too important a thing
ever to talk seriously about it.  [_Moves up C._]

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  What does he mean?  Do, as a concession to my poor
wits, Lord Darlington, just explain to me what you really mean.

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Coming down back of table_.]  I think I had better
not, Duchess.  Nowadays to be intelligible is to be found out.  Good-bye!
[_Shakes hands with_ DUCHESS.]  And now—[_goes up stage_] Lady
Windermere, good-bye.  I may come to-night, mayn’t I?  Do let me come.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Standing up stage with_ LORD DARLINGTON.]  Yes,
certainly.  But you are not to say foolish, insincere things to people.

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Smiling_.]  Ah! you are beginning to reform me.  It
is a dangerous thing to reform any one, Lady Windermere.  [_Bows_, _and
exit C._]

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  [_Who has risen_, _goes C._]  What a charming,
wicked creature!  I like him so much.  I’m quite delighted he’s gone!
How sweet you’re looking!  Where _do_ you get your gowns?  And now I must
tell you how sorry I am for you, dear Margaret.  [_Crosses to sofa and
sits with_ LADY WINDERMERE.]  Agatha, darling!

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma.  [_Rises_.]

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Will you go and look over the photograph album that
I see there?

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma.  [_Goes to table up L._]

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Dear girl!  She is so fond of photographs of
Switzerland.  Such a pure taste, I think.  But I really am so sorry for
you, Margaret.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Smiling_.]  Why, Duchess?

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Oh, on account of that horrid woman.  She dresses so
well, too, which makes it much worse, sets such a dreadful example.
Augustus—you know my disreputable brother—such a trial to us all—well,
Augustus is completely infatuated about her.  It is quite scandalous, for
she is absolutely inadmissible into society.  Many a woman has a past,
but I am told that she has at least a dozen, and that they all fit.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Whom are you talking about, Duchess?

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  About Mrs. Erlynne.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Mrs. Erlynne?  I never heard of her, Duchess.  And what
_has_ she to do with me?

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  My poor child!  Agatha, darling!

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Will you go out on the terrace and look at the
sunset?

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma.

                                             [_Exit through window_, _L._]

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Sweet girl!  So devoted to sunsets!  Shows such
refinement of feeling, does it not?  After all, there is nothing like
Nature, is there?

LADY WINDERMERE.  But what is it, Duchess?  Why do you talk to me about
this person?

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Don’t you really know?  I assure you we’re all so
distressed about it.  Only last night at dear Lady Jansen’s every one was
saying how extraordinary it was that, of all men in London, Windermere
should behave in such a way.

LADY WINDERMERE.  My husband—what has _he_ got to do with any woman of
that kind?

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Ah, what indeed, dear?  That is the point.  He goes
to see her continually, and stops for hours at a time, and while he is
there she is not at home to any one.  Not that many ladies call on her,
dear, but she has a great many disreputable men friends—my own brother
particularly, as I told you—and that is what makes it so dreadful about
Windermere.  We looked upon _him_ as being such a model husband, but I am
afraid there is no doubt about it.  My dear nieces—you know the Saville
girls, don’t you?—such nice domestic creatures—plain, dreadfully plain,
but so good—well, they’re always at the window doing fancy work, and
making ugly things for the poor, which I think so useful of them in these
dreadful socialistic days, and this terrible woman has taken a house in
Curzon Street, right opposite them—such a respectable street, too!  I
don’t know what we’re coming to!  And they tell me that Windermere goes
there four and five times a week—they _see_ him.  They can’t help it—and
although they never talk scandal, they—well, of course—they remark on it
to every one.  And the worst of it all is that I have been told that this
woman has got a great deal of money out of somebody, for it seems that
she came to London six months ago without anything at all to speak of,
and now she has this charming house in Mayfair, drives her ponies in the
Park every afternoon and all—well, all—since she has known poor dear
Windermere.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Oh, I can’t believe it!

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  But it’s quite true, my dear.  The whole of London
knows it.  That is why I felt it was better to come and talk to you, and
advise you to take Windermere away at once to Homburg or to Aix, where
he’ll have something to amuse him, and where you can watch him all day
long.  I assure you, my dear, that on several occasions after I was first
married, I had to pretend to be very ill, and was obliged to drink the
most unpleasant mineral waters, merely to get Berwick out of town.  He
was so extremely susceptible.  Though I am bound to say he never gave
away any large sums of money to anybody.  He is far too high-principled
for that!

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Interrupting_.]  Duchess, Duchess, it’s impossible!
[_Rising and crossing stage to C._]  We are only married two years.  Our
child is but six months old.  [_Sits in chair R. of L. table_.]

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Ah, the dear pretty baby!  How is the little
darling?  Is it a boy or a girl?  I hope a girl—Ah, no, I remember it’s a
boy!  I’m so sorry.  Boys are so wicked.  My boy is excessively immoral.
You wouldn’t believe at what hours he comes home.  And he’s only left
Oxford a few months—I really don’t know what they teach them there.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Are _all_ men bad?

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Oh, all of them, my dear, all of them, without any
exception.  And they never grow any better.  Men become old, but they
never become good.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Windermere and I married for love.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Yes, we begin like that.  It was only Berwick’s
brutal and incessant threats of suicide that made me accept him at all,
and before the year was out, he was running after all kinds of
petticoats, every colour, every shape, every material.  In fact, before
the honeymoon was over, I caught him winking at my maid, a most pretty,
respectable girl.  I dismissed her at once without a character.—No, I
remember I passed her on to my sister; poor dear Sir George is so
short-sighted, I thought it wouldn’t matter.  But it did, though—it was
most unfortunate.  [_Rises_.]  And now, my dear child, I must go, as we
are dining out.  And mind you don’t take this little aberration of
Windermere’s too much to heart.  Just take him abroad, and he’ll come
back to you all right.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Come back to me?  [_C._]

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.   [_L.C._]  Yes, dear, these wicked women get our
husbands away from us, but they always come back, slightly damaged, of
course.  And don’t make scenes, men hate them!

LADY WINDERMERE.  It is very kind of you, Duchess, to come and tell me
all this.  But I can’t believe that my husband is untrue to me.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Pretty child!  I was like that once.  Now I know
that all men are monsters.  [LADY WINDERMERE _rings bell_.]  The only
thing to do is to feed the wretches well.  A good cook does wonders, and
that I know you have.  My dear Margaret, you are not going to cry?

LADY WINDERMERE.  You needn’t be afraid, Duchess, I never cry.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  That’s quite right, dear.  Crying is the refuge of
plain women but the ruin of pretty ones.  Agatha, darling!

LADY AGATHA.  [_Entering L._]  Yes, mamma.  [_Stands back of table L.C._]

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Come and bid good-bye to Lady Windermere, and thank
her for your charming visit.  [_Coming down again_.]  And by the way, I
must thank you for sending a card to Mr. Hopper—he’s that rich young
Australian people are taking such notice of just at present.  His father
made a great fortune by selling some kind of food in circular tins—most
palatable, I believe—I fancy it is the thing the servants always refuse
to eat.  But the son is quite interesting.  I think he’s attracted by
dear Agatha’s clever talk.  Of course, we should be very sorry to lose
her, but I think that a mother who doesn’t part with a daughter every
season has no real affection.  We’re coming to-night, dear.  [PARKER
_opens C. doors_.]  And remember my advice, take the poor fellow out of
town at once, it is the only thing to do.  Good-bye, once more; come,
Agatha.

                                 [_Exeunt_ DUCHESS _and_ LADY AGATHA _C._]

LADY WINDERMERE.  How horrible!  I understand now what Lord Darlington
meant by the imaginary instance of the couple not two years married.  Oh!
it can’t be true—she spoke of enormous sums of money paid to this woman.
I know where Arthur keeps his bank book—in one of the drawers of that
desk.  I might find out by that.  I _will_ find out.  [_Opens drawer_.]
No, it is some hideous mistake.  [_Rises and goes C._]  Some silly
scandal!  He loves _me_!  He loves _me_!  But why should I not look?  I
am his wife, I have a right to look!  [_Returns to bureau_, _takes out
book and examines it page by page_, _smiles and gives a sigh of relief_.]
I knew it! there is not a word of truth in this stupid story.  [_Puts
book back in dranver_.  _As the does so_, _starts and takes out another
book_.]  A second book—private—locked!  [_Tries to open it_, _but fails_.
_Sees paper knife on bureau_, _and with it cuts cover from book_.
_Begins to start at the first page_.]  ‘Mrs. Erlynne—£600—Mrs.
Erlynne—£700—Mrs. Erlynne—£400.’  Oh! it is true!  It is true!  How
horrible!  [_Throws book on floor_.]

                                            [_Enter_ LORD WINDERMERE _C._]

LORD WINDERMERE.  Well, dear, has the fan been sent home yet?  [_Going
R.C._  _Sees book_.]  Margaret, you have cut open my bank book.  You have
no right to do such a thing!

LADY WINDERMERE.  You think it wrong that you are found out, don’t you?

LORD WINDERMERE.  I think it wrong that a wife should spy on her husband.

LADY WINDERMERE.  I did not spy on you.  I never knew of this woman’s
existence till half an hour ago.  Some one who pitied me was kind enough
to tell me what every one in London knows already—your daily visits to
Curzon Street, your mad infatuation, the monstrous sums of money you
squander on this infamous woman!  [_Crossing L._]

LORD WINDERMERE.  Margaret! don’t talk like that of Mrs. Erlynne, you
don’t know how unjust it is!

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Turning to him_.]  You are very jealous of Mrs.
Erlynne’s honour.  I wish you had been as jealous of mine.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Your honour is untouched, Margaret.  You don’t think
for a moment that—[_Puts book back into desk_.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  I think that you spend your money strangely.  That is
all.  Oh, don’t imagine I mind about the money.  As far as I am
concerned, you may squander everything we have.  But what I _do_ mind is
that you who have loved me, you who have taught me to love you, should
pass from the love that is given to the love that is bought.  Oh, it’s
horrible!  [_Sits on sofa_.]  And it is I who feel degraded! _you_ don’t
feel anything.  I feel stained, utterly stained.  You can’t realise how
hideous the last six months seems to me now—every kiss you have given me
is tainted in my memory.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Crossing to her_.]  Don’t say that, Margaret.  I
never loved any one in the whole world but you.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Rises_.]  Who is this woman, then?  Why do you take a
house for her?

LORD WINDERMERE.  I did not take a house for her.

LADY WINDERMERE.  You gave her the money to do it, which is the same
thing.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Margaret, as far as I have known Mrs. Erlynne—

LADY WINDERMERE.  Is there a Mr. Erlynne—or is he a myth?

LORD WINDERMERE.  Her husband died many years ago.  She is alone in the
world.

LADY WINDERMERE.  No relations?  [_A pause_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  None.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Rather curious, isn’t it?  [_L._]

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_L.C._]  Margaret, I was saying to you—and I beg you
to listen to me—that as far as I have known Mrs. Erlynne, she has
conducted herself well.  If years ago—

LADY WINDERMERE.  Oh!  [_Crossing R.C._]  I don’t want details about her
life!

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_C._]  I am not going to give you any details about
her life.  I tell you simply this—Mrs. Erlynne was once honoured, loved,
respected.  She was well born, she had position—she lost everything—threw
it away, if you like.  That makes it all the more bitter.  Misfortunes
one can endure—they come from outside, they are accidents.  But to suffer
for one’s own faults—ah!—there is the sting of life.  It was twenty years
ago, too.  She was little more than a girl then.  She had been a wife for
even less time than you have.

LADY WINDERMERE.  I am not interested in her—and—you should not mention
this woman and me in the same breath.  It is an error of taste.
[_Sitting R. at desk_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  Margaret, you could save this woman.  She wants to get
back into society, and she wants you to help her.  [_Crossing to her_.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  Me!

LORD WINDERMERE.  Yes, you.

LADY WINDERMERE.  How impertinent of her!  [_A pause_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  Margaret, I came to ask you a great favour, and I still
ask it of you, though you have discovered what I had intended you should
never have known that I have given Mrs. Erlynne a large sum of money.  I
want you to send her an invitation for our party to-night.  [_Standing L.
of her_.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  You are mad!  [_Rises_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  I entreat you.  People may chatter about her, do
chatter about her, of course, but they don’t know anything definite
against her.  She has been to several houses—not to houses where you
would go, I admit, but still to houses where women who are in what is
called Society nowadays do go.  That does not content her.  She wants you
to receive her once.

LADY WINDERMERE.  As a triumph for her, I suppose?

LORD WINDERMERE.  No; but because she knows that you are a good woman—and
that if she comes here once she will have a chance of a happier, a surer
life than she has had.  She will make no further effort to know you.
Won’t you help a woman who is trying to get back?

LADY WINDERMERE.  No!  If a woman really repents, she never wishes to
return to the society that has made or seen her ruin.

LORD WINDERMERE.  I beg of you.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Crossing to door R._]  I am going to dress for
dinner, and don’t mention the subject again this evening.  Arthur [_going
to him C._], you fancy because I have no father or mother that I am alone
in the world, and that you can treat me as you choose.  You are wrong, I
have friends, many friends.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_L.C._]  Margaret, you are talking foolishly,
recklessly.  I won’t argue with you, but I insist upon your asking Mrs.
Erlynne to-night.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_R.C._]  I shall do nothing of the kind.  [_Crossing
L.C._]

LORD WINDERMERE.  You refuse?  [_C._]

LADY WINDERMERE.  Absolutely!

LORD WINDERMERE.  Ah, Margaret, do this for my sake; it is her last
chance.

LADY WINDERMERE.  What has that to do with me?

LORD WINDERMERE.  How hard good women are!

LADY WINDERMERE.  How weak bad men are!

LORD WINDERMERE.  Margaret, none of us men may be good enough for the
women we marry—that is quite true—but you don’t imagine I would ever—oh,
the suggestion is monstrous!

LADY WINDERMERE.  Why should _you_ be different from other men?  I am
told that there is hardly a husband in London who does not waste his life
over _some_ shameful passion.

LORD WINDERMERE.  I am not one of them.

LADY WINDERMERE.  I am not sure of that!

LORD WINDERMERE.  You are sure in your heart.  But don’t make chasm after
chasm between us.  God knows the last few minutes have thrust us wide
enough apart.  Sit down and write the card.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Nothing in the whole world would induce me.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Crossing to bureau_.]  Then I will!  [_Rings electric
bell_, _sits and writes card_.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  You are going to invite this woman?  [_Crossing to
him_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  Yes.  [_Pause_.  _Enter_ PARKER.]  Parker!

PARKER.  Yes, my lord.  [_Comes down L.C._]

LORD WINDERMERE.  Have this note sent to Mrs. Erlynne at No. 84A Curzon
Street.  [_Crossing to L.C. and giving note to_ PARKER.]  There is no
answer!

                                                      [_Exit_ PARKER _C._]

LADY WINDERMERE.  Arthur, if that woman comes here, I shall insult her.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Margaret, don’t say that.

LADY WINDERMERE.  I mean it.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Child, if you did such a thing, there’s not a woman in
London who wouldn’t pity you.

LADY WINDERMERE.  There is not a _good_ woman in London who would not
applaud me.  We have been too lax.  We must make an example.  I propose
to begin to-night.  [_Picking up fan_.]  Yes, you gave me this fan
to-day; it was your birthday present.  If that woman crosses my
threshold, I shall strike her across the face with it.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Margaret, you couldn’t do such a thing.

LADY WINDERMERE.  You don’t know me!  [_Moves R._]

[_Enter_ PARKER.]

Parker!

PARKER.  Yes, my lady.

LADY WINDERMERE.  I shall dine in my own room.  I don’t want dinner, in
fact.  See that everything is ready by half-past ten.  And, Parker, be
sure you pronounce the names of the guests very distinctly to-night.
Sometimes you speak so fast that I miss them.  I am particularly anxious
to hear the names quite clearly, so as to make no mistake.  You
understand, Parker?

PARKER.  Yes, my lady.

LADY WINDERMERE.  That will do!

                                                      [_Exit_ PARKER _C._]

[_Speaking to_ LORD WINDERMERE.]  Arthur, if that woman comes here—I warn
you—

LORD WINDERMERE.  Margaret, you’ll ruin us!

LADY WINDERMERE.  Us!  From this moment my life is separate from yours.
But if you wish to avoid a public scandal, write at once to this woman,
and tell her that I forbid her to come here!

LORD WINDERMERE.  I will not—I cannot—she must come!

LADY WINDERMERE.  Then I shall do exactly as I have said.  [_Goes R._]
You leave me no choice.

                                                               [_Exit R._]

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Calling after her_.]  Margaret!  Margaret!  [_A
pause_.]  My God!  What shall I do?  I dare not tell her who this woman
really is.  The shame would kill her.  [_Sinks down into a chair and
buries his face in his hands_.]

                                * * * * *

                                 ACT DROP




SECOND ACT


                                  SCENE

_Drawing-room in Lord Windermere’s house_.  _Door R.U. opening into
ball-room_, _where band is playing_.  _Door L. through which guests are
entering_.  _Door L.U. opens on to illuminated terrace_.  _Palms_,
_flowers_, _and brilliant lights_.  _Room crowded with guests_.  _Lady
Windermere is receiving them_.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  [_Up C._]  So strange Lord Windermere isn’t here.
Mr. Hopper is very late, too.  You have kept those five dances for him,
Agatha?  [_Comes down_.]

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  [_Sitting on sofa_.]  Just let me see your card.
I’m so glad Lady Windermere has revived cards.—They’re a mother’s only
safeguard.  You dear simple little thing!  [_Scratches out two names_.]
No nice girl should ever waltz with such particularly younger sons!  It
looks so fast!  The last two dances you might pass on the terrace with
Mr. Hopper.

[_Enter_ MR. DUMBY _and_ LADY PLYMDALE _from the ball-room_.]

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  [_Fanning herself_.]  The air is so pleasant there.

PARKER.  Mrs. Cowper-Cowper.  Lady Stutfield.  Sir James Royston.  Mr.
Guy Berkeley.

[_These people enter as announced_.]

DUMBY.  Good evening, Lady Stutfield.  I suppose this will be the last
ball of the season?

LADY STUTFIELD.  I suppose so, Mr. Dumby.  It’s been a delightful season,
hasn’t it?

DUMBY.  Quite delightful!  Good evening, Duchess.  I suppose this will be
the last ball of the season?

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  I suppose so, Mr. Dumby.  It has been a very dull
season, hasn’t it?

DUMBY.  Dreadfully dull!  Dreadfully dull!

MR. COWPER-COWPER.  Good evening, Mr. Dumby.  I suppose this will be the
last ball of the season?

DUMBY.  Oh, I think not.  There’ll probably be two more.  [_Wanders back
to_ LADY PLYMDALE.]

PARKER.  Mr. Rufford.  Lady Jedburgh and Miss Graham.  Mr. Hopper.

[_These people enter as announced_.]

HOPPER.  How do you do, Lady Windermere?  How do you do, Duchess?  [_Bows
to_ LADY AGATHA.]

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Dear Mr. Hopper, how nice of you to come so early.
We all know how you are run after in London.

HOPPER.  Capital place, London!  They are not nearly so exclusive in
London as they are in Sydney.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Ah! we know your value, Mr. Hopper.  We wish there
were more like you.  It would make life so much easier.  Do you know, Mr.
Hopper, dear Agatha and I are so much interested in Australia.  It must
be so pretty with all the dear little kangaroos flying about.  Agatha has
found it on the map.  What a curious shape it is!  Just like a large
packing case.  However, it is a very young country, isn’t it?

HOPPER.  Wasn’t it made at the same time as the others, Duchess?

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  How clever you are, Mr. Hopper.  You have a
cleverness quite of your own.  Now I mustn’t keep you.

HOPPER.  But I should like to dance with Lady Agatha, Duchess.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Well, I hope she has a dance left.  Have you a dance
left, Agatha?

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  The next one?

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma.

HOPPER.  May I have the pleasure?  [LADY AGATHA _bows_.]

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Mind you take great care of my little chatterbox,
Mr. Hopper.

[LADY AGATHA _and_ MR. HOPPER _pass into ball-room_.]

[_Enter_ LORD WINDERMERE.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  Margaret, I want to speak to you.

LADY WINDERMERE.  In a moment.  [_The music drops_.]

PARKER.  Lord Augustus Lorton.

[_Enter_ LORD AUGUSTUS.]

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Good evening, Lady Windermere.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Sir James, will you take me into the ball-room?
Augustus has been dining with us to-night.  I really have had quite
enough of dear Augustus for the moment.

[SIR JAMES ROYSTON _gives the_ DUCHESS _his aim and escorts her into the
ball-room_.]

PARKER.  Mr. and Mrs. Arthur Bowden.  Lord and Lady Paisley.  Lord
Darlington.

[_These people enter as announced_.]

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [_Coming up to_ LORD WINDERMERE.]  Want to speak to you
particularly, dear boy.  I’m worn to a shadow.  Know I don’t look it.
None of us men do look what we really are.  Demmed good thing, too.  What
I want to know is this.  Who is she?  Where does she come from?  Why
hasn’t she got any demmed relations?  Demmed nuisance, relations!  But
they make one so demmed respectable.

LORD WINDERMERE.  You are talking of Mrs. Erlynne, I suppose?  I only met
her six months ago.  Till then, I never knew of her existence.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  You have seen a good deal of her since then.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Coldly_.]  Yes, I have seen a good deal of her since
then.  I have just seen her.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Egad! the women are very down on her.  I have been dining
with Arabella this evening!  By Jove! you should have heard what she said
about Mrs. Erlynne.  She didn’t leave a rag on her. . . . [_Aside_.]
Berwick and I told her that didn’t matter much, as the lady in question
must have an extremely fine figure.  You should have seen Arabella’s
expression! . . . But, look here, dear boy.  I don’t know what to do
about Mrs. Erlynne.  Egad!  I might be married to her; she treats me with
such demmed indifference.  She’s deuced clever, too!  She explains
everything.  Egad! she explains you.  She has got any amount of
explanations for you—and all of them different.

LORD WINDERMERE.  No explanations are necessary about my friendship with
Mrs. Erlynne.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Hem!  Well, look here, dear old fellow.  Do you think she
will ever get into this demmed thing called Society?  Would you introduce
her to your wife?  No use beating about the confounded bush.  Would you
do that?

LORD WINDERMERE.  Mrs. Erlynne is coming here to-night.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Your wife has sent her a card?

LORD WINDERMERE.  Mrs. Erlynne has received a card.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Then she’s all right, dear boy.  But why didn’t you tell
me that before?  It would have saved me a heap of worry and demmed
misunderstandings!

[LADY AGATHA _and_ MR. HOPPER _cross and exit on terrace L.U.E._]

PARKER.  Mr. Cecil Graham!

[_Enter_ MR. CECIL GRAHAM.]

CECIL GRAHAM.  [_Bows to_ LADY WINDERMERE, _passes over and shakes hands
with_ LORD WINDERMERE.]  Good evening, Arthur.  Why don’t you ask me how
I am?  I like people to ask me how I am.  It shows a wide-spread interest
in my health.  Now, to-night I am not at all well.  Been dining with my
people.  Wonder why it is one’s people are always so tedious?  My father
would talk morality after dinner.  I told him he was old enough to know
better.  But my experience is that as soon as people are old enough to
know better, they don’t know anything at all.  Hallo, Tuppy!  Hear you’re
going to be married again; thought you were tired of that game.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  You’re excessively trivial, my dear boy, excessively
trivial!

CECIL GRAHAM.  By the way, Tuppy, which is it?  Have you been twice
married and once divorced, or twice divorced and once married?  I say
you’ve been twice divorced and once married.  It seems so much more
probable.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  I have a very bad memory.  I really don’t remember which.
[_Moves away R._]

LADY PLYMDALE.  Lord Windermere, I’ve something most particular to ask
you.

LORD WINDERMERE.  I am afraid—if you will excuse me—I must join my wife.

LADY PLYMDALE.  Oh, you mustn’t dream of such a thing.  It’s most
dangerous nowadays for a husband to pay any attention to his wife in
public.  It always makes people think that he beats her when they’re
alone.  The world has grown so suspicious of anything that looks like a
happy married life.  But I’ll tell you what it is at supper.  [_Moves
towards door of ball-room_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_C._]  Margaret!  I _must_ speak to you.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Will you hold my fan for me, Lord Darlington?  Thanks.
[_Comes down to him_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Crossing to her_.]  Margaret, what you said before
dinner was, of course, impossible?

LADY WINDERMERE.  That woman is not coming here to-night!

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_R.C._]  Mrs. Erlynne is coming here, and if you in
any way annoy or wound her, you will bring shame and sorrow on us both.
Remember that!  Ah, Margaret! only trust me!  A wife should trust her
husband!

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_C._]  London is full of women who trust their
husbands.  One can always recognise them.  They look so thoroughly
unhappy.  I am not going to be one of them.  [_Moves up_.]  Lord
Darlington, will you give me back my fan, please?  Thanks. . . . A useful
thing a fan, isn’t it? . . . I want a friend to-night, Lord Darlington: I
didn’t know I would want one so soon.

LORD DARLINGTON.  Lady Windermere!  I knew the time would come some day;
but why to-night?

LORD WINDERMERE.  I _will_ tell her.  I must.  It would be terrible if
there were any scene.  Margaret . . .

PARKER.  Mrs. Erlynne!

[LORD WINDERMERE _starts_.  MRS. ERLYNNE _enters_, _very beautifully
dressed and very dignified_.  LADY WINDERMERE _clutches at her fan_,
_then lets it drop on the door_.  _She bows coldly to_ MRS. ERLYNNE, _who
bows to her sweetly in turn_, _and sails into the room_.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  You have dropped your fan, Lady Windermere.  [_Picks it
up and hands it to her_.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_C._]  How do you do, again, Lord Windermere?  How
charming your sweet wife looks!  Quite a picture!

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_In a low voice_.]  It was terribly rash of you to
come!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Smiling_.]  The wisest thing I ever did in my life.
And, by the way, you must pay me a good deal of attention this evening.
I am afraid of the women.  You must introduce me to some of them.  The
men I can always manage.  How do you do, Lord Augustus?  You have quite
neglected me lately.  I have not seen you since yesterday.  I am afraid
you’re faithless.  Every one told me so.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [_R._]  Now really, Mrs. Erlynne, allow me to explain.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_R.C._]  No, dear Lord Augustus, you can’t explain
anything.  It is your chief charm.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Ah! if you find charms in me, Mrs. Erlynne—

[_They converse together_.  LORD WINDERMERE _moves uneasily about the
room watching_ MRS. ERLYNNE.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_To_ LADY WINDERMERE.]  How pale you are!

LADY WINDERMERE.  Cowards are always pale!

LORD DARLINGTON.  You look faint.  Come out on the terrace.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Yes.  [_To_ PARKER.]  Parker, send my cloak out.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Crossing to her_.]  Lady Windermere, how beautifully
your terrace is illuminated.  Reminds me of Prince Doria’s at Rome.

[LADY WINDERMERE _bows coldly_, _and goes off with_ LORD DARLINGTON.]

Oh, how do you do, Mr. Graham?  Isn’t that your aunt, Lady Jedburgh?  I
should so much like to know her.

CECIL GRAHAM.  [_After a moment’s hesitation and embarrassment_.]  Oh,
certainly, if you wish it.  Aunt Caroline, allow me to introduce Mrs.
Erlynne.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  So pleased to meet you, Lady Jedburgh.  [_Sits beside her
on the sofa_.]  Your nephew and I are great friends.  I am so much
interested in his political career.  I think he’s sure to be a wonderful
success.  He thinks like a Tory, and talks like a Radical, and that’s so
important nowadays.  He’s such a brilliant talker, too.  But we all know
from whom he inherits that.  Lord Allandale was saying to me only
yesterday, in the Park, that Mr. Graham talks almost as well as his aunt.

LADY JEDBURGH.  [_R._]  Most kind of you to say these charming things to
me!  [MRS. ERLYNNE _smiles_, _and continues conversation_.]

DUMBY.  [_To_ CECIL GRAHAM.]  Did you introduce Mrs. Erlynne to Lady
Jedburgh?

CECIL GRAHAM.  Had to, my dear fellow.  Couldn’t help it!  That woman can
make one do anything she wants.  How, I don’t know.

DUMBY.  Hope to goodness she won’t speak to me!  [_Saunters towards_ LADY
PLYMDALE.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_C._  _To_ LADY JEDBURGH.]  On Thursday?  With great
pleasure.  [_Rises_, _and speaks to_ LORD WINDERMERE, _laughing_.]  What
a bore it is to have to be civil to these old dowagers!  But they always
insist on it!

LADY PLYMDALE.  [_To_ MR. DUMBY.]  Who is that well-dressed woman talking
to Windermere?

DUMBY.  Haven’t got the slightest idea!  Looks like an _édition de luxe_
of a wicked French novel, meant specially for the English market.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  So that is poor Dumby with Lady Plymdale?  I hear she is
frightfully jealous of him.  He doesn’t seem anxious to speak to me
to-night.  I suppose he is afraid of her.  Those straw-coloured women
have dreadful tempers.  Do you know, I think I’ll dance with you first,
Windermere.  [LORD WINDERMERE _bits his lip and frowns_.]  It will make
Lord Augustus so jealous!  Lord Augustus!  [LORD AUGUSTUS _comes down_.]
Lord Windermere insists on my dancing with him first, and, as it’s his
own house, I can’t well refuse.  You know I would much sooner dance with
you.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [_With a low bow_.]  I wish I could think so, Mrs.
Erlynne.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  You know it far too well.  I can fancy a person dancing
through life with you and finding it charming.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [_Placing his hand on his white waistcoat_.]  Oh, thank
you, thank you.  You are the most adorable of all ladies!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  What a nice speech!  So simple and so sincere!  Just the
sort of speech I like.  Well, you shall hold my bouquet.  [_Goes towards
ball-room on_ LORD WINDERMERE’S _arm_.]  Ah, Mr. Dumby, how are you?  I
am so sorry I have been out the last three times you have called.  Come
and lunch on Friday.

DUMBY.  [_With perfect nonchalance_.]  Delighted!

[LADY PLYMDALE _glares with indignation at_ MR. DUMBY.  LORD AUGUSTUS
_follows_ MRS. ERLYNNE _and_ LORD WINDERMERE _into the ball-room holding
bouquet_.]

LADY PLYMDALE.  [_To_ MR. DUMBY.]  What an absolute brute you are!  I
never can believe a word you say!  Why did you tell me you didn’t know
her?  What do you mean by calling on her three times running?  You are
not to go to lunch there; of course you understand that?

DUMBY.  My dear Laura, I wouldn’t dream of going!

LADY PLYMDALE.  You haven’t told me her name yet!  Who is she?

DUMBY.  [_Coughs slightly and smooths his hair_.]  She’s a Mrs. Erlynne.

LADY PLYMDALE.  That woman!

DUMBY.  Yes; that is what every one calls her.

LADY PLYMDALE.  How very interesting!  How intensely interesting!  I
really must have a good stare at her.  [_Goes to door of ball-room and
looks in_.]  I have heard the most shocking things about her.  They say
she is ruining poor Windermere.  And Lady Windermere, who goes in for
being so proper, invites her!  How extremely amusing!  It takes a
thoroughly good woman to do a thoroughly stupid thing.  You are to lunch
there on Friday!

DUMBY.  Why?

LADY PLYMDALE.  Because I want you to take my husband with you.  He has
been so attentive lately, that he has become a perfect nuisance.  Now,
this woman is just the thing for him.  He’ll dance attendance upon her as
long as she lets him, and won’t bother me.  I assure you, women of that
kind are most useful.  They form the basis of other people’s marriages.

DUMBY.  What a mystery you are!

LADY PLYMDALE.  [_Looking at him_.]  I wish _you_ were!

DUMBY.  I am—to myself.  I am the only person in the world I should like
to know thoroughly; but I don’t see any chance of it just at present.

[_They pass into the ball-room_, _and_ LADY WINDERMERE _and_ LORD
DARLINGTON _enter from the terrace_.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  Yes.  Her coming here is monstrous, unbearable.  I know
now what you meant to-day at tea-time.  Why didn’t you tell me right out?
You should have!

LORD DARLINGTON.  I couldn’t!  A man can’t tell these things about
another man!  But if I had known he was going to make you ask her here
to-night, I think I would have told you.  That insult, at any rate, you
would have been spared.

LADY WINDERMERE.  I did not ask her.  He insisted on her coming—against
my entreaties—against my commands.  Oh! the house is tainted for me!  I
feel that every woman here sneers at me as she dances by with my husband.
What have I done to deserve this?  I gave him all my life.  He took
it—used it—spoiled it!  I am degraded in my own eyes; and I lack
courage—I am a coward!  [_Sits down on sofa_.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  If I know you at all, I know that you can’t live with a
man who treats you like this!  What sort of life would you have with him?
You would feel that he was lying to you every moment of the day.  You
would feel that the look in his eyes was false, his voice false, his
touch false, his passion false.  He would come to you when he was weary
of others; you would have to comfort him.  He would come to you when he
was devoted to others; you would have to charm him.  You would have to be
to him the mask of his real life, the cloak to hide his secret.

LADY WINDERMERE.  You are right—you are terribly right.  But where am I
to turn?  You said you would be my friend, Lord Darlington.—Tell me, what
am I to do?  Be my friend now.

LORD DARLINGTON.  Between men and women there is no friendship possible.
There is passion, enmity, worship, love, but no friendship.  I love you—

LADY WINDERMERE.  No, no!  [_Rises_.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  Yes, I love you!  You are more to me than anything in
the whole world.  What does your husband give you?  Nothing.  Whatever is
in him he gives to this wretched woman, whom he has thrust into your
society, into your home, to shame you before every one.  I offer you my
life—

LADY WINDERMERE.  Lord Darlington!

LORD DARLINGTON.  My life—my whole life.  Take it, and do with it what
you will. . . . I love you—love you as I have never loved any living
thing.  From the moment I met you I loved you, loved you blindly,
adoringly, madly!  You did not know it then—you know it now!  Leave this
house to-night.  I won’t tell you that the world matters nothing, or the
world’s voice, or the voice of society.  They matter a great deal.  They
matter far too much.  But there are moments when one has to choose
between living one’s own life, fully, entirely, completely—or dragging
out some false, shallow, degrading existence that the world in its
hypocrisy demands.  You have that moment now.  Choose!  Oh, my love,
choose.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Moving slowly away from him_, _and looking at him
with startled eyes_.]  I have not the courage.

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Following her_.]  Yes; you have the courage.  There
may be six months of pain, of disgrace even, but when you no longer bear
his name, when you bear mine, all will be well.  Margaret, my love, my
wife that shall be some day—yes, my wife!  You know it!  What are you
now?  This woman has the place that belongs by right to you.  Oh! go—go
out of this house, with head erect, with a smile upon your lips, with
courage in your eyes.  All London will know why you did it; and who will
blame you?  No one.  If they do, what matter?  Wrong?  What is wrong?
It’s wrong for a man to abandon his wife for a shameless woman.  It is
wrong for a wife to remain with a man who so dishonours her.  You said
once you would make no compromise with things.  Make none now.  Be brave!
Be yourself!

LADY WINDERMERE.  I am afraid of being myself.  Let me think!  Let me
wait!  My husband may return to me.  [_Sits down on sofa_.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  And you would take him back!  You are not what I
thought you were.  You are just the same as every other woman.  You would
stand anything rather than face the censure of a world, whose praise you
would despise.  In a week you will be driving with this woman in the
Park.  She will be your constant guest—your dearest friend.  You would
endure anything rather than break with one blow this monstrous tie.  You
are right.  You have no courage; none!

LADY WINDERMERE.  Ah, give me time to think.  I cannot answer you now.
[_Passes her hand nervously over her brow_.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  It must be now or not at all.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Rising from the sofa_.]  Then, not at all!  [_A
pause_.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  You break my heart!

LADY WINDERMERE.  Mine is already broken.  [_A pause_.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  To-morrow I leave England.  This is the last time I
shall ever look on you.  You will never see me again.  For one moment our
lives met—our souls touched.  They must never meet or touch again.
Good-bye, Margaret.  [_Exit_.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  How alone I am in life!  How terribly alone!

[_The music stops_.  _Enter the_ DUCHESS OF BERWICK _and_ LORD PAISLEY
_laughing and talking_.  _Other guests come on from ball-room_.]

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Dear Margaret, I’ve just been having such a
delightful chat with Mrs. Erlynne.  I am so sorry for what I said to you
this afternoon about her.  Of course, she must be all right if _you_
invite her.  A most attractive woman, and has such sensible views on
life.  Told me she entirely disapproved of people marrying more than
once, so I feel quite safe about poor Augustus.  Can’t imagine why people
speak against her.  It’s those horrid nieces of mine—the Saville
girls—they’re always talking scandal.  Still, I should go to Homburg,
dear, I really should.  She is just a little too attractive.  But where
is Agatha?  Oh, there she is:  [LADY AGATHA _and_ MR. HOPPER _enter from
terrace L.U.E._]  Mr. Hopper, I am very, very angry with you.  You have
taken Agatha out on the terrace, and she is so delicate.

HOPPER.  Awfully sorry, Duchess.  We went out for a moment and then got
chatting together.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  [_C._]  Ah, about dear Australia, I suppose?

HOPPER.  Yes!

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Agatha, darling!  [_Beckons her over_.]

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma!

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  [_Aside_.]  Did Mr. Hopper definitely—

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  And what answer did you give him, dear child?

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  [_Affectionately_.]  My dear one!  You always say
the right thing.  Mr. Hopper!  James!  Agatha has told me everything.
How cleverly you have both kept your secret.

HOPPER.  You don’t mind my taking Agatha off to Australia, then, Duchess?

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  [_Indignantly_.]  To Australia?  Oh, don’t mention
that dreadful vulgar place.

HOPPER.  But she said she’d like to come with me.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  [_Severely_.]  Did you say that, Agatha?

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Agatha, you say the most silly things possible.  I
think on the whole that Grosvenor Square would be a more healthy place to
reside in.  There are lots of vulgar people live in Grosvenor Square, but
at any rate there are no horrid kangaroos crawling about.  But we’ll talk
about that to-morrow.  James, you can take Agatha down.  You’ll come to
lunch, of course, James.  At half-past one, instead of two.  The Duke
will wish to say a few words to you, I am sure.

HOPPER.  I should like to have a chat with the Duke, Duchess.  He has not
said a single word to me yet.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  I think you’ll find he will have a great deal to say
to you to-morrow.  [_Exit_ LADY AGATHA _with_ MR. HOPPER.]  And now
good-night, Margaret.  I’m afraid it’s the old, old story, dear.
Love—well, not love at first sight, but love at the end of the season,
which is so much more satisfactory.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Good-night, Duchess.

[_Exit the_ DUCHESS OF BERWICK _on_ LORD PAISLEY’S _arm_.]

LADY PLYMDALE.  My dear Margaret, what a handsome woman your husband has
been dancing with!  I should be quite jealous if I were you!  Is she a
great friend of yours?

LADY WINDERMERE.  No!

LADY PLYMDALE.  Really?  Good-night, dear.  [_Looks at_ MR. DUMBY _and
exit_.]

DUMBY.  Awful manners young Hopper has!

CECIL GRAHAM.  Ah!  Hopper is one of Nature’s gentlemen, the worst type
of gentleman I know.

DUMBY.  Sensible woman, Lady Windermere.  Lots of wives would have
objected to Mrs. Erlynne coming.  But Lady Windermere has that uncommon
thing called common sense.

CECIL GRAHAM.  And Windermere knows that nothing looks so like innocence
as an indiscretion.

DUMBY.  Yes; dear Windermere is becoming almost modern.  Never thought he
would.  [_Bows to_ LADY WINDERMERE _and exit_.]

LADY JEDBURGH.  Good night, Lady Windermere.  What a fascinating woman
Mrs. Erlynne is!  She is coming to lunch on Thursday, won’t you come too?
I expect the Bishop and dear Lady Merton.

LADY WINDERMERE.  I am afraid I am engaged, Lady Jedburgh.

LADY JEDBURGH.  So sorry.  Come, dear.  [_Exeunt_ LADY JEDBURGH _and_
MISS GRAHAM.]

[_Enter_ MRS. ERLYNNE _and_ LORD WINDERMERE.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Charming ball it has been!  Quite reminds me of old days.
[_Sits on sofa_.]  And I see that there are just as many fools in society
as there used to be.  So pleased to find that nothing has altered!
Except Margaret.  She’s grown quite pretty.  The last time I saw
her—twenty years ago, she was a fright in flannel.  Positive fright, I
assure you.  The dear Duchess! and that sweet Lady Agatha!  Just the type
of girl I like!  Well, really, Windermere, if I am to be the Duchess’s
sister-in-law—

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Sitting L. of her_.]  But are you—?

[_Exit_ MR. CECIL GRAHAM _with rest of guests_.  LADY WINDERMERE
_watches_, _with a look of scorn and pain_, MRS. ERLYNNE _and her
husband_.  _They are unconscious of her presence_.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Oh, yes!  He’s to call to-morrow at twelve o’clock!  He
wanted to propose to-night.  In fact he did.  He kept on proposing.  Poor
Augustus, you know how he repeats himself.  Such a bad habit!  But I told
him I wouldn’t give him an answer till to-morrow.  Of course I am going
to take him.  And I dare say I’ll make him an admirable wife, as wives
go.  And there is a great deal of good in Lord Augustus.  Fortunately it
is all on the surface.  Just where good qualities should be.  Of course
you must help me in this matter.

LORD WINDERMERE.  I am not called on to encourage Lord Augustus, I
suppose?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Oh, no!  I do the encouraging.  But you will make me a
handsome settlement, Windermere, won’t you?

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Frowning_.]  Is that what you want to talk to me
about to-night?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Yes.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_With a gesture of impatience_.]  I will not talk of
it here.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Laughing_.]  Then we will talk of it on the terrace.
Even business should have a picturesque background.  Should it not,
Windermere?  With a proper background women can do anything.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Won’t to-morrow do as well?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  No; you see, to-morrow I am going to accept him.  And I
think it would be a good thing if I was able to tell him that I had—well,
what shall I say?—£2000 a year left to me by a third cousin—or a second
husband—or some distant relative of that kind.  It would be an additional
attraction, wouldn’t it?  You have a delightful opportunity now of paying
me a compliment, Windermere.  But you are not very clever at paying
compliments.  I am afraid Margaret doesn’t encourage you in that
excellent habit.  It’s a great mistake on her part.  When men give up
saying what is charming, they give up thinking what is charming.  But
seriously, what do you say to £2000?  £2500, I think.  In modern life
margin is everything.  Windermere, don’t you think the world an intensely
amusing place?  I do!

[_Exit on terrace with_ LORD WINDERMERE.  Music strikes up in ball-room.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  To stay in this house any longer is impossible.
To-night a man who loves me offered me his whole life.  I refused it.  It
was foolish of me.  I will offer him mine now.  I will give him mine.  I
will go to him!  [_Puts on cloak and goes to the door_, _then turns
back_.  _Sits down at table and writes a letter_, _puts it into an
envelope_, _and leaves it on table_.]  Arthur has never understood me.
When he reads this, he will.  He may do as he chooses now with his life.
I have done with mine as I think best, as I think right.  It is he who
has broken the bond of marriage—not I.  I only break its bondage.

                                                                 [_Exit_.]

[_PARKER enters L. and crosses towards the ball-room R._  _Enter_ MRS.
ERLYNNE.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Is Lady Windermere in the ball-room?

PARKER.  Her ladyship has just gone out.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Gone out?  She’s not on the terrace?

PARKER.  No, madam.  Her ladyship has just gone out of the house.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Starts_, _and looks at the servant with a puzzled
expression in her face_.]  Out of the house?

PARKER.  Yes, madam—her ladyship told me she had left a letter for his
lordship on the table.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  A letter for Lord Windermere?

PARKER.  Yes, madam.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Thank you.

[_Exit_ PARKER.  _The music in the ball-room stops_.]  Gone out of her
house!  A letter addressed to her husband!  [_Goes over to bureau and
looks at letter_.  _Takes it up and lays it down again with a shudder of
fear_.]  No, no!  It would be impossible!  Life doesn’t repeat its
tragedies like that!  Oh, why does this horrible fancy come across me?
Why do I remember now the one moment of my life I most wish to forget?
Does life repeat its tragedies?  [_Tears letter open and reads it_, _then
sinks down into a chair with a gesture of anguish_.]  Oh, how terrible!
The same words that twenty years ago I wrote to her father! and how
bitterly I have been punished for it!  No; my punishment, my real
punishment is to-night, is now!  [_Still seated R._]

[_Enter_ LORD WINDERMERE _L.U.E._]

LORD WINDERMERE.  Have you said good-night to my wife?  [_Comes C._]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Crushing letter in her hand_.]  Yes.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Where is she?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  She is very tired.  She has gone to bed.  She said she had
a headache.

LORD WINDERMERE.  I must go to her.  You’ll excuse me?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Rising hurriedly_.]  Oh, no!  It’s nothing serious.
She’s only very tired, that is all.  Besides, there are people still in
the supper-room.  She wants you to make her apologies to them.  She said
she didn’t wish to be disturbed.  [_Drops letter_.]  She asked me to tell
you!

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Picks up letter_.]  You have dropped something.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Oh yes, thank you, that is mine.  [_Puts out her hand to
take it_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Still looking at letter_.]  But it’s my wife’s
handwriting, isn’t it?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Takes the letter quickly_.]  Yes, it’s—an address.  Will
you ask them to call my carriage, please?

LORD WINDERMERE.  Certainly.

                                                     [_Goes L. and Exit_.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Thanks!  What can I do?  What can I do?  I feel a passion
awakening within me that I never felt before.  What can it mean?  The
daughter must not be like the mother—that would be terrible.  How can I
save her?  How can I save my child?  A moment may ruin a life.  Who knows
that better than I?  Windermere must be got out of the house; that is
absolutely necessary.  [_Goes L._]  But how shall I do it?  It must be
done somehow.  Ah!

[_Enter_ LORD AUGUSTUS _R.U.E. carrying bouquet_.]

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Dear lady, I am in such suspense!  May I not have an
answer to my request?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Lord Augustus, listen to me.  You are to take Lord
Windermere down to your club at once, and keep him there as long as
possible.  You understand?

LORD AUGUSTUS.  But you said you wished me to keep early hours!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Nervously_.]  Do what I tell you.  Do what I tell you.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  And my reward?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Your reward?  Your reward?  Oh! ask me that to-morrow.
But don’t let Windermere out of your sight to-night.  If you do I will
never forgive you.  I will never speak to you again.  I’ll have nothing
to do with you.  Remember you are to keep Windermere at your club, and
don’t let him come back to-night.

                                                               [_Exit L._]

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Well, really, I might be her husband already.  Positively
I might.  [_Follows her in a bewildered manner_.]

                                * * * * *

                                ACT DROP.




THIRD ACT


                                  SCENE

_Lord Darlington’s Rooms_.  _A large sofa is in front of fireplace R._
_At the back of the stage a curtain is drawn across the window_.  _Doors
L. and R._  _Table R. with writing materials.  Table C. with syphons,
glasses, and Tantalus frame_.  _Table L. with cigar and cigarette box.
Lamps lit_.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Standing by the fireplace_.]  Why doesn’t he come?
This waiting is horrible.  He should be here.  Why is he not here, to
wake by passionate words some fire within me?  I am cold—cold as a
loveless thing.  Arthur must have read my letter by this time.  If he
cared for me, he would have come after me, would have taken me back by
force.  But he doesn’t care.  He’s entrammelled by this woman—fascinated
by her—dominated by her.  If a woman wants to hold a man, she has merely
to appeal to what is worst in him.  We make gods of men and they leave
us.  Others make brutes of them and they fawn and are faithful.  How
hideous life is! . . . Oh! it was mad of me to come here, horribly mad.
And yet, which is the worst, I wonder, to be at the mercy of a man who
loves one, or the wife of a man who in one’s own house dishonours one?
What woman knows?  What woman in the whole world?  But will he love me
always, this man to whom I am giving my life?  What do I bring him?  Lips
that have lost the note of joy, eyes that are blinded by tears, chill
hands and icy heart.  I bring him nothing.  I must go back—no; I can’t go
back, my letter has put me in their power—Arthur would not take me back!
That fatal letter!  No!  Lord Darlington leaves England to-morrow.  I
will go with him—I have no choice.  [_Sits down for a few moments_.
_Then starts up and puts on her cloak_.]  No, no!  I will go back, let
Arthur do with me what he pleases.  I can’t wait here.  It has been
madness my coming.  I must go at once.  As for Lord Darlington—Oh! here
he is!  What shall I do?  What can I say to him?  Will he let me go away
at all?  I have heard that men are brutal, horrible . . . Oh!  [_Hides
her face in her hands_.]

[_Enter_ MRS. ERLYNNE _L._]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Lady Windermere!  [LADY WINDERMERE _starts and looks up_.
_Then recoils in contempt_.]  Thank Heaven I am in time.  You must go
back to your husband’s house immediately.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Must?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Authoritatively_.]  Yes, you must!  There is not a
second to be lost.  Lord Darlington may return at any moment.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Don’t come near me!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Oh!  You are on the brink of ruin, you are on the brink of
a hideous precipice.  You must leave this place at once, my carriage is
waiting at the corner of the street.  You must come with me and drive
straight home.

[LADY WINDERMERE _throws off her cloak and flings it on the sofa_.]

What are you doing?

LADY WINDERMERE.  Mrs. Erlynne—if you had not come here, I would have
gone back.  But now that I see you, I feel that nothing in the whole
world would induce me to live under the same roof as Lord Windermere.
You fill me with horror.  There is something about you that stirs the
wildest—rage within me.  And I know why you are here.  My husband sent
you to lure me back that I might serve as a blind to whatever relations
exist between you and him.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Oh!  You don’t think that—you can’t.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Go back to my husband, Mrs. Erlynne.  He belongs to you
and not to me.  I suppose he is afraid of a scandal.  Men are such
cowards.  They outrage every law of the world, and are afraid of the
world’s tongue.  But he had better prepare himself.  He shall have a
scandal.  He shall have the worst scandal there has been in London for
years.  He shall see his name in every vile paper, mine on every hideous
placard.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  No—no—

LADY WINDERMERE.  Yes! he shall.  Had he come himself, I admit I would
have gone back to the life of degradation you and he had prepared for
me—I was going back—but to stay himself at home, and to send you as his
messenger—oh! it was infamous—infamous.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_C._]  Lady Windermere, you wrong me horribly—you wrong
your husband horribly.  He doesn’t know you are here—he thinks you are
safe in your own house.  He thinks you are asleep in your own room.  He
never read the mad letter you wrote to him!

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_R._]  Never read it!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  No—he knows nothing about it.

LADY WINDERMERE.  How simple you think me!  [_Going to her_.]  You are
lying to me!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Restraining herself_.]  I am not.  I am telling you the
truth.

LADY WINDERMERE.  If my husband didn’t read my letter, how is it that you
are here?  Who told you I had left the house you were shameless enough to
enter?  Who told you where I had gone to?  My husband told you, and sent
you to decoy me back.  [_Crosses L._]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_R.C._]  Your husband has never seen the letter.  I—saw
it, I opened it.  I—read it.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Turning to her_.]  You opened a letter of mine to my
husband?  You wouldn’t dare!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Dare!  Oh! to save you from the abyss into which you are
falling, there is nothing in the world I would not dare, nothing in the
whole world.  Here is the letter.  Your husband has never read it.  He
never shall read it.  [_Going to fireplace_.]  It should never have been
written.  [_Tears it and throws it into the fire_.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_With infinite contempt in her voice and look_.]  How
do I know that that was my letter after all?  You seem to think the
commonest device can take me in!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Oh! why do you disbelieve everything I tell you?  What
object do you think I have in coming here, except to save you from utter
ruin, to save you from the consequence of a hideous mistake?  That letter
that is burnt now _was_ your letter.  I swear it to you!

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Slowly_.]  You took good care to burn it before I had
examined it.  I cannot trust you.  You, whose whole life is a lie, could
you speak the truth about anything?  [_Sits down_.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Hurriedly_.]  Think as you like about me—say what you
choose against me, but go back, go back to the husband you love.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Sullenly_.]  I do _not_ love him!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  You do, and you know that he loves you.

LADY WINDERMERE.  He does not understand what love is.  He understands it
as little as you do—but I see what you want.  It would be a great
advantage for you to get me back.  Dear Heaven! what a life I would have
then!  Living at the mercy of a woman who has neither mercy nor pity in
her, a woman whom it is an infamy to meet, a degradation to know, a vile
woman, a woman who comes between husband and wife!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_With a gesture of despair_.]  Lady Windermere, Lady
Windermere, don’t say such terrible things.  You don’t know how terrible
they are, how terrible and how unjust.  Listen, you must listen!  Only go
back to your husband, and I promise you never to communicate with him
again on any pretext—never to see him—never to have anything to do with
his life or yours.  The money that he gave me, he gave me not through
love, but through hatred, not in worship, but in contempt.  The hold I
have over him—

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Rising_.]  Ah! you admit you have a hold!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Yes, and I will tell you what it is.  It is his love for
you, Lady Windermere.

LADY WINDERMERE.  You expect me to believe that?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  You must believe it!  It is true.  It is his love for you
that has made him submit to—oh! call it what you like, tyranny, threats,
anything you choose.  But it is his love for you.  His desire to spare
you—shame, yes, shame and disgrace.

LADY WINDERMERE.  What do you mean?  You are insolent!  What have I to do
with you?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Humbly_.]  Nothing.  I know it—but I tell you that your
husband loves you—that you may never meet with such love again in your
whole life—that such love you will never meet—and that if you throw it
away, the day may come when you will starve for love and it will not be
given to you, beg for love and it will be denied you—Oh! Arthur loves
you!

LADY WINDERMERE.  Arthur?  And you tell me there is nothing between you?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Lady Windermere, before Heaven your husband is guiltless
of all offence towards you!  And I—I tell you that had it ever occurred
to me that such a monstrous suspicion would have entered your mind, I
would have died rather than have crossed your life or his—oh! died,
gladly died!  [_Moves away to sofa R._]

LADY WINDERMERE.  You talk as if you had a heart.  Women like you have no
hearts.  Heart is not in you.  You are bought and sold.  [_Sits L.C._]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Starts_, _with a gesture of pain_.  _Then restrains
herself_, _and comes over to where_ LADY WINDERMERE _is sitting_.  _As
she speaks_, _she stretches out her hands towards her_, _but does not
dare to touch her_.]  Believe what you choose about me.  I am not worth a
moment’s sorrow.  But don’t spoil your beautiful young life on my
account!  You don’t know what may be in store for you, unless you leave
this house at once.  You don’t know what it is to fall into the pit, to
be despised, mocked, abandoned, sneered at—to be an outcast! to find the
door shut against one, to have to creep in by hideous byways, afraid
every moment lest the mask should be stripped from one’s face, and all
the while to hear the laughter, the horrible laughter of the world, a
thing more tragic than all the tears the world has ever shed.  You don’t
know what it is.  One pays for one’s sin, and then one pays again, and
all one’s life one pays.  You must never know that.—As for me, if
suffering be an expiation, then at this moment I have expiated all my
faults, whatever they have been; for to-night you have made a heart in
one who had it not, made it and broken it.—But let that pass.  I may have
wrecked my own life, but I will not let you wreck yours.  You—why, you
are a mere girl, you would be lost.  You haven’t got the kind of brains
that enables a woman to get back.  You have neither the wit nor the
courage.  You couldn’t stand dishonour!  No!  Go back, Lady Windermere,
to the husband who loves you, whom you love.  You have a child, Lady
Windermere.  Go back to that child who even now, in pain or in joy, may
be calling to you.  [LADY WINDERMERE _rises_.]  God gave you that child.
He will require from you that you make his life fine, that you watch over
him.  What answer will you make to God if his life is ruined through you?
Back to your house, Lady Windermere—your husband loves you!  He has never
swerved for a moment from the love he bears you.  But even if he had a
thousand loves, you must stay with your child.  If he was harsh to you,
you must stay with your child.  If he ill-treated you, you must stay with
your child.  If he abandoned you, your place is with your child.

[LADY WINDERMERE _bursts into tears and buries her face in her hands_.]

[_Rushing to her_.]  Lady Windermere!

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Holding out her hands to her_, _helplessly_, _as a
child might do_.]  Take me home.  Take me home.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Is about to embrace her_.  _Then restrains herself_.
_There is a look of wonderful joy in her face_.]  Come!  Where is your
cloak?  [_Getting it from sofa_.]  Here.  Put it on.  Come at once!

[_They go to the door_.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  Stop!  Don’t you hear voices?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  No, no!  There was no one!

LADY WINDERMERE.  Yes, there is!  Listen!  Oh! that is my husband’s
voice!  He is coming in!  Save me!  Oh, it’s some plot!  You have sent
for him.

[_Voices outside_.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Silence!  I’m here to save you, if I can.  But I fear it
is too late!  There! [_Points to the curtain across the window_.]  The
first chance you have, slip out, if you ever get a chance!

LADY WINDERMERE.  But you?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Oh! never mind me.  I’ll face them.

[LADY WINDERMERE _hides herself behind the curtain_.]

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [_Outside_.]  Nonsense, dear Windermere, you must not
leave me!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Lord Augustus!  Then it is I who am lost!  [_Hesitates for
a moment_, then _looks round and sees door R._, _and exits through it_.]

[_Enter_ LORD DARLINGTON, MR. DUMBY, LORD WINDERMERE, LORD AUGUSTUS
LORTON, _and_ MR. CECIL GRAHAM.

DUMBY.  What a nuisance their turning us out of the club at this hour!
It’s only two o’clock.  [_Sinks into a chair_.]  The lively part of the
evening is only just beginning.  [_Yawns and closes his eyes_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  It is very good of you, Lord Darlington, allowing
Augustus to force our company on you, but I’m afraid I can’t stay long.

LORD DARLINGTON.  Really!  I am so sorry!  You’ll take a cigar, won’t
you?

LORD WINDERMERE.  Thanks!  [_Sits down_.]

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [_To_ LORD WINDERMERE.]  My dear boy, you must not dream
of going.  I have a great deal to talk to you about, of demmed
importance, too.  [_Sits down with him at L. table_.]

CECIL GRAHAM.  Oh!  We all know what that is!  Tuppy can’t talk about
anything but Mrs. Erlynne.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Well, that is no business of yours, is it, Cecil?

CECIL GRAHAM.  None!  That is why it interests me.  My own business
always bores me to death.  I prefer other people’s.

LORD DARLINGTON.  Have something to drink, you fellows.  Cecil, you’ll
have a whisky and soda?

CECIL GRAHAM.  Thanks.  [_Goes to table with_ LORD DARLINGTON.]  Mrs.
Erlynne looked very handsome to-night, didn’t she?

LORD DARLINGTON.  I am not one of her admirers.

CECIL GRAHAM.  I usen’t to be, but I am now.  Why! she actually made me
introduce her to poor dear Aunt Caroline.  I believe she is going to
lunch there.

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_In Purple_.]  No?

CECIL GRAHAM.  She is, really.

LORD DARLINGTON.  Excuse me, you fellows.  I’m going away to-morrow.  And
I have to write a few letters.  [_Goes to writing table and sits down_.]

DUMBY.  Clever woman, Mrs. Erlynne.

CECIL GRAHAM.  Hallo, Dumby!  I thought you were asleep.

DUMBY.  I am, I usually am!

LORD AUGUSTUS.  A very clever woman.  Knows perfectly well what a demmed
fool I am—knows it as well as I do myself.

[CECIL GRAHAM _comes towards him laughing_.]

Ah, you may laugh, my boy, but it is a great thing to come across a woman
who thoroughly understands one.

DUMBY.  It is an awfully dangerous thing.  They always end by marrying
one.

CECIL GRAHAM.  But I thought, Tuppy, you were never going to see her
again!  Yes! you told me so yesterday evening at the club.  You said
you’d heard—

[_Whispering to him_.]

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Oh, she’s explained that.

CECIL GRAHAM.  And the Wiesbaden affair?

LORD AUGUSTUS.  She’s explained that too.

DUMBY.  And her income, Tuppy?  Has she explained that?

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [_In a very serious voice_.]  She’s going to explain that
to-morrow.

[CECIL GRAHAM _goes back to C. table_.]

DUMBY.  Awfully commercial, women nowadays.  Our grandmothers threw their
caps over the mills, of course, but, by Jove, their granddaughters only
throw their caps over mills that can raise the wind for them.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  You want to make her out a wicked woman.  She is not!

CECIL GRAHAM.  Oh!  Wicked women bother one.  Good women bore one.  That
is the only difference between them.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [_Puffing a cigar_.]  Mrs. Erlynne has a future before
her.

DUMBY.  Mrs. Erlynne has a past before her.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  I prefer women with a past.  They’re always so demmed
amusing to talk to.

CECIL GRAHAM.  Well, you’ll have lots of topics of conversation with
_her_, Tuppy.  [_Rising and going to him_.]

LORD AUGUSTUS.  You’re getting annoying, dear-boy; you’re getting demmed
annoying.

CECIL GRAHAM.  [_Puts his hands on his shoulders_.]  Now, Tuppy, you’ve
lost your figure and you’ve lost your character.  Don’t lose your temper;
you have only got one.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  My dear boy, if I wasn’t the most good-natured man in
London—

CECIL GRAHAM.  We’d treat you with more respect, wouldn’t we, Tuppy?
[_Strolls away_.]

DUMBY.  The youth of the present day are quite monstrous.  They have
absolutely no respect for dyed hair.  [LORD AUGUSTUS _looks round
angrily_.]

CECIL GRAHAM.  Mrs. Erlynne has a very great respect for dear Tuppy.

DUMBY.  Then Mrs. Erlynne sets an admirable example to the rest of her
sex.  It is perfectly brutal the way most women nowadays behave to men
who are not their husbands.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Dumby, you are ridiculous, and Cecil, you let your
tongue run away with you.  You must leave Mrs. Erlynne alone.  You don’t
really know anything about her, and you’re always talking scandal against
her.

CECIL GRAHAM.  [_Coming towards him L.C._]  My dear Arthur, I never talk
scandal.  _I_ only talk gossip.

LORD WINDERMERE.  What is the difference between scandal and gossip?

CECIL GRAHAM.  Oh! gossip is charming!  History is merely gossip.  But
scandal is gossip made tedious by morality.  Now, I never moralise.  A
man who moralises is usually a hypocrite, and a woman who moralises is
invariably plain.  There is nothing in the whole world so unbecoming to a
woman as a Nonconformist conscience.  And most women know it, I’m glad to
say.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Just my sentiments, dear boy, just my sentiments.

CECIL GRAHAM.  Sorry to hear it, Tuppy; whenever people agree with me, I
always feel I must be wrong.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  My dear boy, when I was your age—

CECIL GRAHAM.  But you never were, Tuppy, and you never will be.  [_Goes
up C._]  I say, Darlington, let us have some cards.  You’ll play, Arthur,
won’t you?

LORD WINDERMERE.  No, thanks, Cecil.

DUMBY.  [_With a sigh_.]  Good heavens! how marriage ruins a man!  It’s
as demoralising as cigarettes, and far more expensive.

CECIL GRAHAM.  You’ll play, of course, Tuppy?

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [_Pouring himself out a brandy and soda at table_.]
Can’t, dear boy.  Promised Mrs. Erlynne never to play or drink again.

CECIL GRAHAM.  Now, my dear Tuppy, don’t be led astray into the paths of
virtue.  Reformed, you would be perfectly tedious.  That is the worst of
women.  They always want one to be good.  And if we are good, when they
meet us, they don’t love us at all.  They like to find us quite
irretrievably bad, and to leave us quite unattractively good.

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Rising from R. table_, _where he has been writing
letters_.]  They always do find us bad!

DUMBY.  I don’t think we are bad.  I think we are all good, except Tuppy.

LORD DARLINGTON.  No, we are all in the gutter, but some of us are
looking at the stars.  [_Sits down at C. table_.]

DUMBY.  We are all in the gutter, but some of us are looking at the
stars?  Upon my word, you are very romantic to-night, Darlington.

CECIL GRAHAM.  Too romantic!  You must be in love.  Who is the girl?

LORD DARLINGTON.  The woman I love is not free, or thinks she isn’t.
[_Glances instinctively at_ LORD WINDERMERE _while he speaks_.]

CECIL GRAHAM.  A married woman, then!  Well, there’s nothing in the world
like the devotion of a married woman.  It’s a thing no married man knows
anything about.

LORD DARLINGTON.  Oh! she doesn’t love me.  She is a good woman.  She is
the only good woman I have ever met in my life.

CECIL GRAHAM.  The only good woman you have ever met in your life?

LORD DARLINGTON.  Yes!

CECIL GRAHAM.  [_Lighting a cigarette_.]  Well, you are a lucky fellow!
Why, I have met hundreds of good women.  I never seem to meet any but
good women.  The world is perfectly packed with good women.  To know them
is a middle-class education.

LORD DARLINGTON.  This woman has purity and innocence.  She has
everything we men have lost.

CECIL GRAHAM.  My dear fellow, what on earth should we men do going about
with purity and innocence?  A carefully thought-out buttonhole is much
more effective.

DUMBY.  She doesn’t really love you then?

LORD DARLINGTON.  No, she does not!

DUMBY.  I congratulate you, my dear fellow.  In this world there are only
two tragedies.  One is not getting what one wants, and the other is
getting it.  The last is much the worst; the last is a real tragedy!  But
I am interested to hear she does not love you.  How long could you love a
woman who didn’t love you, Cecil?

CECIL GRAHAM.  A woman who didn’t love me?  Oh, all my life!

DUMBY.  So could I.  But it’s so difficult to meet one.

LORD DARLINGTON.  How can you be so conceited, DUMBY?

DUMBY.  I didn’t say it as a matter of conceit.  I said it as a matter of
regret.  I have been wildly, madly adored.  I am sorry I have.  It has
been an immense nuisance.  I should like to be allowed a little time to
myself now and then.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [_Looking round_.]  Time to educate yourself, I suppose.

DUMBY.  No, time to forget all I have learned.  That is much more
important, dear Tuppy.  [LORD AUGUSTUS _moves uneasily in his chair_.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  What cynics you fellows are!

CECIL GRAHAM.  What is a cynic?  [_Sitting on the back of the sofa_.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  A man who knows the price of everything and the value
of nothing.

CECIL GRAHAM.  And a sentimentalist, my dear Darlington, is a man who
sees an absurd value in everything, and doesn’t know the market price of
any single thing.

LORD DARLINGTON.  You always amuse me, Cecil.  You talk as if you were a
man of experience.

CECIL GRAHAM.  I am.  [_Moves up to front off fireplace_.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  You are far too young!

CECIL GRAHAM.  That is a great error.  Experience is a question of
instinct about life.  I have got it.  Tuppy hasn’t.  Experience is the
name Tuppy gives to his mistakes.  That is all.  [LORD AUGUSTUS _looks
round indignantly_.]

DUMBY.  Experience is the name every one gives to their mistakes.

CECIL GRAHAM.  [_Standing with his back to the fireplace_.]  One
shouldn’t commit any.  [_Sees_ LADY WINDERMERE’S _fan on sofa_.]

DUMBY.  Life would be very dull without them.

CECIL GRAHAM.  Of course you are quite faithful to this woman you are in
love with, Darlington, to this good woman?

LORD DARLINGTON.  Cecil, if one really loves a woman, all other women in
the world become absolutely meaningless to one.  Love changes one—_I_ am
changed.

CECIL GRAHAM.  Dear me!  How very interesting!  Tuppy, I want to talk to
you.  [LORD AUGUSTUS _takes no notice_.]

DUMBY.  It’s no use talking to Tuppy.  You might just as well talk to a
brick wall.

CECIL GRAHAM.  But I like talking to a brick wall—it’s the only thing in
the world that never contradicts me!  Tuppy!

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Well, what is it?  What is it?  [_Rising and going over
to_ CECIL GRAHAM.]

CECIL GRAHAM.  Come over here.  I want you particularly.  [_Aside_.]
Darlington has been moralising and talking about the purity of love, and
that sort of thing, and he has got some woman in his rooms all the time.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  No, really! really!

CECIL GRAHAM.  [_In a low voice_.]  Yes, here is her fan.  [_Points to
the fan_.]

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [_Chuckling_.]  By Jove!  By Jove!

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Up by door_.]  I am really off now, Lord Darlington.
I am sorry you are leaving England so soon.  Pray call on us when you
come back!  My wife and I will be charmed to see you!

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Upstage with_ LORD WINDERMERE.]  I am afraid I shall
be away for many years.  Good-night!

CECIL GRAHAM.  Arthur!

LORD WINDERMERE.  What?

CECIL GRAHAM.  I want to speak to you for a moment.  No, do come!

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Putting on his coat_.]  I can’t—I’m off!

CECIL GRAHAM.  It is something very particular.  It will interest you
enormously.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Smiling_.]  It is some of your nonsense, Cecil.

CECIL GRAHAM.  It isn’t!  It isn’t really.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [_Going to him_.]  My dear fellow, you mustn’t go yet.  I
have a lot to talk to you about.  And Cecil has something to show you.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Walking over_.]  Well, what is it?

CECIL GRAHAM.  Darlington has got a woman here in his rooms.  Here is her
fan.  Amusing, isn’t it?  [_A pause_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  Good God!  [_Seizes the fan_—DUMBY _rises_.]

CECIL GRAHAM.  What is the matter?

LORD WINDERMERE.  Lord Darlington!

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Turning round_.]  Yes!

LORD WINDERMERE.  What is my wife’s fan doing here in your rooms?  Hands
off, Cecil.  Don’t touch me.

LORD DARLINGTON.  Your wife’s fan?

LORD WINDERMERE.  Yes, here it is!

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Walking towards him_.]  I don’t know!

LORD WINDERMERE.  You must know.  I demand an explanation.  Don’t hold
me, you fool.  [_To_ CECIL GRAHAM.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Aside_.]  She is here after all!

LORD WINDERMERE.  Speak, sir!  Why is my wife’s fan here?  Answer me!  By
God!  I’ll search your rooms, and if my wife’s here, I’ll—  [_Moves_.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  You shall not search my rooms.  You have no right to do
so.  I forbid you!

LORD WINDERMERE.  You scoundrel!  I’ll not leave your room till I have
searched every corner of it!  What moves behind that curtain?  [_Rushes
towards the curtain C._]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Enters behind R._]  Lord Windermere!

LORD WINDERMERE.  Mrs. Erlynne!

[_Every one starts and turns round_.  LADY WINDERMERE _slips out from
behind the curtain and glides from the room L._]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  I am afraid I took your wife’s fan in mistake for my own,
when I was leaving your house to-night.  I am so sorry.  [_Takes fan from
him_.  LORD WINDERMERE _looks at her in contempt_.  LORD DARLINGTON _in
mingled astonishment and anger_.  LORD AUGUSTUS _turns away_.  _The other
men smile at each other_.]

                                ACT DROP.




FOURTH ACT


                         SCENE—Same as in Act I.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Lying on sofa_.]  How can I tell him?  I can’t tell
him.  It would kill me.  I wonder what happened after I escaped from that
horrible room.  Perhaps she told them the true reason of her being there,
and the real meaning of that—fatal fan of mine.  Oh, if he knows—how can
I look him in the face again?  He would never forgive me.  [_Touches
bell_.]  How securely one thinks one lives—out of reach of temptation,
sin, folly.  And then suddenly—Oh!  Life is terrible.  It rules us, we do
not rule it.

[_Enter_ ROSALIE _R._]

ROSALIE.  Did your ladyship ring for me?

LADY WINDERMERE.  Yes.  Have you found out at what time Lord Windermere
came in last night?

ROSALIE.  His lordship did not come in till five o’clock.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Five o’clock?  He knocked at my door this morning,
didn’t he?

ROSALIE.  Yes, my lady—at half-past nine.  I told him your ladyship was
not awake yet.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Did he say anything?

ROSALIE.  Something about your ladyship’s fan.  I didn’t quite catch what
his lordship said.  Has the fan been lost, my lady?  I can’t find it, and
Parker says it was not left in any of the rooms.  He has looked in all of
them and on the terrace as well.

LADY WINDERMERE.  It doesn’t matter.  Tell Parker not to trouble.  That
will do.

                                                         [_Exit_ ROSALIE.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Rising_.]  She is sure to tell him.  I can fancy a
person doing a wonderful act of self-sacrifice, doing it spontaneously,
recklessly, nobly—and afterwards finding out that it costs too much.  Why
should she hesitate between her ruin and mine? . . . How strange!  I
would have publicly disgraced her in my own house.  She accepts public
disgrace in the house of another to save me. . . . There is a bitter
irony in things, a bitter irony in the way we talk of good and bad women.
. . . Oh, what a lesson! and what a pity that in life we only get our
lessons when they are of no use to us!  For even if she doesn’t tell, I
must.  Oh! the shame of it, the shame of it.  To tell it is to live
through it all again.  Actions are the first tragedy in life, words are
the second.  Words are perhaps the worst.  Words are merciless. . . . Oh!
[_Starts as_ LORD WINDERMERE _enters_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Kisses her_.]  Margaret—how pale you look!

LADY WINDERMERE.  I slept very badly.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Sitting on sofa with her_.]  I am so sorry.  I came
in dreadfully late, and didn’t like to wake you.  You are crying, dear.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Yes, I am crying, for I have something to tell you,
Arthur.

LORD WINDERMERE.  My dear child, you are not well.  You’ve been doing too
much.  Let us go away to the country.  You’ll be all right at Selby.  The
season is almost over.  There is no use staying on.  Poor darling!  We’ll
go away to-day, if you like.  [_Rises_.]  We can easily catch the 3.40.
I’ll send a wire to Fannen.  [_Crosses and sits down at table to write a
telegram_.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  Yes; let us go away to-day.  No; I can’t go to-day,
Arthur.  There is some one I must see before I leave town—some one who
has been kind to me.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Rising and leaning over sofa_.]  Kind to you?

LADY WINDERMERE.  Far more than that.  [_Rises and goes to him_.]  I will
tell you, Arthur, but only love me, love me as you used to love me.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Used to?  You are not thinking of that wretched woman
who came here last night?  [_Coming round and sitting R. of her_.]  You
don’t still imagine—no, you couldn’t.

LADY WINDERMERE.  I don’t.  I know now I was wrong and foolish.

LORD WINDERMERE.  It was very good of you to receive her last night—but
you are never to see her again.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Why do you say that?  [_A pause_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Holding her hand_.]  Margaret, I thought Mrs. Erlynne
was a woman more sinned against than sinning, as the phrase goes.  I
thought she wanted to be good, to get back into a place that she had lost
by a moment’s folly, to lead again a decent life.  I believed what she
told me—I was mistaken in her.  She is bad—as bad as a woman can be.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Arthur, Arthur, don’t talk so bitterly about any woman.
I don’t think now that people can be divided into the good and the bad as
though they were two separate races or creations.  What are called good
women may have terrible things in them, mad moods of recklessness,
assertion, jealousy, sin.  Bad women, as they are termed, may have in
them sorrow, repentance, pity, sacrifice.  And I don’t think Mrs. Erlynne
a bad woman—I know she’s not.

LORD WINDERMERE.  My dear child, the woman’s impossible.  No matter what
harm she tries to do us, you must never see her again.  She is
inadmissible anywhere.

LADY WINDERMERE.  But I want to see her.  I want her to come here.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Never!

LADY WINDERMERE.  She came here once as _your_ guest.  She must come now
as _mine_.  That is but fair.

LORD WINDERMERE.  She should never have come here.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Rising_.]  It is too late, Arthur, to say that now.
[_Moves away_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Rising_.]  Margaret, if you knew where Mrs. Erlynne
went last night, after she left this house, you would not sit in the same
room with her.  It was absolutely shameless, the whole thing.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Arthur, I can’t bear it any longer.  I must tell you.
Last night—

[_Enter_ PARKER _with a tray on which lie_ LADY WINDERMERE’S _fan and a
card_.]

PARKER.  Mrs. Erlynne has called to return your ladyship’s fan which she
took away by mistake last night.  Mrs. Erlynne has written a message on
the card.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Oh, ask Mrs. Erlynne to be kind enough to come up.
[_Reads card_.]  Say I shall be very glad to see her.

                                                          [_Exit_ PARKER.]

She wants to see me, Arthur.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Takes card and looks at it_.]  Margaret, I _beg_ you
not to.  Let me see her first, at any rate.  She’s a very dangerous
woman.  She is the most dangerous woman I know.  You don’t realise what
you’re doing.

LADY WINDERMERE.  It is right that I should see her.

LORD WINDERMERE.  My child, you may be on the brink of a great sorrow.
Don’t go to meet it.  It is absolutely necessary that I should see her
before you do.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Why should it be necessary?

[_Enter_ PARKER.]

PARKER.  Mrs. Erlynne.

[_Enter_ MRS. ERLYNNE.]

                                                          [_Exit_ PARKER.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  How do you do, Lady Windermere?  [_To_ LORD WINDERMERE.]
How do you do?  Do you know, Lady Windermere, I am so sorry about your
fan.  I can’t imagine how I made such a silly mistake.  Most stupid of
me.  And as I was driving in your direction, I thought I would take the
opportunity of returning your property in person with many apologies for
my carelessness, and of bidding you good-bye.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Good-bye?  [_Moves towards sofa with_ MRS. ERLYNNE _and
sits down beside her_.]  Are you going away, then, Mrs. Erlynne?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Yes; I am going to live abroad again.  The English climate
doesn’t suit me.  My—heart is affected here, and that I don’t like.  I
prefer living in the south.  London is too full of fogs and—and serious
people, Lord Windermere.  Whether the fogs produce the serious people or
whether the serious people produce the fogs, I don’t know, but the whole
thing rather gets on my nerves, and so I’m leaving this afternoon by the
Club Train.

LADY WINDERMERE.  This afternoon?  But I wanted so much to come and see
you.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  How kind of you!  But I am afraid I have to go.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Shall I never see you again, Mrs. Erlynne?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  I am afraid not.  Our lives lie too far apart.  But there
is a little thing I would like you to do for me.  I want a photograph of
you, Lady Windermere—would you give me one?  You don’t know how gratified
I should be.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Oh, with pleasure.  There is one on that table.  I’ll
show it to you. [_Goes across to the table_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Coming up to_ MRS. ERLYNNE _and speaking in a low
voice_.]  It is monstrous your intruding yourself here after your conduct
last night.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_With an amused smile_.]  My dear Windermere, manners
before morals!

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Returning_.]  I’m afraid it is very flattering—I am
not so pretty as that.  [_Showing photograph_.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  You are much prettier.  But haven’t you got one of
yourself with your little boy?

LADY WINDERMERE.  I have.  Would you prefer one of those?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Yes.

LADY WINDERMERE.  I’ll go and get it for you, if you’ll excuse me for a
moment.  I have one upstairs.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  So sorry, Lady Windermere, to give you so much trouble.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Moves to door R._]  No trouble at all, Mrs. Erlynne.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Thanks so much.

[_Exit_ LADY WINDERMERE _R._]  You seem rather out of temper this
morning, Windermere.  Why should you be?  Margaret and I get on
charmingly together.

LORD WINDERMERE.  I can’t bear to see you with her.  Besides, you have
not told me the truth, Mrs. Erlynne.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  I have not told _her_ the truth, you mean.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Standing C._]  I sometimes wish you had.  I should
have been spared then the misery, the anxiety, the annoyance of the last
six months.  But rather than my wife should know—that the mother whom she
was taught to consider as dead, the mother whom she has mourned as dead,
is living—a divorced woman, going about under an assumed name, a bad
woman preying upon life, as I know you now to be—rather than that, I was
ready to supply you with money to pay bill after bill, extravagance after
extravagance, to risk what occurred yesterday, the first quarrel I have
ever had with my wife.  You don’t understand what that means to me.  How
could you?  But I tell you that the only bitter words that ever came from
those sweet lips of hers were on your account, and I hate to see you next
her.  You sully the innocence that is in her. [_Moves L.C._]  And then I
used to think that with all your faults you were frank and honest.  You
are not.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Why do you say that?

LORD WINDERMERE.  You made me get you an invitation to my wife’s ball.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  For my daughter’s ball—yes.

LORD WINDERMERE.  You came, and within an hour of your leaving the house
you are found in a man’s rooms—you are disgraced before every one.
[_Goes up stage C._]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Yes.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Turning round on her_.]  Therefore I have a right to
look upon you as what you are—a worthless, vicious woman.  I have the
right to tell you never to enter this house, never to attempt to come
near my wife—

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Coldly_.]  My daughter, you mean.

LORD WINDERMERE.  You have no right to claim her as your daughter.  You
left her, abandoned her when she was but a child in the cradle, abandoned
her for your lover, who abandoned you in turn.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Rising_.]  Do you count that to his credit, Lord
Windermere—or to mine?

LORD WINDERMERE.  To his, now that I know you.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Take care—you had better be careful.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Oh, I am not going to mince words for you.  I know you
thoroughly.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Looks steadily at him_.]  I question that.

LORD WINDERMERE.  I _do_ know you.  For twenty years of your life you
lived without your child, without a thought of your child.  One day you
read in the papers that she had married a rich man.  You saw your hideous
chance.  You knew that to spare her the ignominy of learning that a woman
like you was her mother, I would endure anything.  You began your
blackmailing.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Shrugging her shoulders_.]  Don’t use ugly words,
Windermere.  They are vulgar.  I saw my chance, it is true, and took it.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Yes, you took it—and spoiled it all last night by being
found out.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_With a strange smile_.]  You are quite right, I spoiled
it all last night.

LORD WINDERMERE.  And as for your blunder in taking my wife’s fan from
here and then leaving it about in Darlington’s rooms, it is unpardonable.
I can’t bear the sight of it now.  I shall never let my wife use it
again.  The thing is soiled for me.  You should have kept it and not
brought it back.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  I think I shall keep it.  [_Goes up_.]  It’s extremely
pretty.  [_Takes up fan_.]  I shall ask Margaret to give it to me.

LORD WINDERMERE.  I hope my wife will give it you.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Oh, I’m sure she will have no objection.

LORD WINDERMERE.  I wish that at the same time she would give you a
miniature she kisses every night before she prays—It’s the miniature of a
young innocent-looking girl with beautiful _dark_ hair.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Ah, yes, I remember.  How long ago that seems!  [_Goes to
sofa and sits down_.]  It was done before I was married.  Dark hair and
an innocent expression were the fashion then, Windermere!  [_A pause_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  What do you mean by coming here this morning?  What is
your object?  [_Crossing L.C. and sitting_.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_With a note of irony in her voice_.]  To bid good-bye to
my dear daughter, of course.  [LORD WINDERMERE _bites his under lip in
anger_.  MRS. ERLYNNE _looks at him_, _and her voice and manner become
serious_.  _In her accents at she talks there is a note of deep tragedy_.
_For a moment she reveals herself_.]  Oh, don’t imagine I am going to
have a pathetic scene with her, weep on her neck and tell her who I am,
and all that kind of thing.  I have no ambition to play the part of a
mother.  Only once in my life have I known a mother’s feelings.  That was
last night.  They were terrible—they made me suffer—they made me suffer
too much.  For twenty years, as you say, I have lived childless,—I want
to live childless still.  [_Hiding her feelings with a trivial laugh_.]
Besides, my dear Windermere, how on earth could I pose as a mother with a
grown-up daughter?  Margaret is twenty-one, and I have never admitted
that I am more than twenty-nine, or thirty at the most.  Twenty-nine when
there are pink shades, thirty when there are not.  So you see what
difficulties it would involve.  No, as far as I am concerned, let your
wife cherish the memory of this dead, stainless mother.  Why should I
interfere with her illusions?  I find it hard enough to keep my own.  I
lost one illusion last night.  I thought I had no heart.  I find I have,
and a heart doesn’t suit me, Windermere.  Somehow it doesn’t go with
modern dress.  It makes one look old.  [_Takes up hand-mirror from table
and looks into it_.]  And it spoils one’s career at critical moments.

LORD WINDERMERE.  You fill me with horror—with absolute horror.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Rising_.]  I suppose, Windermere, you would like me to
retire into a convent, or become a hospital nurse, or something of that
kind, as people do in silly modern novels.  That is stupid of you,
Arthur; in real life we don’t do such things—not as long as we have any
good looks left, at any rate.  No—what consoles one nowadays is not
repentance, but pleasure.  Repentance is quite out of date.  And besides,
if a woman really repents, she has to go to a bad dressmaker, otherwise
no one believes in her.  And nothing in the world would induce me to do
that.  No; I am going to pass entirely out of your two lives.  My coming
into them has been a mistake—I discovered that last night.

LORD WINDERMERE.  A fatal mistake.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Smiling_.]  Almost fatal.

LORD WINDERMERE.  I am sorry now I did not tell my wife the whole thing
at once.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  I regret my bad actions.  You regret your good ones—that
is the difference between us.

LORD WINDERMERE.  I don’t trust you.  I _will_ tell my wife.  It’s better
for her to know, and from me.  It will cause her infinite pain—it will
humiliate her terribly, but it’s right that she should know.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  You propose to tell her?

LORD WINDERMERE.  I am going to tell her.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Going up to him_.]  If you do, I will make my name so
infamous that it will mar every moment of her life.  It will ruin her,
and make her wretched.  If you dare to tell her, there is no depth of
degradation I will not sink to, no pit of shame I will not enter.  You
shall not tell her—I forbid you.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Why?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_After a pause_.]  If I said to you that I cared for her,
perhaps loved her even—you would sneer at me, wouldn’t you?

LORD WINDERMERE.  I should feel it was not true.  A mother’s love means
devotion, unselfishness, sacrifice.  What could you know of such things?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  You are right.  What could I know of such things?  Don’t
let us talk any more about it—as for telling my daughter who I am, that I
do not allow.  It is my secret, it is not yours.  If I make up my mind to
tell her, and I think I will, I shall tell her before I leave the
house—if not, I shall never tell her.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Angrily_.]  Then let me beg of you to leave our house
at once.  I will make your excuses to Margaret.

[_Enter_ LADY WINDERMERE _R._  _She goes over to_ MRS. ERLYNNE _with the
photograph in her hand_.  LORD WINDERMERE _moves to back of sofa_, _and
anxiously watches_ MRS. ERLYNNE _as the scene progresses_.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  I am so sorry, Mrs. Erlynne, to have kept you waiting.
I couldn’t find the photograph anywhere.  At last I discovered it in my
husband’s dressing-room—he had stolen it.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Takes the photograph from her and looks at it_.]  I am
not surprised—it is charming.  [_Goes over to sofa with_ LADY WINDERMERE,
_and sits down beside her_.  _Looks again at the photograph_.]  And so
that is your little boy!  What is he called?

LADY WINDERMERE.  Gerard, after my dear father.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Laying the photograph down_.]  Really?

LADY WINDERMERE.  Yes.  If it had been a girl, I would have called it
after my mother.  My mother had the same name as myself, Margaret.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  My name is Margaret too.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Indeed!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Yes.  [_Pause_.]  You are devoted to your mother’s memory,
Lady Windermere, your husband tells me.

LADY WINDERMERE.  We all have ideals in life.  At least we all should
have.  Mine is my mother.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Ideals are dangerous things.  Realities are better.  They
wound, but they’re better.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Shaking her head_.]  If I lost my ideals, I should
lose everything.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Everything?

LADY WINDERMERE.  Yes.  [_Pause_.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Did your father often speak to you of your mother?

LADY WINDERMERE.  No, it gave him too much pain.  He told me how my
mother had died a few months after I was born.  His eyes filled with
tears as he spoke.  Then he begged me never to mention her name to him
again.  It made him suffer even to hear it.  My father—my father really
died of a broken heart.  His was the most ruined life know.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Rising_.]  I am afraid I must go now, Lady Windermere.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Rising_.]  Oh no, don’t.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  I think I had better.  My carriage must have come back by
this time.  I sent it to Lady Jedburgh’s with a note.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Arthur, would you mind seeing if Mrs. Erlynne’s
carriage has come back?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Pray don’t trouble, Lord Windermere.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Yes, Arthur, do go, please.

[LORD WINDERMERE _hesitated for a moment and looks at_ MRS. ERLYNNE.
_She remains quite impassive_.  _He leaves the room_.]

[_To_ MRS. ERLYNNE.]  Oh!  What am I to say to you?  You saved me last
night?  [_Goes towards her_.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Hush—don’t speak of it.

LADY WINDERMERE.  I must speak of it.  I can’t let you think that I am
going to accept this sacrifice.  I am not.  It is too great.  I am going
to tell my husband everything.  It is my duty.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  It is not your duty—at least you have duties to others
besides him.  You say you owe me something?

LADY WINDERMERE.  I owe you everything.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Then pay your debt by silence.  That is the only way in
which it can be paid.  Don’t spoil the one good thing I have done in my
life by telling it to any one.  Promise me that what passed last night
will remain a secret between us.  You must not bring misery into your
husband’s life.  Why spoil his love?  You must not spoil it.  Love is
easily killed.  Oh! how easily love is killed.  Pledge me your word, Lady
Windermere, that you will never tell him.  I insist upon it.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_With bowed head_.]  It is your will, not mine.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Yes, it is my will.  And never forget your child—I like to
think of you as a mother.  I like you to think of yourself as one.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Looking up_.]  I always will now.  Only once in my
life I have forgotten my own mother—that was last night.  Oh, if I had
remembered her I should not have been so foolish, so wicked.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_With a slight shudder_.]  Hush, last night is quite
over.

[_Enter_ LORD WINDERMERE.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  Your carriage has not come back yet, Mrs. Erlynne.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  It makes no matter.  I’ll take a hansom.  There is nothing
in the world so respectable as a good Shrewsbury and Talbot.  And now,
dear Lady Windermere, I am afraid it is really good-bye.  [_Moves up C._]
Oh, I remember.  You’ll think me absurd, but do you know I’ve taken a
great fancy to this fan that I was silly enough to run away with last
night from your ball.  Now, I wonder would you give it to me?  Lord
Windermere says you may.  I know it is his present.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Oh, certainly, if it will give you any pleasure.  But
it has my name on it.  It has ‘Margaret’ on it.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  But we have the same Christian name.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Oh, I forgot.  Of course, do have it.  What a wonderful
chance our names being the same!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Quite wonderful.  Thanks—it will always remind me of you.
[_Shakes hands with her_.]

[_Enter_ PARKER.]

PARKER.  Lord Augustus Lorton.  Mrs. Erlynne’s carriage has come.

[_Enter_ LORD AUGUSTUS.]

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Good morning, dear boy.  Good morning, Lady Windermere.
[_Sees_ MRS. ERLYNNE.]  Mrs. Erlynne!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  How do you do, Lord Augustus?  Are you quite well this
morning?

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [_Coldly_.]  Quite well, thank you, Mrs. Erlynne.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  You don’t look at all well, Lord Augustus.  You stop up
too late—it is so bad for you.  You really should take more care of
yourself.  Good-bye, Lord Windermere. [_Goes towards door with a bow to_
LORD AUGUSTUS.  _Suddenly smiles and looks back at him_.]  Lord Augustus!
Won’t you see me to my carriage?  You might carry the fan.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Allow me!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  No; I want Lord Augustus.  I have a special message for
the dear Duchess.  Won’t you carry the fan, Lord Augustus?

LORD AUGUSTUS.  If you really desire it, Mrs. Erlynne.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Laughing_.]  Of course I do.  You’ll carry it so
gracefully.  You would carry off anything gracefully, dear Lord Augustus.

[_When she reaches the door she looks back for a moment at_ LADY
WINDERMERE.  _Their eyes meet_.  _Then she turns_, _and exit C. followed
by_ LORD AUGUSTUS.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  You will never speak against Mrs. Erlynne again,
Arthur, will you?

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Gravely_.]  She is better than one thought her.

LADY WINDERMERE.  She is better than I am.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Smiling as he strokes her hair_.]  Child, you and she
belong to different worlds.  Into your world evil has never entered.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Don’t say that, Arthur.  There is the same world for
all of us, and good and evil, sin and innocence, go through it hand in
hand.  To shut one’s eyes to half of life that one may live securely is
as though one blinded oneself that one might walk with more safety in a
land of pit and precipice.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Moves down with her_.]  Darling, why do you say that?

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Sits on sofa_.]  Because I, who had shut my eyes to
life, came to the brink.  And one who had separated us—

LORD WINDERMERE.  We were never separated.

LADY WINDERMERE.  We never must be again.  O Arthur, don’t love me less,
and I will trust you more.  I will trust you absolutely.  Let us go to
Selby.  In the Rose Garden at Selby the roses are white and red.

[_Enter_ LORD AUGUSTUS _C._]

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Arthur, she has explained everything!

[LADY WINDERMERE _looks horribly frightened at this_.  LORD WINDERMERE
_starts_.  LORD AUGUSTUS _takes_ WINDERMERE _by the arm and brings him to
front of stage_.  _He talks rapidly and in a low voice_.  LADY WINDERMERE
_stands watching them in terror_.]  My dear fellow, she has explained
every demmed thing.  We all wronged her immensely.  It was entirely for
my sake she went to Darlington’s rooms.  Called first at the Club—fact
is, wanted to put me out of suspense—and being told I had gone
on—followed—naturally frightened when she heard a lot of us coming
in—retired to another room—I assure you, most gratifying to me, the whole
thing.  We all behaved brutally to her.  She is just the woman for me.
Suits me down to the ground.  All the conditions she makes are that we
live entirely out of England.  A very good thing too.  Demmed clubs,
demmed climate, demmed cooks, demmed everything.  Sick of it all!

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Frightened_.]  Has Mrs. Erlynne—?

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [_Advancing towards her with a low bow_.]  Yes, Lady
Windermere—  Mrs. Erlynne has done me the honour of accepting my hand.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Well, you are certainly marrying a very clever woman!

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Taking her husband’s hand_.]  Ah, you’re marrying a
very good woman!

                                * * * * *

                                 CURTAIN




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LADY WINDERMERE'S FAN***


******* This file should be named 790-0.txt or 790-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/7/9/790


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

﻿DE PROFUNDIS


. . . Suffering is one very long moment.  We cannot divide it by seasons.
We can only record its moods, and chronicle their return.  With us time
itself does not progress.  It revolves.  It seems to circle round one
centre of pain.  The paralysing immobility of a life every circumstance
of which is regulated after an unchangeable pattern, so that we eat and
drink and lie down and pray, or kneel at least for prayer, according to
the inflexible laws of an iron formula: this immobile quality, that makes
each dreadful day in the very minutest detail like its brother, seems to
communicate itself to those external forces the very essence of whose
existence is ceaseless change.  Of seed-time or harvest, of the reapers
bending over the corn, or the grape gatherers threading through the
vines, of the grass in the orchard made white with broken blossoms or
strewn with fallen fruit: of these we know nothing and can know nothing.

For us there is only one season, the season of sorrow.  The very sun and
moon seem taken from us.  Outside, the day may be blue and gold, but the
light that creeps down through the thickly-muffled glass of the small
iron-barred window beneath which one sits is grey and niggard.  It is
always twilight in one's cell, as it is always twilight in one's heart.
And in the sphere of thought, no less than in the sphere of time, motion
is no more.  The thing that you personally have long ago forgotten, or
can easily forget, is happening to me now, and will happen to me again to-
morrow.  Remember this, and you will be able to understand a little of
why I am writing, and in this manner writing. . . .

A week later, I am transferred here.  Three more months go over and my
mother dies.  No one knew how deeply I loved and honoured her.  Her death
was terrible to me; but I, once a lord of language, have no words in
which to express my anguish and my shame.  She and my father had
bequeathed me a name they had made noble and honoured, not merely in
literature, art, archaeology, and science, but in the public history of
my own country, in its evolution as a nation.  I had disgraced that name
eternally.  I had made it a low by-word among low people.  I had dragged
it through the very mire.  I had given it to brutes that they might make
it brutal, and to fools that they might turn it into a synonym for folly.
What I suffered then, and still suffer, is not for pen to write or paper
to record.  My wife, always kind and gentle to me, rather than that I
should hear the news from indifferent lips, travelled, ill as she was,
all the way from Genoa to England to break to me herself the tidings of
so irreparable, so irremediable, a loss.  Messages of sympathy reached me
from all who had still affection for me.  Even people who had not known
me personally, hearing that a new sorrow had broken into my life, wrote
to ask that some expression of their condolence should be conveyed to me.
. . .

Three months go over.  The calendar of my daily conduct and labour that
hangs on the outside of my cell door, with my name and sentence written
upon it, tells me that it is May. . . .

Prosperity, pleasure and success, may be rough of grain and common in
fibre, but sorrow is the most sensitive of all created things.  There is
nothing that stirs in the whole world of thought to which sorrow does not
vibrate in terrible and exquisite pulsation.  The thin beaten-out leaf of
tremulous gold that chronicles the direction of forces the eye cannot see
is in comparison coarse.  It is a wound that bleeds when any hand but
that of love touches it, and even then must bleed again, though not in
pain.

Where there is sorrow there is holy ground.  Some day people will realise
what that means.  They will know nothing of life till they do,--and
natures like his can realise it.  When I was brought down from my prison
to the Court of Bankruptcy, between two policemen,--waited in the long
dreary corridor that, before the whole crowd, whom an action so sweet and
simple hushed into silence, he might gravely raise his hat to me, as,
handcuffed and with bowed head, I passed him by.  Men have gone to heaven
for smaller things than that.  It was in this spirit, and with this mode
of love, that the saints knelt down to wash the feet of the poor, or
stooped to kiss the leper on the cheek.  I have never said one single
word to him about what he did.  I do not know to the present moment
whether he is aware that I was even conscious of his action.  It is not a
thing for which one can render formal thanks in formal words.  I store it
in the treasure-house of my heart.  I keep it there as a secret debt that
I am glad to think I can never possibly repay.  It is embalmed and kept
sweet by the myrrh and cassia of many tears.  When wisdom has been
profitless to me, philosophy barren, and the proverbs and phrases of
those who have sought to give me consolation as dust and ashes in my
mouth, the memory of that little, lovely, silent act of love has unsealed
for me all the wells of pity: made the desert blossom like a rose, and
brought me out of the bitterness of lonely exile into harmony with the
wounded, broken, and great heart of the world.  When people are able to
understand, not merely how beautiful ---'s action was, but why it meant
so much to me, and always will mean so much, then, perhaps, they will
realise how and in what spirit they should approach me. . . .

The poor are wise, more charitable, more kind, more sensitive than we
are.  In their eyes prison is a tragedy in a man's life, a misfortune, a
casuality, something that calls for sympathy in others.  They speak of
one who is in prison as of one who is 'in trouble' simply.  It is the
phrase they always use, and the expression has the perfect wisdom of love
in it.  With people of our own rank it is different.  With us, prison
makes a man a pariah.  I, and such as I am, have hardly any right to air
and sun.  Our presence taints the pleasures of others.  We are unwelcome
when we reappear.  To revisit the glimpses of the moon is not for us.  Our
very children are taken away.  Those lovely links with humanity are
broken.  We are doomed to be solitary, while our sons still live.  We are
denied the one thing that might heal us and keep us, that might bring
balm to the bruised heart, and peace to the soul in pain. . . .

I must say to myself that I ruined myself, and that nobody great or small
can be ruined except by his own hand.  I am quite ready to say so.  I am
trying to say so, though they may not think it at the present moment.
This pitiless indictment I bring without pity against myself.  Terrible
as was what the world did to me, what I did to myself was far more
terrible still.

I was a man who stood in symbolic relations to the art and culture of my
age.  I had realised this for myself at the very dawn of my manhood, and
had forced my age to realise it afterwards.  Few men hold such a position
in their own lifetime, and have it so acknowledged.  It is usually
discerned, if discerned at all, by the historian, or the critic, long
after both the man and his age have passed away.  With me it was
different.  I felt it myself, and made others feel it.  Byron was a
symbolic figure, but his relations were to the passion of his age and its
weariness of passion.  Mine were to something more noble, more permanent,
of more vital issue, of larger scope.

The gods had given me almost everything.  But I let myself be lured into
long spells of senseless and sensual ease.  I amused myself with being a
_flaneur_, a dandy, a man of fashion.  I surrounded myself with the
smaller natures and the meaner minds.  I became the spendthrift of my own
genius, and to waste an eternal youth gave me a curious joy.  Tired of
being on the heights, I deliberately went to the depths in the search for
new sensation.  What the paradox was to me in the sphere of thought,
perversity became to me in the sphere of passion.  Desire, at the end,
was a malady, or a madness, or both.  I grew careless of the lives of
others.  I took pleasure where it pleased me, and passed on.  I forgot
that every little action of the common day makes or unmakes character,
and that therefore what one has done in the secret chamber one has some
day to cry aloud on the housetop.  I ceased to be lord over myself.  I
was no longer the captain of my soul, and did not know it.  I allowed
pleasure to dominate me.  I ended in horrible disgrace.  There is only
one thing for me now, absolute humility.

I have lain in prison for nearly two years.  Out of my nature has come
wild despair; an abandonment to grief that was piteous even to look at;
terrible and impotent rage; bitterness and scorn; anguish that wept
aloud; misery that could find no voice; sorrow that was dumb.  I have
passed through every possible mood of suffering.  Better than Wordsworth
himself I know what Wordsworth meant when he said--

   'Suffering is permanent, obscure, and dark
   And has the nature of infinity.'

But while there were times when I rejoiced in the idea that my sufferings
were to be endless, I could not bear them to be without meaning.  Now I
find hidden somewhere away in my nature something that tells me that
nothing in the whole world is meaningless, and suffering least of all.
That something hidden away in my nature, like a treasure in a field, is
Humility.

It is the last thing left in me, and the best: the ultimate discovery at
which I have arrived, the starting-point for a fresh development.  It has
come to me right out of myself, so I know that it has come at the proper
time.  It could not have come before, nor later.  Had any one told me of
it, I would have rejected it.  Had it been brought to me, I would have
refused it.  As I found it, I want to keep it.  I must do so.  It is the
one thing that has in it the elements of life, of a new life, _Vita
Nuova_ for me.  Of all things it is the strangest.  One cannot acquire
it, except by surrendering everything that one has.  It is only when one
has lost all things, that one knows that one possesses it.

Now I have realised that it is in me, I see quite clearly what I ought to
do; in fact, must do.  And when I use such a phrase as that, I need not
say that I am not alluding to any external sanction or command.  I admit
none.  I am far more of an individualist than I ever was.  Nothing seems
to me of the smallest value except what one gets out of oneself.  My
nature is seeking a fresh mode of self-realisation.  That is all I am
concerned with.  And the first thing that I have got to do is to free
myself from any possible bitterness of feeling against the world.

I am completely penniless, and absolutely homeless.  Yet there are worse
things in the world than that.  I am quite candid when I say that rather
than go out from this prison with bitterness in my heart against the
world, I would gladly and readily beg my bread from door to door.  If I
got nothing from the house of the rich I would get something at the house
of the poor.  Those who have much are often greedy; those who have little
always share.  I would not a bit mind sleeping in the cool grass in
summer, and when winter came on sheltering myself by the warm
close-thatched rick, or under the penthouse of a great barn, provided I
had love in my heart.  The external things of life seem to me now of no
importance at all.  You can see to what intensity of individualism I have
arrived--or am arriving rather, for the journey is long, and 'where I
walk there are thorns.'

Of course I know that to ask alms on the highway is not to be my lot, and
that if ever I lie in the cool grass at night-time it will be to write
sonnets to the moon.  When I go out of prison, R--- will be waiting for
me on the other side of the big iron-studded gate, and he is the symbol,
not merely of his own affection, but of the affection of many others
besides.  I believe I am to have enough to live on for about eighteen
months at any rate, so that if I may not write beautiful books, I may at
least read beautiful books; and what joy can be greater?  After that, I
hope to be able to recreate my creative faculty.

But were things different: had I not a friend left in the world; were
there not a single house open to me in pity; had I to accept the wallet
and ragged cloak of sheer penury: as long as I am free from all
resentment, hardness and scorn, I would be able to face the life with
much more calm and confidence than I would were my body in purple and
fine linen, and the soul within me sick with hate.

And I really shall have no difficulty.  When you really want love you
will find it waiting for you.

I need not say that my task does not end there.  It would be
comparatively easy if it did.  There is much more before me.  I have
hills far steeper to climb, valleys much darker to pass through.  And I
have to get it all out of myself.  Neither religion, morality, nor reason
can help me at all.

Morality does not help me.  I am a born antinomian.  I am one of those
who are made for exceptions, not for laws.  But while I see that there is
nothing wrong in what one does, I see that there is something wrong in
what one becomes.  It is well to have learned that.

Religion does not help me.  The faith that others give to what is unseen,
I give to what one can touch, and look at.  My gods dwell in temples made
with hands; and within the circle of actual experience is my creed made
perfect and complete: too complete, it may be, for like many or all of
those who have placed their heaven in this earth, I have found in it not
merely the beauty of heaven, but the horror of hell also.  When I think
about religion at all, I feel as if I would like to found an order for
those who _cannot_ believe: the Confraternity of the Faithless, one might
call it, where on an altar, on which no taper burned, a priest, in whose
heart peace had no dwelling, might celebrate with unblessed bread and a
chalice empty of wine.  Every thing to be true must become a religion.
And agnosticism should have its ritual no less than faith.  It has sown
its martyrs, it should reap its saints, and praise God daily for having
hidden Himself from man.  But whether it be faith or agnosticism, it must
be nothing external to me.  Its symbols must be of my own creating.  Only
that is spiritual which makes its own form.  If I may not find its secret
within myself, I shall never find it: if I have not got it already, it
will never come to me.

Reason does not help me.  It tells me that the laws under which I am
convicted are wrong and unjust laws, and the system under which I have
suffered a wrong and unjust system.  But, somehow, I have got to make
both of these things just and right to me.  And exactly as in Art one is
only concerned with what a particular thing is at a particular moment to
oneself, so it is also in the ethical evolution of one's character.  I
have got to make everything that has happened to me good for me.  The
plank bed, the loathsome food, the hard ropes shredded into oakum till
one's finger-tips grow dull with pain, the menial offices with which each
day begins and finishes, the harsh orders that routine seems to
necessitate, the dreadful dress that makes sorrow grotesque to look at,
the silence, the solitude, the shame--each and all of these things I have
to transform into a spiritual experience.  There is not a single
degradation of the body which I must not try and make into a
spiritualising of the soul.

I want to get to the point when I shall be able to say quite simply, and
without affectation that the two great turning-points in my life were
when my father sent me to Oxford, and when society sent me to prison.  I
will not say that prison is the best thing that could have happened to
me: for that phrase would savour of too great bitterness towards myself.
I would sooner say, or hear it said of me, that I was so typical a child
of my age, that in my perversity, and for that perversity's sake, I
turned the good things of my life to evil, and the evil things of my life
to good.

What is said, however, by myself or by others, matters little.  The
important thing, the thing that lies before me, the thing that I have to
do, if the brief remainder of my days is not to be maimed, marred, and
incomplete, is to absorb into my nature all that has been done to me, to
make it part of me, to accept it without complaint, fear, or reluctance.
The supreme vice is shallowness.  Whatever is realised is right.

When first I was put into prison some people advised me to try and forget
who I was.  It was ruinous advice.  It is only by realising what I am
that I have found comfort of any kind.  Now I am advised by others to try
on my release to forget that I have ever been in a prison at all.  I know
that would be equally fatal.  It would mean that I would always be
haunted by an intolerable sense of disgrace, and that those things that
are meant for me as much as for anybody else--the beauty of the sun and
moon, the pageant of the seasons, the music of daybreak and the silence
of great nights, the rain falling through the leaves, or the dew creeping
over the grass and making it silver--would all be tainted for me, and
lose their healing power, and their power of communicating joy.  To
regret one's own experiences is to arrest one's own development.  To deny
one's own experiences is to put a lie into the lips of one's own life.  It
is no less than a denial of the soul.

For just as the body absorbs things of all kinds, things common and
unclean no less than those that the priest or a vision has cleansed, and
converts them into swiftness or strength, into the play of beautiful
muscles and the moulding of fair flesh, into the curves and colours of
the hair, the lips, the eye; so the soul in its turn has its nutritive
functions also, and can transform into noble moods of thought and
passions of high import what in itself is base, cruel and degrading; nay,
more, may find in these its most august modes of assertion, and can often
reveal itself most perfectly through what was intended to desecrate or
destroy.

The fact of my having been the common prisoner of a common gaol I must
frankly accept, and, curious as it may seem, one of the things I shall
have to teach myself is not to be ashamed of it.  I must accept it as a
punishment, and if one is ashamed of having been punished, one might just
as well never have been punished at all.  Of course there are many things
of which I was convicted that I had not done, but then there are many
things of which I was convicted that I had done, and a still greater
number of things in my life for which I was never indicted at all.  And
as the gods are strange, and punish us for what is good and humane in us
as much as for what is evil and perverse, I must accept the fact that one
is punished for the good as well as for the evil that one does.  I have
no doubt that it is quite right one should be.  It helps one, or should
help one, to realise both, and not to be too conceited about either.  And
if I then am not ashamed of my punishment, as I hope not to be, I shall
be able to think, and walk, and live with freedom.

Many men on their release carry their prison about with them into the
air, and hide it as a secret disgrace in their hearts, and at length,
like poor poisoned things, creep into some hole and die.  It is wretched
that they should have to do so, and it is wrong, terribly wrong, of
society that it should force them to do so.  Society takes upon itself
the right to inflict appalling punishment on the individual, but it also
has the supreme vice of shallowness, and fails to realise what it has
done.  When the man's punishment is over, it leaves him to himself; that
is to say, it abandons him at the very moment when its highest duty
towards him begins.  It is really ashamed of its own actions, and shuns
those whom it has punished, as people shun a creditor whose debt they
cannot pay, or one on whom they have inflicted an irreparable, an
irremediable wrong.  I can claim on my side that if I realise what I have
suffered, society should realise what it has inflicted on me; and that
there should be no bitterness or hate on either side.

Of course I know that from one point of view things will be made
different for me than for others; must indeed, by the very nature of the
case, be made so.  The poor thieves and outcasts who are imprisoned here
with me are in many respects more fortunate than I am.  The little way in
grey city or green field that saw their sin is small; to find those who
know nothing of what they have done they need go no further than a bird
might fly between the twilight and the dawn; but for me the world is
shrivelled to a handsbreadth, and everywhere I turn my name is written on
the rocks in lead.  For I have come, not from obscurity into the
momentary notoriety of crime, but from a sort of eternity of fame to a
sort of eternity of infamy, and sometimes seem to myself to have shown,
if indeed it required showing, that between the famous and the infamous
there is but one step, if as much as one.

Still, in the very fact that people will recognise me wherever I go, and
know all about my life, as far as its follies go, I can discern something
good for me.  It will force on me the necessity of again asserting myself
as an artist, and as soon as I possibly can.  If I can produce only one
beautiful work of art I shall be able to rob malice of its venom, and
cowardice of its sneer, and to pluck out the tongue of scorn by the
roots.

And if life be, as it surely is, a problem to me, I am no less a problem
to life.  People must adopt some attitude towards me, and so pass
judgment, both on themselves and me.  I need not say I am not talking of
particular individuals.  The only people I would care to be with now are
artists and people who have suffered: those who know what beauty is, and
those who know what sorrow is: nobody else interests me.  Nor am I making
any demands on life.  In all that I have said I am simply concerned with
my own mental attitude towards life as a whole; and I feel that not to be
ashamed of having been punished is one of the first points I must attain
to, for the sake of my own perfection, and because I am so imperfect.

Then I must learn how to be happy.  Once I knew it, or thought I knew it,
by instinct.  It was always springtime once in my heart.  My temperament
was akin to joy.  I filled my life to the very brim with pleasure, as one
might fill a cup to the very brim with wine.  Now I am approaching life
from a completely new standpoint, and even to conceive happiness is often
extremely difficult for me.  I remember during my first term at Oxford
reading in Pater's _Renaissance_--that book which has had such strange
influence over my life--how Dante places low in the Inferno those who
wilfully live in sadness; and going to the college library and turning to
the passage in the _Divine Comedy_ where beneath the dreary marsh lie
those who were 'sullen in the sweet air,' saying for ever and ever
through their sighs--

   'Tristi fummo
   Nell aer dolce che dal sol s'allegra.'

I knew the church condemned _accidia_, but the whole idea seemed to me
quite fantastic, just the sort of sin, I fancied, a priest who knew
nothing about real life would invent.  Nor could I understand how Dante,
who says that 'sorrow remarries us to God,' could have been so harsh to
those who were enamoured of melancholy, if any such there really were.  I
had no idea that some day this would become to me one of the greatest
temptations of my life.

While I was in Wandsworth prison I longed to die.  It was my one desire.
When after two months in the infirmary I was transferred here, and found
myself growing gradually better in physical health, I was filled with
rage.  I determined to commit suicide on the very day on which I left
prison.  After a time that evil mood passed away, and I made up my mind
to live, but to wear gloom as a king wears purple: never to smile again:
to turn whatever house I entered into a house of mourning: to make my
friends walk slowly in sadness with me: to teach them that melancholy is
the true secret of life: to maim them with an alien sorrow: to mar them
with my own pain.  Now I feel quite differently.  I see it would be both
ungrateful and unkind of me to pull so long a face that when my friends
came to see me they would have to make their faces still longer in order
to show their sympathy; or, if I desired to entertain them, to invite
them to sit down silently to bitter herbs and funeral baked meats.  I
must learn how to be cheerful and happy.

The last two occasions on which I was allowed to see my friends here, I
tried to be as cheerful as possible, and to show my cheerfulness, in
order to make them some slight return for their trouble in coming all the
way from town to see me.  It is only a slight return, I know, but it is
the one, I feel certain, that pleases them most.  I saw R--- for an hour
on Saturday week, and I tried to give the fullest possible expression of
the delight I really felt at our meeting.  And that, in the views and
ideas I am here shaping for myself, I am quite right is shown to me by
the fact that now for the first time since my imprisonment I have a real
desire for life.

There is before me so much to do, that I would regard it as a terrible
tragedy if I died before I was allowed to complete at any rate a little
of it.  I see new developments in art and life, each one of which is a
fresh mode of perfection.  I long to live so that I can explore what is
no less than a new world to me.  Do you want to know what this new world
is?  I think you can guess what it is.  It is the world in which I have
been living.  Sorrow, then, and all that it teaches one, is my new world.

I used to live entirely for pleasure.  I shunned suffering and sorrow of
every kind.  I hated both.  I resolved to ignore them as far as possible:
to treat them, that is to say, as modes of imperfection.  They were not
part of my scheme of life.  They had no place in my philosophy.  My
mother, who knew life as a whole, used often to quote to me Goethe's
lines--written by Carlyle in a book he had given her years ago, and
translated by him, I fancy, also:--

   'Who never ate his bread in sorrow,
   Who never spent the midnight hours
   Weeping and waiting for the morrow,--
   He knows you not, ye heavenly powers.'

They were the lines which that noble Queen of Prussia, whom Napoleon
treated with such coarse brutality, used to quote in her humiliation and
exile; they were the lines my mother often quoted in the troubles of her
later life.  I absolutely declined to accept or admit the enormous truth
hidden in them.  I could not understand it.  I remember quite well how I
used to tell her that I did not want to eat my bread in sorrow, or to
pass any night weeping and watching for a more bitter dawn.

I had no idea that it was one of the special things that the Fates had in
store for me: that for a whole year of my life, indeed, I was to do
little else.  But so has my portion been meted out to me; and during the
last few months I have, after terrible difficulties and struggles, been
able to comprehend some of the lessons hidden in the heart of pain.
Clergymen and people who use phrases without wisdom sometimes talk of
suffering as a mystery.  It is really a revelation.  One discerns things
one never discerned before.  One approaches the whole of history from a
different standpoint.  What one had felt dimly, through instinct, about
art, is intellectually and emotionally realised with perfect clearness of
vision and absolute intensity of apprehension.

I now see that sorrow, being the supreme emotion of which man is capable,
is at once the type and test of all great art.  What the artist is always
looking for is the mode of existence in which soul and body are one and
indivisible: in which the outward is expressive of the inward: in which
form reveals.  Of such modes of existence there are not a few: youth and
the arts preoccupied with youth may serve as a model for us at one
moment: at another we may like to think that, in its subtlety and
sensitiveness of impression, its suggestion of a spirit dwelling in
external things and making its raiment of earth and air, of mist and city
alike, and in its morbid sympathy of its moods, and tones, and colours,
modern landscape art is realising for us pictorially what was realised in
such plastic perfection by the Greeks.  Music, in which all subject is
absorbed in expression and cannot be separated from it, is a complex
example, and a flower or a child a simple example, of what I mean; but
sorrow is the ultimate type both in life and art.

Behind joy and laughter there may be a temperament, coarse, hard and
callous.  But behind sorrow there is always sorrow.  Pain, unlike
pleasure, wears no mask.  Truth in art is not any correspondence between
the essential idea and the accidental existence; it is not the
resemblance of shape to shadow, or of the form mirrored in the crystal to
the form itself; it is no echo coming from a hollow hill, any more than
it is a silver well of water in the valley that shows the moon to the
moon and Narcissus to Narcissus.  Truth in art is the unity of a thing
with itself: the outward rendered expressive of the inward: the soul made
incarnate: the body instinct with spirit.  For this reason there is no
truth comparable to sorrow.  There are times when sorrow seems to me to
be the only truth.  Other things may be illusions of the eye or the
appetite, made to blind the one and cloy the other, but out of sorrow
have the worlds been built, and at the birth of a child or a star there
is pain.

More than this, there is about sorrow an intense, an extraordinary
reality.  I have said of myself that I was one who stood in symbolic
relations to the art and culture of my age.  There is not a single
wretched man in this wretched place along with me who does not stand in
symbolic relation to the very secret of life.  For the secret of life is
suffering.  It is what is hidden behind everything.  When we begin to
live, what is sweet is so sweet to us, and what is bitter so bitter, that
we inevitably direct all our desires towards pleasures, and seek not
merely for a 'month or twain to feed on honeycomb,' but for all our years
to taste no other food, ignorant all the while that we may really be
starving the soul.

I remember talking once on this subject to one of the most beautiful
personalities I have ever known: a woman, whose sympathy and noble
kindness to me, both before and since the tragedy of my imprisonment,
have been beyond power and description; one who has really assisted me,
though she does not know it, to bear the burden of my troubles more than
any one else in the whole world has, and all through the mere fact of her
existence, through her being what she is--partly an ideal and partly an
influence: a suggestion of what one might become as well as a real help
towards becoming it; a soul that renders the common air sweet, and makes
what is spiritual seem as simple and natural as sunlight or the sea: one
for whom beauty and sorrow walk hand in hand, and have the same message.
On the occasion of which I am thinking I recall distinctly how I said to
her that there was enough suffering in one narrow London lane to show
that God did not love man, and that wherever there was any sorrow, though
but that of a child, in some little garden weeping over a fault that it
had or had not committed, the whole face of creation was completely
marred.  I was entirely wrong.  She told me so, but I could not believe
her.  I was not in the sphere in which such belief was to be attained to.
Now it seems to me that love of some kind is the only possible
explanation of the extraordinary amount of suffering that there is in the
world.  I cannot conceive of any other explanation.  I am convinced that
there is no other, and that if the world has indeed, as I have said, been
built of sorrow, it has been built by the hands of love, because in no
other way could the soul of man, for whom the world was made, reach the
full stature of its perfection.  Pleasure for the beautiful body, but
pain for the beautiful soul.

When I say that I am convinced of these things I speak with too much
pride.  Far off, like a perfect pearl, one can see the city of God.  It
is so wonderful that it seems as if a child could reach it in a summer's
day.  And so a child could.  But with me and such as me it is different.
One can realise a thing in a single moment, but one loses it in the long
hours that follow with leaden feet.  It is so difficult to keep 'heights
that the soul is competent to gain.'  We think in eternity, but we move
slowly through time; and how slowly time goes with us who lie in prison I
need not tell again, nor of the weariness and despair that creep back
into one's cell, and into the cell of one's heart, with such strange
insistence that one has, as it were, to garnish and sweep one's house for
their coming, as for an unwelcome guest, or a bitter master, or a slave
whose slave it is one's chance or choice to be.

And, though at present my friends may find it a hard thing to believe, it
is true none the less, that for them living in freedom and idleness and
comfort it is more easy to learn the lessons of humility than it is for
me, who begin the day by going down on my knees and washing the floor of
my cell.  For prison life with its endless privations and restrictions
makes one rebellious.  The most terrible thing about it is not that it
breaks one's heart--hearts are made to be broken--but that it turns one's
heart to stone.  One sometimes feels that it is only with a front of
brass and a lip of scorn that one can get through the day at all.  And he
who is in a state of rebellion cannot receive grace, to use the phrase of
which the Church is so fond--so rightly fond, I dare say--for in life as
in art the mood of rebellion closes up the channels of the soul, and
shuts out the airs of heaven.  Yet I must learn these lessons here, if I
am to learn them anywhere, and must be filled with joy if my feet are on
the right road and my face set towards 'the gate which is called
beautiful,' though I may fall many times in the mire and often in the
mist go astray.

This New Life, as through my love of Dante I like sometimes to call it,
is of course no new life at all, but simply the continuance, by means of
development, and evolution, of my former life.  I remember when I was at
Oxford saying to one of my friends as we were strolling round Magdalen's
narrow bird-haunted walks one morning in the year before I took my
degree, that I wanted to eat of the fruit of all the trees in the garden
of the world, and that I was going out into the world with that passion
in my soul.  And so, indeed, I went out, and so I lived.  My only mistake
was that I confined myself so exclusively to the trees of what seemed to
me the sun-lit side of the garden, and shunned the other side for its
shadow and its gloom.  Failure, disgrace, poverty, sorrow, despair,
suffering, tears even, the broken words that come from lips in pain,
remorse that makes one walk on thorns, conscience that condemns, self-
abasement that punishes, the misery that puts ashes on its head, the
anguish that chooses sack-cloth for its raiment and into its own drink
puts gall:--all these were things of which I was afraid.  And as I had
determined to know nothing of them, I was forced to taste each of them in
turn, to feed on them, to have for a season, indeed, no other food at
all.

I don't regret for a single moment having lived for pleasure.  I did it
to the full, as one should do everything that one does.  There was no
pleasure I did not experience.  I threw the pearl of my soul into a cup
of wine.  I went down the primrose path to the sound of flutes.  I lived
on honeycomb.  But to have continued the same life would have been wrong
because it would have been limiting.  I had to pass on.  The other half
of the garden had its secrets for me also.  Of course all this is
foreshadowed and prefigured in my books.  Some of it is in _The Happy
Prince_, some of it in _The Young King_, notably in the passage where the
bishop says to the kneeling boy, 'Is not He who made misery wiser than
thou art'? a phrase which when I wrote it seemed to me little more than a
phrase; a great deal of it is hidden away in the note of doom that like a
purple thread runs through the texture of _Dorian Gray_; in _The Critic
as Artist_ it is set forth in many colours; in _The Soul of Man_ it is
written down, and in letters too easy to read; it is one of the refrains
whose recurring _motifs_ make _Salome_ so like a piece of music and bind
it together as a ballad; in the prose poem of the man who from the bronze
of the image of the 'Pleasure that liveth for a moment' has to make the
image of the 'Sorrow that abideth for ever' it is incarnate.  It could
not have been otherwise.  At every single moment of one's life one is
what one is going to be no less than what one has been.  Art is a symbol,
because man is a symbol.

It is, if I can fully attain to it, the ultimate realisation of the
artistic life.  For the artistic life is simply self-development.
Humility in the artist is his frank acceptance of all experiences, just
as love in the artist is simply the sense of beauty that reveals to the
world its body and its soul.  In _Marius the Epicurean_ Pater seeks to
reconcile the artistic life with the life of religion, in the deep,
sweet, and austere sense of the word.  But Marius is little more than a
spectator: an ideal spectator indeed, and one to whom it is given 'to
contemplate the spectacle of life with appropriate emotions,' which
Wordsworth defines as the poet's true aim; yet a spectator merely, and
perhaps a little too much occupied with the comeliness of the benches of
the sanctuary to notice that it is the sanctuary of sorrow that he is
gazing at.

I see a far more intimate and immediate connection between the true life
of Christ and the true life of the artist; and I take a keen pleasure in
the reflection that long before sorrow had made my days her own and bound
me to her wheel I had written in _The Soul of Man_ that he who would lead
a Christ-like life must be entirely and absolutely himself, and had taken
as my types not merely the shepherd on the hillside and the prisoner in
his cell, but also the painter to whom the world is a pageant and the
poet for whom the world is a song.  I remember saying once to Andre Gide,
as we sat together in some Paris _cafe_, that while meta-physics had but
little real interest for me, and morality absolutely none, there was
nothing that either Plato or Christ had said that could not be
transferred immediately into the sphere of Art and there find its
complete fulfilment.

Nor is it merely that we can discern in Christ that close union of
personality with perfection which forms the real distinction between the
classical and romantic movement in life, but the very basis of his nature
was the same as that of the nature of the artist--an intense and
flamelike imagination.  He realised in the entire sphere of human
relations that imaginative sympathy which in the sphere of Art is the
sole secret of creation.  He understood the leprosy of the leper, the
darkness of the blind, the fierce misery of those who live for pleasure,
the strange poverty of the rich.  Some one wrote to me in trouble, 'When
you are not on your pedestal you are not interesting.'  How remote was
the writer from what Matthew Arnold calls 'the Secret of Jesus.'  Either
would have taught him that whatever happens to another happens to
oneself, and if you want an inscription to read at dawn and at
night-time, and for pleasure or for pain, write up on the walls of your
house in letters for the sun to gild and the moon to silver, 'Whatever
happens to oneself happens to another.'

Christ's place indeed is with the poets.  His whole conception of
Humanity sprang right out of the imagination and can only be realised by
it.  What God was to the pantheist, man was to Him.  He was the first to
conceive the divided races as a unity.  Before his time there had been
gods and men, and, feeling through the mysticism of sympathy that in
himself each had been made incarnate, he calls himself the Son of the one
or the Son of the other, according to his mood.  More than any one else
in history he wakes in us that temper of wonder to which romance always
appeals.  There is still something to me almost incredible in the idea of
a young Galilean peasant imagining that he could bear on his own
shoulders the burden of the entire world; all that had already been done
and suffered, and all that was yet to be done and suffered: the sins of
Nero, of Caesar Borgia, of Alexander VI., and of him who was Emperor of
Rome and Priest of the Sun: the sufferings of those whose names are
legion and whose dwelling is among the tombs: oppressed nationalities,
factory children, thieves, people in prison, outcasts, those who are dumb
under oppression and whose silence is heard only of God; and not merely
imagining this but actually achieving it, so that at the present moment
all who come in contact with his personality, even though they may
neither bow to his altar nor kneel before his priest, in some way find
that the ugliness of their sin is taken away and the beauty of their
sorrow revealed to them.

I had said of Christ that he ranks with the poets.  That is true.  Shelley
and Sophocles are of his company.  But his entire life also is the most
wonderful of poems.  For 'pity and terror' there is nothing in the entire
cycle of Greek tragedy to touch it.  The absolute purity of the
protagonist raises the entire scheme to a height of romantic art from
which the sufferings of Thebes and Pelops' line are by their very horror
excluded, and shows how wrong Aristotle was when he said in his treatise
on the drama that it would be impossible to bear the spectacle of one
blameless in pain.  Nor in AEschylus nor Dante, those stern masters of
tenderness, in Shakespeare, the most purely human of all the great
artists, in the whole of Celtic myth and legend, where the loveliness of
the world is shown through a mist of tears, and the life of a man is no
more than the life of a flower, is there anything that, for sheer
simplicity of pathos wedded and made one with sublimity of tragic effect,
can be said to equal or even approach the last act of Christ's passion.
The little supper with his companions, one of whom has already sold him
for a price; the anguish in the quiet moon-lit garden; the false friend
coming close to him so as to betray him with a kiss; the friend who still
believed in him, and on whom as on a rock he had hoped to build a house
of refuge for Man, denying him as the bird cried to the dawn; his own
utter loneliness, his submission, his acceptance of everything; and along
with it all such scenes as the high priest of orthodoxy rending his
raiment in wrath, and the magistrate of civil justice calling for water
in the vain hope of cleansing himself of that stain of innocent blood
that makes him the scarlet figure of history; the coronation ceremony of
sorrow, one of the most wonderful things in the whole of recorded time;
the crucifixion of the Innocent One before the eyes of his mother and of
the disciple whom he loved; the soldiers gambling and throwing dice for
his clothes; the terrible death by which he gave the world its most
eternal symbol; and his final burial in the tomb of the rich man, his
body swathed in Egyptian linen with costly spices and perfumes as though
he had been a king's son.  When one contemplates all this from the point
of view of art alone one cannot but be grateful that the supreme office
of the Church should be the playing of the tragedy without the shedding
of blood: the mystical presentation, by means of dialogue and costume and
gesture even, of the Passion of her Lord; and it is always a source of
pleasure and awe to me to remember that the ultimate survival of the
Greek chorus, lost elsewhere to art, is to be found in the servitor
answering the priest at Mass.

Yet the whole life of Christ--so entirely may sorrow and beauty be made
one in their meaning and manifestation--is really an idyll, though it
ends with the veil of the temple being rent, and the darkness coming over
the face of the earth, and the stone rolled to the door of the sepulchre.
One always thinks of him as a young bridegroom with his companions, as
indeed he somewhere describes himself; as a shepherd straying through a
valley with his sheep in search of green meadow or cool stream; as a
singer trying to build out of the music the walls of the City of God; or
as a lover for whose love the whole world was too small.  His miracles
seem to me to be as exquisite as the coming of spring, and quite as
natural.  I see no difficulty at all in believing that such was the charm
of his personality that his mere presence could bring peace to souls in
anguish, and that those who touched his garments or his hands forgot
their pain; or that as he passed by on the highway of life people who had
seen nothing of life's mystery, saw it clearly, and others who had been
deaf to every voice but that of pleasure heard for the first time the
voice of love and found it as 'musical as Apollo's lute'; or that evil
passions fled at his approach, and men whose dull unimaginative lives had
been but a mode of death rose as it were from the grave when he called
them; or that when he taught on the hillside the multitude forgot their
hunger and thirst and the cares of this world, and that to his friends
who listened to him as he sat at meat the coarse food seemed delicate,
and the water had the taste of good wine, and the whole house became full
of the odour and sweetness of nard.

Renan in his _Vie de Jesus_--that gracious fifth gospel, the gospel
according to St. Thomas, one might call it--says somewhere that Christ's
great achievement was that he made himself as much loved after his death
as he had been during his lifetime.  And certainly, if his place is among
the poets, he is the leader of all the lovers.  He saw that love was the
first secret of the world for which the wise men had been looking, and
that it was only through love that one could approach either the heart of
the leper or the feet of God.

And above all, Christ is the most supreme of individualists.  Humility,
like the artistic, acceptance of all experiences, is merely a mode of
manifestation.  It is man's soul that Christ is always looking for.  He
calls it 'God's Kingdom,' and finds it in every one.  He compares it to
little things, to a tiny seed, to a handful of leaven, to a pearl.  That
is because one realises one's soul only by getting rid of all alien
passions, all acquired culture, and all external possessions, be they
good or evil.

I bore up against everything with some stubbornness of will and much
rebellion of nature, till I had absolutely nothing left in the world but
one thing.  I had lost my name, my position, my happiness, my freedom, my
wealth.  I was a prisoner and a pauper.  But I still had my children
left.  Suddenly they were taken away from me by the law.  It was a blow
so appalling that I did not know what to do, so I flung myself on my
knees, and bowed my head, and wept, and said, 'The body of a child is as
the body of the Lord: I am not worthy of either.'  That moment seemed to
save me.  I saw then that the only thing for me was to accept everything.
Since then--curious as it will no doubt sound--I have been happier.  It
was of course my soul in its ultimate essence that I had reached.  In
many ways I had been its enemy, but I found it waiting for me as a
friend.  When one comes in contact with the soul it makes one simple as a
child, as Christ said one should be.

It is tragic how few people ever 'possess their souls' before they die.
'Nothing is more rare in any man,' says Emerson, 'than an act of his
own.'  It is quite true.  Most people are other people.  Their thoughts
are some one else's opinions, their lives a mimicry, their passions a
quotation.  Christ was not merely the supreme individualist, but he was
the first individualist in history.  People have tried to make him out an
ordinary philanthropist, or ranked him as an altruist with the scientific
and sentimental.  But he was really neither one nor the other.  Pity he
has, of course, for the poor, for those who are shut up in prisons, for
the lowly, for the wretched; but he has far more pity for the rich, for
the hard hedonists, for those who waste their freedom in becoming slaves
to things, for those who wear soft raiment and live in kings' houses.
Riches and pleasure seemed to him to be really greater tragedies than
poverty or sorrow.  And as for altruism, who knew better than he that it
is vocation not volition that determines us, and that one cannot gather
grapes of thorns or figs from thistles?

To live for others as a definite self-conscious aim was not his creed.  It
was not the basis of his creed.  When he says, 'Forgive your enemies,' it
is not for the sake of the enemy, but for one's own sake that he says so,
and because love is more beautiful than hate.  In his own entreaty to the
young man, 'Sell all that thou hast and give to the poor,' it is not of
the state of the poor that he is thinking but of the soul of the young
man, the soul that wealth was marring.  In his view of life he is one
with the artist who knows that by the inevitable law of self-perfection,
the poet must sing, and the sculptor think in bronze, and the painter
make the world a mirror for his moods, as surely and as certainly as the
hawthorn must blossom in spring, and the corn turn to gold at harvest-
time, and the moon in her ordered wanderings change from shield to
sickle, and from sickle to shield.

But while Christ did not say to men, 'Live for others,' he pointed out
that there was no difference at all between the lives of others and one's
own life.  By this means he gave to man an extended, a Titan personality.
Since his coming the history of each separate individual is, or can be
made, the history of the world.  Of course, culture has intensified the
personality of man.  Art has made us myriad-minded.  Those who have the
artistic temperament go into exile with Dante and learn how salt is the
bread of others, and how steep their stairs; they catch for a moment the
serenity and calm of Goethe, and yet know but too well that Baudelaire
cried to God--

   'O Seigneur, donnez moi la force et le courage
   De contempler mon corps et mon coeur sans degout.'

Out of Shakespeare's sonnets they draw, to their own hurt it may be, the
secret of his love and make it their own; they look with new eyes on
modern life, because they have listened to one of Chopin's nocturnes, or
handled Greek things, or read the story of the passion of some dead man
for some dead woman whose hair was like threads of fine gold, and whose
mouth was as a pomegranate.  But the sympathy of the artistic temperament
is necessarily with what has found expression.  In words or in colours,
in music or in marble, behind the painted masks of an AEschylean play, or
through some Sicilian shepherds' pierced and jointed reeds, the man and
his message must have been revealed.

To the artist, expression is the only mode under which he can conceive
life at all.  To him what is dumb is dead.  But to Christ it was not so.
With a width and wonder of imagination that fills one almost with awe, he
took the entire world of the inarticulate, the voiceless world of pain,
as his kingdom, and made of himself its eternal mouthpiece.  Those of
whom I have spoken, who are dumb under oppression, and 'whose silence is
heard only of God,' he chose as his brothers.  He sought to become eyes
to the blind, ears to the deaf, and a cry in the lips of those whose
tongues had been tied.  His desire was to be to the myriads who had found
no utterance a very trumpet through which they might call to heaven.  And
feeling, with the artistic nature of one to whom suffering and sorrow
were modes through which he could realise his conception of the
beautiful, that an idea is of no value till it becomes incarnate and is
made an image, he made of himself the image of the Man of Sorrows, and as
such has fascinated and dominated art as no Greek god ever succeeded in
doing.

For the Greek gods, in spite of the white and red of their fair fleet
limbs, were not really what they appeared to be.  The curved brow of
Apollo was like the sun's disc crescent over a hill at dawn, and his feet
were as the wings of the morning, but he himself had been cruel to
Marsyas and had made Niobe childless.  In the steel shields of Athena's
eyes there had been no pity for Arachne; the pomp and peacocks of Hera
were all that was really noble about her; and the Father of the Gods
himself had been too fond of the daughters of men.  The two most deeply
suggestive figures of Greek Mythology were, for religion, Demeter, an
Earth Goddess, not one of the Olympians, and for art, Dionysus, the son
of a mortal woman to whom the moment of his birth had proved also the
moment of her death.

But Life itself from its lowliest and most humble sphere produced one far
more marvellous than the mother of Proserpina or the son of Semele.  Out
of the Carpenter's shop at Nazareth had come a personality infinitely
greater than any made by myth and legend, and one, strangely enough,
destined to reveal to the world the mystical meaning of wine and the real
beauties of the lilies of the field as none, either on Cithaeron or at
Enna, had ever done.

The song of Isaiah, 'He is despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrows
and acquainted with grief: and we hid as it were our faces from him,' had
seemed to him to prefigure himself, and in him the prophecy was
fulfilled.  We must not be afraid of such a phrase.  Every single work of
art is the fulfilment of a prophecy: for every work of art is the
conversion of an idea into an image.  Every single human being should be
the fulfilment of a prophecy: for every human being should be the
realisation of some ideal, either in the mind of God or in the mind of
man.  Christ found the type and fixed it, and the dream of a Virgilian
poet, either at Jerusalem or at Babylon, became in the long progress of
the centuries incarnate in him for whom the world was waiting.

To me one of the things in history the most to be regretted is that the
Christ's own renaissance, which has produced the Cathedral at Chartres,
the Arthurian cycle of legends, the life of St. Francis of Assisi, the
art of Giotto, and Dante's _Divine Comedy_, was not allowed to develop on
its own lines, but was interrupted and spoiled by the dreary classical
Renaissance that gave us Petrarch, and Raphael's frescoes, and Palladian
architecture, and formal French tragedy, and St. Paul's Cathedral, and
Pope's poetry, and everything that is made from without and by dead
rules, and does not spring from within through some spirit informing it.
But wherever there is a romantic movement in art there somehow, and under
some form, is Christ, or the soul of Christ.  He is in _Romeo and
Juliet_, in the _Winter's Tale_, in Provencal poetry, in the _Ancient
Mariner_, in _La Belle Dame sans merci_, and in Chatterton's _Ballad of
Charity_.

We owe to him the most diverse things and people.  Hugo's _Les
Miserables_, Baudelaire's _Fleurs du Mal_, the note of pity in Russian
novels, Verlaine and Verlaine's poems, the stained glass and tapestries
and the quattro-cento work of Burne-Jones and Morris, belong to him no
less than the tower of Giotto, Lancelot and Guinevere, Tannhauser, the
troubled romantic marbles of Michael Angelo, pointed architecture, and
the love of children and flowers--for both of which, indeed, in classical
art there was but little place, hardly enough for them to grow or play
in, but which, from the twelfth century down to our own day, have been
continually making their appearances in art, under various modes and at
various times, coming fitfully and wilfully, as children, as flowers, are
apt to do: spring always seeming to one as if the flowers had been in
hiding, and only came out into the sun because they were afraid that
grown up people would grow tired of looking for them and give up the
search; and the life of a child being no more than an April day on which
there is both rain and sun for the narcissus.

It is the imaginative quality of Christ's own nature that makes him this
palpitating centre of romance.  The strange figures of poetic drama and
ballad are made by the imagination of others, but out of his own
imagination entirely did Jesus of Nazareth create himself.  The cry of
Isaiah had really no more to do with his coming than the song of the
nightingale has to do with the rising of the moon--no more, though
perhaps no less.  He was the denial as well as the affirmation of
prophecy.  For every expectation that he fulfilled there was another that
he destroyed.  'In all beauty,' says Bacon, 'there is some strangeness of
proportion,' and of those who are born of the spirit--of those, that is
to say, who like himself are dynamic forces--Christ says that they are
like the wind that 'bloweth where it listeth, and no man can tell whence
it cometh and whither it goeth.'  That is why he is so fascinating to
artists.  He has all the colour elements of life: mystery, strangeness,
pathos, suggestion, ecstasy, love.  He appeals to the temper of wonder,
and creates that mood in which alone he can be understood.

And to me it is a joy to remember that if he is 'of imagination all
compact,' the world itself is of the same substance.  I said in _Dorian
Gray_ that the great sins of the world take place in the brain: but it is
in the brain that everything takes place.  We know now that we do not see
with the eyes or hear with the ears.  They are really channels for the
transmission, adequate or inadequate, of sense impressions.  It is in the
brain that the poppy is red, that the apple is odorous, that the skylark
sings.

Of late I have been studying with diligence the four prose poems about
Christ.  At Christmas I managed to get hold of a Greek Testament, and
every morning, after I had cleaned my cell and polished my tins, I read a
little of the Gospels, a dozen verses taken by chance anywhere.  It is a
delightful way of opening the day.  Every one, even in a turbulent, ill-
disciplined life, should do the same.  Endless repetition, in and out of
season, has spoiled for us the freshness, the naivete, the simple
romantic charm of the Gospels.  We hear them read far too often and far
too badly, and all repetition is anti-spiritual.  When one returns to the
Greek; it is like going into a garden of lilies out of some, narrow and
dark house.

And to me, the pleasure is doubled by the reflection that it is extremely
probable that we have the actual terms, the _ipsissima verba_, used by
Christ.  It was always supposed that Christ talked in Aramaic.  Even
Renan thought so.  But now we know that the Galilean peasants, like the
Irish peasants of our own day, were bilingual, and that Greek was the
ordinary language of intercourse all over Palestine, as indeed all over
the Eastern world.  I never liked the idea that we knew of Christ's own
words only through a translation of a translation.  It is a delight to me
to think that as far as his conversation was concerned, Charmides might
have listened to him, and Socrates reasoned with him, and Plato
understood him: that he really said [Greek text], that when he thought of
the lilies of the field and how they neither toil nor spin, his absolute
expression was [Greek text], and that his last word when he cried out 'my
life has been completed, has reached its fulfilment, has been perfected,'
was exactly as St. John tells us it was: [Greek text]--no more.

While in reading the Gospels--particularly that of St. John himself, or
whatever early Gnostic took his name and mantle--I see the continual
assertion of the imagination as the basis of all spiritual and material
life, I see also that to Christ imagination was simply a form of love,
and that to him love was lord in the fullest meaning of the phrase.  Some
six weeks ago I was allowed by the doctor to have white bread to eat
instead of the coarse black or brown bread of ordinary prison fare.  It
is a great delicacy.  It will sound strange that dry bread could possibly
be a delicacy to any one.  To me it is so much so that at the close of
each meal I carefully eat whatever crumbs may be left on my tin plate, or
have fallen on the rough towel that one uses as a cloth so as not to soil
one's table; and I do so not from hunger--I get now quite sufficient
food--but simply in order that nothing should be wasted of what is given
to me.  So one should look on love.

Christ, like all fascinating personalities, had the power of not merely
saying beautiful things himself, but of making other people say beautiful
things to him; and I love the story St. Mark tells us about the Greek
woman, who, when as a trial of her faith he said to her that he could not
give her the bread of the children of Israel, answered him that the
little dogs--([Greek text], 'little dogs' it should be rendered)--who are
under the table eat of the crumbs that the children let fall.  Most
people live for love and admiration.  But it is by love and admiration
that we should live.  If any love is shown us we should recognise that we
are quite unworthy of it.  Nobody is worthy to be loved.  The fact that
God loves man shows us that in the divine order of ideal things it is
written that eternal love is to be given to what is eternally unworthy.
Or if that phrase seems to be a bitter one to bear, let us say that every
one is worthy of love, except him who thinks that he is.  Love is a
sacrament that should be taken kneeling, and _Domine, non sum dignus_
should be on the lips and in the hearts of those who receive it.

If ever I write again, in the sense of producing artistic work, there are
just two subjects on which and through which I desire to express myself:
one is 'Christ as the precursor of the romantic movement in life': the
other is 'The artistic life considered in its relation to conduct.'  The
first is, of course, intensely fascinating, for I see in Christ not
merely the essentials of the supreme romantic type, but all the
accidents, the wilfulnesses even, of the romantic temperament also.  He
was the first person who ever said to people that they should live
'flower-like lives.'  He fixed the phrase.  He took children as the type
of what people should try to become.  He held them up as examples to
their elders, which I myself have always thought the chief use of
children, if what is perfect should have a use.  Dante describes the soul
of a man as coming from the hand of God 'weeping and laughing like a
little child,' and Christ also saw that the soul of each one should be _a
guisa di fanciulla che piangendo e ridendo pargoleggia_.  He felt that
life was changeful, fluid, active, and that to allow it to be stereotyped
into any form was death.  He saw that people should not be too serious
over material, common interests: that to be unpractical was to be a great
thing: that one should not bother too much over affairs.  The birds
didn't, why should man?  He is charming when he says, 'Take no thought
for the morrow; is not the soul more than meat? is not the body more than
raiment?'  A Greek might have used the latter phrase.  It is full of
Greek feeling.  But only Christ could have said both, and so summed up
life perfectly for us.

His morality is all sympathy, just what morality should be.  If the only
thing that he ever said had been, 'Her sins are forgiven her because she
loved much,' it would have been worth while dying to have said it.  His
justice is all poetical justice, exactly what justice should be.  The
beggar goes to heaven because he has been unhappy.  I cannot conceive a
better reason for his being sent there.  The people who work for an hour
in the vineyard in the cool of the evening receive just as much reward as
those who have toiled there all day long in the hot sun.  Why shouldn't
they?  Probably no one deserved anything.  Or perhaps they were a
different kind of people.  Christ had no patience with the dull lifeless
mechanical systems that treat people as if they were things, and so treat
everybody alike: for him there were no laws: there were exceptions
merely, as if anybody, or anything, for that matter, was like aught else
in the world!

That which is the very keynote of romantic art was to him the proper
basis of natural life.  He saw no other basis.  And when they brought him
one, taken in the very act of sin and showed him her sentence written in
the law, and asked him what was to be done, he wrote with his finger on
the ground as though he did not hear them, and finally, when they pressed
him again, looked up and said, 'Let him of you who has never sinned be
the first to throw the stone at her.'  It was worth while living to have
said that.

Like all poetical natures he loved ignorant people.  He knew that in the
soul of one who is ignorant there is always room for a great idea.  But
he could not stand stupid people, especially those who are made stupid by
education: people who are full of opinions not one of which they even
understand, a peculiarly modern type, summed up by Christ when he
describes it as the type of one who has the key of knowledge, cannot use
it himself, and does not allow other people to use it, though it may be
made to open the gate of God's Kingdom.  His chief war was against the
Philistines.  That is the war every child of light has to wage.
Philistinism was the note of the age and community in which he lived.  In
their heavy inaccessibility to ideas, their dull respectability, their
tedious orthodoxy, their worship of vulgar success, their entire
preoccupation with the gross materialistic side of life, and their
ridiculous estimate of themselves and their importance, the Jews of
Jerusalem in Christ's day were the exact counterpart of the British
Philistine of our own.  Christ mocked at the 'whited sepulchre' of
respectability, and fixed that phrase for ever.  He treated worldly
success as a thing absolutely to be despised.  He saw nothing in it at
all.  He looked on wealth as an encumbrance to a man.  He would not hear
of life being sacrificed to any system of thought or morals.  He pointed
out that forms and ceremonies were made for man, not man for forms and
ceremonies.  He took sabbatarianism as a type of the things that should
be set at nought.  The cold philanthropies, the ostentatious public
charities, the tedious formalisms so dear to the middle-class mind, he
exposed with utter and relentless scorn.  To us, what is termed orthodoxy
is merely a facile unintelligent acquiescence; but to them, and in their
hands, it was a terrible and paralysing tyranny.  Christ swept it aside.
He showed that the spirit alone was of value.  He took a keen pleasure in
pointing out to them that though they were always reading the law and the
prophets, they had not really the smallest idea of what either of them
meant.  In opposition to their tithing of each separate day into the
fixed routine of prescribed duties, as they tithe mint and rue, he
preached the enormous importance of living completely for the moment.

Those whom he saved from their sins are saved simply for beautiful
moments in their lives.  Mary Magdalen, when she sees Christ, breaks the
rich vase of alabaster that one of her seven lovers had given her, and
spills the odorous spices over his tired dusty feet, and for that one
moment's sake sits for ever with Ruth and Beatrice in the tresses of the
snow-white rose of Paradise.  All that Christ says to us by the way of a
little warning is that every moment should be beautiful, that the soul
should always be ready for the coming of the bridegroom, always waiting
for the voice of the lover, Philistinism being simply that side of man's
nature that is not illumined by the imagination.  He sees all the lovely
influences of life as modes of light: the imagination itself is the world
of light.  The world is made by it, and yet the world cannot understand
it: that is because the imagination is simply a manifestation of love,
and it is love and the capacity for it that distinguishes one human being
from another.

But it is when he deals with a sinner that Christ is most romantic, in
the sense of most real.  The world had always loved the saint as being
the nearest possible approach to the perfection of God.  Christ, through
some divine instinct in him, seems to have always loved the sinner as
being the nearest possible approach to the perfection of man.  His
primary desire was not to reform people, any more than his primary desire
was to a relieve suffering.  To turn an interesting thief into a tedious
honest man was not his aim.  He would have thought little of the
Prisoners' Aid Society and other modern movements of the kind.  The
conversion of a publican into a Pharisee would not have seemed to him a
great achievement.  But in a manner not yet understood of the world he
regarded sin and suffering as being in themselves beautiful holy things
and modes of perfection.

It seems a very dangerous idea.  It is--all great ideas are dangerous.
That it was Christ's creed admits of no doubt.  That it is the true creed
I don't doubt myself.

Of course the sinner must repent.  But why?  Simply because otherwise he
would be unable to realise what he had done.  The moment of repentance is
the moment of initiation.  More than that: it is the means by which one
alters one's past.  The Greeks thought that impossible.  They often say
in their Gnomic aphorisms, 'Even the Gods cannot alter the past.'  Christ
showed that the commonest sinner could do it, that it was the one thing
he could do.  Christ, had he been asked, would have said--I feel quite
certain about it--that the moment the prodigal son fell on his knees and
wept, he made his having wasted his substance with harlots, his swine-
herding and hungering for the husks they ate, beautiful and holy moments
in his life.  It is difficult for most people to grasp the idea.  I dare
say one has to go to prison to understand it.  If so, it may be worth
while going to prison.

There is something so unique about Christ.  Of course just as there are
false dawns before the dawn itself, and winter days so full of sudden
sunlight that they will cheat the wise crocus into squandering its gold
before its time, and make some foolish bird call to its mate to build on
barren boughs, so there were Christians before Christ.  For that we
should be grateful.  The unfortunate thing is that there have been none
since.  I make one exception, St. Francis of Assisi.  But then God had
given him at his birth the soul of a poet, as he himself when quite young
had in mystical marriage taken poverty as his bride: and with the soul of
a poet and the body of a beggar he found the way to perfection not
difficult.  He understood Christ, and so he became like him.  We do not
require the Liber Conformitatum to teach us that the life of St. Francis
was the true _Imitatio Christi_, a poem compared to which the book of
that name is merely prose.

Indeed, that is the charm about Christ, when all is said: he is just like
a work of art.  He does not really teach one anything, but by being
brought into his presence one becomes something.  And everybody is
predestined to his presence.  Once at least in his life each man walks
with Christ to Emmaus.

As regards the other subject, the Relation of the Artistic Life to
Conduct, it will no doubt seem strange to you that I should select it.
People point to Reading Gaol and say, 'That is where the artistic life
leads a man.'  Well, it might lead to worse places.  The more mechanical
people to whom life is a shrewd speculation depending on a careful
calculation of ways and means, always know where they are going, and go
there.  They start with the ideal desire of being the parish beadle, and
in whatever sphere they are placed they succeed in being the parish
beadle and no more.  A man whose desire is to be something separate from
himself, to be a member of Parliament, or a successful grocer, or a
prominent solicitor, or a judge, or something equally tedious, invariably
succeeds in being what he wants to be.  That is his punishment.  Those
who want a mask have to wear it.

But with the dynamic forces of life, and those in whom those dynamic
forces become incarnate, it is different.  People whose desire is solely
for self-realisation never know where they are going.  They can't know.
In one sense of the word it is of course necessary, as the Greek oracle
said, to know oneself: that is the first achievement of knowledge.  But
to recognise that the soul of a man is unknowable, is the ultimate
achievement of wisdom.  The final mystery is oneself.  When one has
weighed the sun in the balance, and measured the steps of the moon, and
mapped out the seven heavens star by star, there still remains oneself.
Who can calculate the orbit of his own soul?  When the son went out to
look for his father's asses, he did not know that a man of God was
waiting for him with the very chrism of coronation, and that his own soul
was already the soul of a king.

I hope to live long enough and to produce work of such a character that I
shall be able at the end of my days to say, 'Yes! this is just where the
artistic life leads a man!'  Two of the most perfect lives I have come
across in my own experience are the lives of Verlaine and of Prince
Kropotkin: both of them men who have passed years in prison: the first,
the one Christian poet since Dante; the other, a man with a soul of that
beautiful white Christ which seems coming out of Russia.  And for the
last seven or eight months, in spite of a succession of great troubles
reaching me from the outside world almost without intermission, I have
been placed in direct contact with a new spirit working in this prison
through man and things, that has helped me beyond any possibility of
expression in words: so that while for the first year of my imprisonment
I did nothing else, and can remember doing nothing else, but wring my
hands in impotent despair, and say, 'What an ending, what an appalling
ending!' now I try to say to myself, and sometimes when I am not
torturing myself do really and sincerely say, 'What a beginning, what a
wonderful beginning!'  It may really be so.  It may become so.  If it
does I shall owe much to this new personality that has altered every
man's life in this place.

You may realise it when I say that had I been released last May, as I
tried to be, I would have left this place loathing it and every official
in it with a bitterness of hatred that would have poisoned my life.  I
have had a year longer of imprisonment, but humanity has been in the
prison along with us all, and now when I go out I shall always remember
great kindnesses that I have received here from almost everybody, and on
the day of my release I shall give many thanks to many people, and ask to
be remembered by them in turn.

The prison style is absolutely and entirely wrong.  I would give anything
to be able to alter it when I go out.  I intend to try.  But there is
nothing in the world so wrong but that the spirit of humanity, which is
the spirit of love, the spirit of the Christ who is not in churches, may
make it, if not right, at least possible to be borne without too much
bitterness of heart.

I know also that much is waiting for me outside that is very delightful,
from what St. Francis of Assisi calls 'my brother the wind, and my sister
the rain,' lovely things both of them, down to the shop-windows and
sunsets of great cities.  If I made a list of all that still remains to
me, I don't know where I should stop: for, indeed, God made the world
just as much for me as for any one else.  Perhaps I may go out with
something that I had not got before.  I need not tell you that to me
reformations in morals are as meaningless and vulgar as Reformations in
theology.  But while to propose to be a better man is a piece of
unscientific cant, to have become a deeper man is the privilege of those
who have suffered.  And such I think I have become.

If after I am free a friend of mine gave a feast, and did not invite me
to it, I should not mind a bit.  I can be perfectly happy by myself.  With
freedom, flowers, books, and the moon, who could not be perfectly happy?
Besides, feasts are not for me any more.  I have given too many to care
about them.  That side of life is over for me, very fortunately, I dare
say.  But if after I am free a friend of mine had a sorrow and refused to
allow me to share it, I should feel it most bitterly.  If he shut the
doors of the house of mourning against me, I would come back again and
again and beg to be admitted, so that I might share in what I was
entitled to share in.  If he thought me unworthy, unfit to weep with him,
I should feel it as the most poignant humiliation, as the most terrible
mode in which disgrace could be inflicted on me.  But that could not be.
I have a right to share in sorrow, and he who can look at the loveliness
of the world and share its sorrow, and realise something of the wonder of
both, is in immediate contact with divine things, and has got as near to
God's secret as any one can get.

Perhaps there may come into my art also, no less than into my life, a
still deeper note, one of greater unity of passion, and directness of
impulse.  Not width but intensity is the true aim of modern art.  We are
no longer in art concerned with the type.  It is with the exception that
we have to do.  I cannot put my sufferings into any form they took, I
need hardly say.  Art only begins where Imitation ends, but something
must come into my work, of fuller memory of words perhaps, of richer
cadences, of more curious effects, of simpler architectural order, of
some aesthetic quality at any rate.

When Marsyas was 'torn from the scabbard of his limbs'--_della vagina
della membre sue_, to use one of Dante's most terrible Tacitean
phrases--he had no more song, the Greek said.  Apollo had been victor.
The lyre had vanquished the reed.  But perhaps the Greeks were mistaken.
I hear in much modern Art the cry of Marsyas.  It is bitter in
Baudelaire, sweet and plaintive in Lamartine, mystic in Verlaine.  It is
in the deferred resolutions of Chopin's music.  It is in the discontent
that haunts Burne-Jones's women.  Even Matthew Arnold, whose song of
Callicles tells of 'the triumph of the sweet persuasive lyre,' and the
'famous final victory,' in such a clear note of lyrical beauty, has not a
little of it; in the troubled undertone of doubt and distress that haunts
his verses, neither Goethe nor Wordsworth could help him, though he
followed each in turn, and when he seeks to mourn for _Thyrsis_ or to
sing of the _Scholar Gipsy_, it is the reed that he has to take for the
rendering of his strain.  But whether or not the Phrygian Faun was
silent, I cannot be.  Expression is as necessary to me as leaf and
blossoms are to the black branches of the trees that show themselves
above the prison walls and are so restless in the wind.  Between my art
and the world there is now a wide gulf, but between art and myself there
is none.  I hope at least that there is none.

To each of us different fates are meted out.  My lot has been one of
public infamy, of long imprisonment, of misery, of ruin, of disgrace, but
I am not worthy of it--not yet, at any rate.  I remember that I used to
say that I thought I could bear a real tragedy if it came to me with
purple pall and a mask of noble sorrow, but that the dreadful thing about
modernity was that it put tragedy into the raiment of comedy, so that the
great realities seemed commonplace or grotesque or lacking in style.  It
is quite true about modernity.  It has probably always been true about
actual life.  It is said that all martyrdoms seemed mean to the looker
on.  The nineteenth century is no exception to the rule.

Everything about my tragedy has been hideous, mean, repellent, lacking in
style; our very dress makes us grotesque.  We are the zanies of sorrow.
We are clowns whose hearts are broken.  We are specially designed to
appeal to the sense of humour.  On November 13th, 1895, I was brought
down here from London.  From two o'clock till half-past two on that day I
had to stand on the centre platform of Clapham Junction in convict dress,
and handcuffed, for the world to look at.  I had been taken out of the
hospital ward without a moment's notice being given to me.  Of all
possible objects I was the most grotesque.  When people saw me they
laughed.  Each train as it came up swelled the audience.  Nothing could
exceed their amusement.  That was, of course, before they knew who I was.
As soon as they had been informed they laughed still more.  For half an
hour I stood there in the grey November rain surrounded by a jeering mob.

For a year after that was done to me I wept every day at the same hour
and for the same space of time.  That is not such a tragic thing as
possibly it sounds to you.  To those who are in prison tears are a part
of every day's experience.  A day in prison on which one does not weep is
a day on which one's heart is hard, not a day on which one's heart is
happy.

Well, now I am really beginning to feel more regret for the people who
laughed than for myself.  Of course when they saw me I was not on my
pedestal, I was in the pillory.  But it is a very unimaginative nature
that only cares for people on their pedestals.  A pedestal may be a very
unreal thing.  A pillory is a terrific reality.  They should have known
also how to interpret sorrow better.  I have said that behind sorrow
there is always sorrow.  It were wiser still to say that behind sorrow
there is always a soul.  And to mock at a soul in pain is a dreadful
thing.  In the strangely simple economy of the world people only get what
they give, and to those who have not enough imagination to penetrate the
mere outward of things, and feel pity, what pity can be given save that
of scorn?

I write this account of the mode of my being transferred here simply that
it should be realised how hard it has been for me to get anything out of
my punishment but bitterness and despair.  I have, however, to do it, and
now and then I have moments of submission and acceptance.  All the spring
may be hidden in the single bud, and the low ground nest of the lark may
hold the joy that is to herald the feet of many rose-red dawns.  So
perhaps whatever beauty of life still remains to me is contained in some
moment of surrender, abasement, and humiliation.  I can, at any rate,
merely proceed on the lines of my own development, and, accepting all
that has happened to me, make myself worthy of it.

People used to say of me that I was too individualistic.  I must be far
more of an individualist than ever I was.  I must get far more out of
myself than ever I got, and ask far less of the world than ever I asked.
Indeed, my ruin came not from too great individualism of life, but from
too little.  The one disgraceful, unpardonable, and to all time
contemptible action of my life was to allow myself to appeal to society
for help and protection.  To have made such an appeal would have been
from the individualist point of view bad enough, but what excuse can
there ever be put forward for having made it?  Of course once I had put
into motion the forces of society, society turned on me and said, 'Have
you been living all this time in defiance of my laws, and do you now
appeal to those laws for protection?  You shall have those laws exercised
to the full.  You shall abide by what you have appealed to.'  The result
is I am in gaol.  Certainly no man ever fell so ignobly, and by such
ignoble instruments, as I did.

The Philistine element in life is not the failure to understand art.
Charming people, such as fishermen, shepherds, ploughboys, peasants and
the like, know nothing about art, and are the very salt of the earth.  He
is the Philistine who upholds and aids the heavy, cumbrous, blind,
mechanical forces of society, and who does not recognise dynamic force
when he meets it either in a man or a movement.

People thought it dreadful of me to have entertained at dinner the evil
things of life, and to have found pleasure in their company.  But then,
from the point of view through which I, as an artist in life, approach
them they were delightfully suggestive and stimulating.  The danger was
half the excitement. . . . My business as an artist was with Ariel.  I
set myself to wrestle with Caliban. . . .

A great friend of mine--a friend of ten years' standing--came to see me
some time ago, and told me that he did not believe a single word of what
was said against me, and wished me to know that he considered me quite
innocent, and the victim of a hideous plot.  I burst into tears at what
he said, and told him that while there was much amongst the definite
charges that was quite untrue and transferred to me by revolting malice,
still that my life had been full of perverse pleasures, and that unless
he accepted that as a fact about me and realised it to the full I could
not possibly be friends with him any more, or ever be in his company.  It
was a terrible shock to him, but we are friends, and I have not got his
friendship on false pretences.

Emotional forces, as I say somewhere in _Intentions_, are as limited in
extent and duration as the forces of physical energy.  The little cup
that is made to hold so much can hold so much and no more, though all the
purple vats of Burgundy be filled with wine to the brim, and the treaders
stand knee-deep in the gathered grapes of the stony vineyards of Spain.
There is no error more common than that of thinking that those who are
the causes or occasions of great tragedies share in the feelings suitable
to the tragic mood: no error more fatal than expecting it of them.  The
martyr in his 'shirt of flame' may be looking on the face of God, but to
him who is piling the faggots or loosening the logs for the blast the
whole scene is no more than the slaying of an ox is to the butcher, or
the felling of a tree to the charcoal burner in the forest, or the fall
of a flower to one who is mowing down the grass with a scythe.  Great
passions are for the great of soul, and great events can be seen only by
those who are on a level with them.

* * * * *

I know of nothing in all drama more incomparable from the point of view
of art, nothing more suggestive in its subtlety of observation, than
Shakespeare's drawing of Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.  They are Hamlet's
college friends.  They have been his companions.  They bring with them
memories of pleasant days together.  At the moment when they come across
him in the play he is staggering under the weight of a burden intolerable
to one of his temperament.  The dead have come armed out of the grave to
impose on him a mission at once too great and too mean for him.  He is a
dreamer, and he is called upon to act.  He has the nature of the poet,
and he is asked to grapple with the common complexity of cause and
effect, with life in its practical realisation, of which he knows
nothing, not with life in its ideal essence, of which he knows so much.
He has no conception of what to do, and his folly is to feign folly.
Brutus used madness as a cloak to conceal the sword of his purpose, the
dagger of his will, but the Hamlet madness is a mere mask for the hiding
of weakness.  In the making of fancies and jests he sees a chance of
delay.  He keeps playing with action as an artist plays with a theory.  He
makes himself the spy of his proper actions, and listening to his own
words knows them to be but 'words, words, words.'  Instead of trying to
be the hero of his own history, he seeks to be the spectator of his own
tragedy.  He disbelieves in everything, including himself, and yet his
doubt helps him not, as it comes not from scepticism but from a divided
will.

Of all this Guildenstern and Rosencrantz realise nothing.  They bow and
smirk and smile, and what the one says the other echoes with sickliest
intonation.  When, at last, by means of the play within the play, and the
puppets in their dalliance, Hamlet 'catches the conscience' of the King,
and drives the wretched man in terror from his throne, Guildenstern and
Rosencrantz see no more in his conduct than a rather painful breach of
Court etiquette.  That is as far as they can attain to in 'the
contemplation of the spectacle of life with appropriate emotions.'  They
are close to his very secret and know nothing of it.  Nor would there be
any use in telling them.  They are the little cups that can hold so much
and no more.  Towards the close it is suggested that, caught in a cunning
spring set for another, they have met, or may meet, with a violent and
sudden death.  But a tragic ending of this kind, though touched by
Hamlet's humour with something of the surprise and justice of comedy, is
really not for such as they.  They never die.  Horatio, who in order to
'report Hamlet and his cause aright to the unsatisfied,'

   'Absents him from felicity a while,
   And in this harsh world draws his breath in pain,'

dies, but Guildenstern and Rosencrantz are as immortal as Angelo and
Tartuffe, and should rank with them.  They are what modern life has
contributed to the antique ideal of friendship.  He who writes a new _De
Amicitia_ must find a niche for them, and praise them in Tusculan prose.
They are types fixed for all time.  To censure them would show 'a lack of
appreciation.'  They are merely out of their sphere: that is all.  In
sublimity of soul there is no contagion.  High thoughts and high emotions
are by their very existence isolated.

* * * * *

I am to be released, if all goes well with me, towards the end of May,
and hope to go at once to some little sea-side village abroad with R---
and M---.

The sea, as Euripides says in one of his plays about Iphigeneia, washes
away the stains and wounds of the world.

I hope to be at least a month with my friends, and to gain peace and
balance, and a less troubled heart, and a sweeter mood.  I have a strange
longing for the great simple primeval things, such as the sea, to me no
less of a mother than the Earth.  It seems to me that we all look at
Nature too much, and live with her too little.  I discern great sanity in
the Greek attitude.  They never chattered about sunsets, or discussed
whether the shadows on the grass were really mauve or not.  But they saw
that the sea was for the swimmer, and the sand for the feet of the
runner.  They loved the trees for the shadow that they cast, and the
forest for its silence at noon.  The vineyard-dresser wreathed his hair
with ivy that he might keep off the rays of the sun as he stooped over
the young shoots, and for the artist and the athlete, the two types that
Greece gave us, they plaited with garlands the leaves of the bitter
laurel and of the wild parsley, which else had been of no service to men.

We call ours a utilitarian age, and we do not know the uses of any single
thing.  We have forgotten that water can cleanse, and fire purify, and
that the Earth is mother to us all.  As a consequence our art is of the
moon and plays with shadows, while Greek art is of the sun and deals
directly with things.  I feel sure that in elemental forces there is
purification, and I want to go back to them and live in their presence.

Of course to one so modern as I am, 'Enfant de mon siecle,' merely to
look at the world will be always lovely.  I tremble with pleasure when I
think that on the very day of my leaving prison both the laburnum and the
lilac will be blooming in the gardens, and that I shall see the wind stir
into restless beauty the swaying gold of the one, and make the other toss
the pale purple of its plumes, so that all the air shall be Arabia for
me.  Linnaeus fell on his knees and wept for joy when he saw for the
first time the long heath of some English upland made yellow with the
tawny aromatic brooms of the common furze; and I know that for me, to
whom flowers are part of desire, there are tears waiting in the petals of
some rose.  It has always been so with me from my boyhood.  There is not
a single colour hidden away in the chalice of a flower, or the curve of a
shell, to which, by some subtle sympathy with the very soul of things, my
nature does not answer.  Like Gautier, I have always been one of those
'pour qui le monde visible existe.'

Still, I am conscious now that behind all this beauty, satisfying though
it may be, there is some spirit hidden of which the painted forms and
shapes are but modes of manifestation, and it is with this spirit that I
desire to become in harmony.  I have grown tired of the articulate
utterances of men and things.  The Mystical in Art, the Mystical in Life,
the Mystical in Nature this is what I am looking for.  It is absolutely
necessary for me to find it somewhere.

All trials are trials for one's life, just as all sentences are sentences
of death; and three times have I been tried.  The first time I left the
box to be arrested, the second time to be led back to the house of
detention, the third time to pass into a prison for two years.  Society,
as we have constituted it, will have no place for me, has none to offer;
but Nature, whose sweet rains fall on unjust and just alike, will have
clefts in the rocks where I may hide, and secret valleys in whose silence
I may weep undisturbed.  She will hang the night with stars so that I may
walk abroad in the darkness without stumbling, and send the wind over my
footprints so that none may track me to my hurt: she will cleanse me in
great waters, and with bitter herbs make me whole.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DE PROFUNDIS***


******* This file should be named 921.txt or 921.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/9/2/921



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook, De Profundis, by Oscar Wilde


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: De Profundis


Author: Oscar Wilde



Release Date: April 13, 2007  [eBook #921]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DE PROFUNDIS***





Transcribed from the 1913 Methuen & Co. edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org.  Note that later editions of De Profundis contained
more material.  The most complete editions are still in copyright in the
U.S.A.





DE PROFUNDIS


. . . Suffering is one very long moment.  We cannot divide it by seasons.
We can only record its moods, and chronicle their return.  With us time
itself does not progress.  It revolves.  It seems to circle round one
centre of pain.  The paralysing immobility of a life every circumstance
of which is regulated after an unchangeable pattern, so that we eat and
drink and lie down and pray, or kneel at least for prayer, according to
the inflexible laws of an iron formula: this immobile quality, that makes
each dreadful day in the very minutest detail like its brother, seems to
communicate itself to those external forces the very essence of whose
existence is ceaseless change.  Of seed-time or harvest, of the reapers
bending over the corn, or the grape gatherers threading through the
vines, of the grass in the orchard made white with broken blossoms or
strewn with fallen fruit: of these we know nothing and can know nothing.

For us there is only one season, the season of sorrow.  The very sun and
moon seem taken from us.  Outside, the day may be blue and gold, but the
light that creeps down through the thickly-muffled glass of the small
iron-barred window beneath which one sits is grey and niggard.  It is
always twilight in one's cell, as it is always twilight in one's heart.
And in the sphere of thought, no less than in the sphere of time, motion
is no more.  The thing that you personally have long ago forgotten, or
can easily forget, is happening to me now, and will happen to me again to-
morrow.  Remember this, and you will be able to understand a little of
why I am writing, and in this manner writing. . . .

A week later, I am transferred here.  Three more months go over and my
mother dies.  No one knew how deeply I loved and honoured her.  Her death
was terrible to me; but I, once a lord of language, have no words in
which to express my anguish and my shame.  She and my father had
bequeathed me a name they had made noble and honoured, not merely in
literature, art, archaeology, and science, but in the public history of
my own country, in its evolution as a nation.  I had disgraced that name
eternally.  I had made it a low by-word among low people.  I had dragged
it through the very mire.  I had given it to brutes that they might make
it brutal, and to fools that they might turn it into a synonym for folly.
What I suffered then, and still suffer, is not for pen to write or paper
to record.  My wife, always kind and gentle to me, rather than that I
should hear the news from indifferent lips, travelled, ill as she was,
all the way from Genoa to England to break to me herself the tidings of
so irreparable, so irremediable, a loss.  Messages of sympathy reached me
from all who had still affection for me.  Even people who had not known
me personally, hearing that a new sorrow had broken into my life, wrote
to ask that some expression of their condolence should be conveyed to me.
. . .

Three months go over.  The calendar of my daily conduct and labour that
hangs on the outside of my cell door, with my name and sentence written
upon it, tells me that it is May. . . .

Prosperity, pleasure and success, may be rough of grain and common in
fibre, but sorrow is the most sensitive of all created things.  There is
nothing that stirs in the whole world of thought to which sorrow does not
vibrate in terrible and exquisite pulsation.  The thin beaten-out leaf of
tremulous gold that chronicles the direction of forces the eye cannot see
is in comparison coarse.  It is a wound that bleeds when any hand but
that of love touches it, and even then must bleed again, though not in
pain.

Where there is sorrow there is holy ground.  Some day people will realise
what that means.  They will know nothing of life till they do,--and
natures like his can realise it.  When I was brought down from my prison
to the Court of Bankruptcy, between two policemen,--waited in the long
dreary corridor that, before the whole crowd, whom an action so sweet and
simple hushed into silence, he might gravely raise his hat to me, as,
handcuffed and with bowed head, I passed him by.  Men have gone to heaven
for smaller things than that.  It was in this spirit, and with this mode
of love, that the saints knelt down to wash the feet of the poor, or
stooped to kiss the leper on the cheek.  I have never said one single
word to him about what he did.  I do not know to the present moment
whether he is aware that I was even conscious of his action.  It is not a
thing for which one can render formal thanks in formal words.  I store it
in the treasure-house of my heart.  I keep it there as a secret debt that
I am glad to think I can never possibly repay.  It is embalmed and kept
sweet by the myrrh and cassia of many tears.  When wisdom has been
profitless to me, philosophy barren, and the proverbs and phrases of
those who have sought to give me consolation as dust and ashes in my
mouth, the memory of that little, lovely, silent act of love has unsealed
for me all the wells of pity: made the desert blossom like a rose, and
brought me out of the bitterness of lonely exile into harmony with the
wounded, broken, and great heart of the world.  When people are able to
understand, not merely how beautiful ---'s action was, but why it meant
so much to me, and always will mean so much, then, perhaps, they will
realise how and in what spirit they should approach me. . . .

The poor are wise, more charitable, more kind, more sensitive than we
are.  In their eyes prison is a tragedy in a man's life, a misfortune, a
casuality, something that calls for sympathy in others.  They speak of
one who is in prison as of one who is 'in trouble' simply.  It is the
phrase they always use, and the expression has the perfect wisdom of love
in it.  With people of our own rank it is different.  With us, prison
makes a man a pariah.  I, and such as I am, have hardly any right to air
and sun.  Our presence taints the pleasures of others.  We are unwelcome
when we reappear.  To revisit the glimpses of the moon is not for us.  Our
very children are taken away.  Those lovely links with humanity are
broken.  We are doomed to be solitary, while our sons still live.  We are
denied the one thing that might heal us and keep us, that might bring
balm to the bruised heart, and peace to the soul in pain. . . .

I must say to myself that I ruined myself, and that nobody great or small
can be ruined except by his own hand.  I am quite ready to say so.  I am
trying to say so, though they may not think it at the present moment.
This pitiless indictment I bring without pity against myself.  Terrible
as was what the world did to me, what I did to myself was far more
terrible still.

I was a man who stood in symbolic relations to the art and culture of my
age.  I had realised this for myself at the very dawn of my manhood, and
had forced my age to realise it afterwards.  Few men hold such a position
in their own lifetime, and have it so acknowledged.  It is usually
discerned, if discerned at all, by the historian, or the critic, long
after both the man and his age have passed away.  With me it was
different.  I felt it myself, and made others feel it.  Byron was a
symbolic figure, but his relations were to the passion of his age and its
weariness of passion.  Mine were to something more noble, more permanent,
of more vital issue, of larger scope.

The gods had given me almost everything.  But I let myself be lured into
long spells of senseless and sensual ease.  I amused myself with being a
_flaneur_, a dandy, a man of fashion.  I surrounded myself with the
smaller natures and the meaner minds.  I became the spendthrift of my own
genius, and to waste an eternal youth gave me a curious joy.  Tired of
being on the heights, I deliberately went to the depths in the search for
new sensation.  What the paradox was to me in the sphere of thought,
perversity became to me in the sphere of passion.  Desire, at the end,
was a malady, or a madness, or both.  I grew careless of the lives of
others.  I took pleasure where it pleased me, and passed on.  I forgot
that every little action of the common day makes or unmakes character,
and that therefore what one has done in the secret chamber one has some
day to cry aloud on the housetop.  I ceased to be lord over myself.  I
was no longer the captain of my soul, and did not know it.  I allowed
pleasure to dominate me.  I ended in horrible disgrace.  There is only
one thing for me now, absolute humility.

I have lain in prison for nearly two years.  Out of my nature has come
wild despair; an abandonment to grief that was piteous even to look at;
terrible and impotent rage; bitterness and scorn; anguish that wept
aloud; misery that could find no voice; sorrow that was dumb.  I have
passed through every possible mood of suffering.  Better than Wordsworth
himself I know what Wordsworth meant when he said--

   'Suffering is permanent, obscure, and dark
   And has the nature of infinity.'

But while there were times when I rejoiced in the idea that my sufferings
were to be endless, I could not bear them to be without meaning.  Now I
find hidden somewhere away in my nature something that tells me that
nothing in the whole world is meaningless, and suffering least of all.
That something hidden away in my nature, like a treasure in a field, is
Humility.

It is the last thing left in me, and the best: the ultimate discovery at
which I have arrived, the starting-point for a fresh development.  It has
come to me right out of myself, so I know that it has come at the proper
time.  It could not have come before, nor later.  Had any one told me of
it, I would have rejected it.  Had it been brought to me, I would have
refused it.  As I found it, I want to keep it.  I must do so.  It is the
one thing that has in it the elements of life, of a new life, _Vita
Nuova_ for me.  Of all things it is the strangest.  One cannot acquire
it, except by surrendering everything that one has.  It is only when one
has lost all things, that one knows that one possesses it.

Now I have realised that it is in me, I see quite clearly what I ought to
do; in fact, must do.  And when I use such a phrase as that, I need not
say that I am not alluding to any external sanction or command.  I admit
none.  I am far more of an individualist than I ever was.  Nothing seems
to me of the smallest value except what one gets out of oneself.  My
nature is seeking a fresh mode of self-realisation.  That is all I am
concerned with.  And the first thing that I have got to do is to free
myself from any possible bitterness of feeling against the world.

I am completely penniless, and absolutely homeless.  Yet there are worse
things in the world than that.  I am quite candid when I say that rather
than go out from this prison with bitterness in my heart against the
world, I would gladly and readily beg my bread from door to door.  If I
got nothing from the house of the rich I would get something at the house
of the poor.  Those who have much are often greedy; those who have little
always share.  I would not a bit mind sleeping in the cool grass in
summer, and when winter came on sheltering myself by the warm
close-thatched rick, or under the penthouse of a great barn, provided I
had love in my heart.  The external things of life seem to me now of no
importance at all.  You can see to what intensity of individualism I have
arrived--or am arriving rather, for the journey is long, and 'where I
walk there are thorns.'

Of course I know that to ask alms on the highway is not to be my lot, and
that if ever I lie in the cool grass at night-time it will be to write
sonnets to the moon.  When I go out of prison, R--- will be waiting for
me on the other side of the big iron-studded gate, and he is the symbol,
not merely of his own affection, but of the affection of many others
besides.  I believe I am to have enough to live on for about eighteen
months at any rate, so that if I may not write beautiful books, I may at
least read beautiful books; and what joy can be greater?  After that, I
hope to be able to recreate my creative faculty.

But were things different: had I not a friend left in the world; were
there not a single house open to me in pity; had I to accept the wallet
and ragged cloak of sheer penury: as long as I am free from all
resentment, hardness and scorn, I would be able to face the life with
much more calm and confidence than I would were my body in purple and
fine linen, and the soul within me sick with hate.

And I really shall have no difficulty.  When you really want love you
will find it waiting for you.

I need not say that my task does not end there.  It would be
comparatively easy if it did.  There is much more before me.  I have
hills far steeper to climb, valleys much darker to pass through.  And I
have to get it all out of myself.  Neither religion, morality, nor reason
can help me at all.

Morality does not help me.  I am a born antinomian.  I am one of those
who are made for exceptions, not for laws.  But while I see that there is
nothing wrong in what one does, I see that there is something wrong in
what one becomes.  It is well to have learned that.

Religion does not help me.  The faith that others give to what is unseen,
I give to what one can touch, and look at.  My gods dwell in temples made
with hands; and within the circle of actual experience is my creed made
perfect and complete: too complete, it may be, for like many or all of
those who have placed their heaven in this earth, I have found in it not
merely the beauty of heaven, but the horror of hell also.  When I think
about religion at all, I feel as if I would like to found an order for
those who _cannot_ believe: the Confraternity of the Faithless, one might
call it, where on an altar, on which no taper burned, a priest, in whose
heart peace had no dwelling, might celebrate with unblessed bread and a
chalice empty of wine.  Every thing to be true must become a religion.
And agnosticism should have its ritual no less than faith.  It has sown
its martyrs, it should reap its saints, and praise God daily for having
hidden Himself from man.  But whether it be faith or agnosticism, it must
be nothing external to me.  Its symbols must be of my own creating.  Only
that is spiritual which makes its own form.  If I may not find its secret
within myself, I shall never find it: if I have not got it already, it
will never come to me.

Reason does not help me.  It tells me that the laws under which I am
convicted are wrong and unjust laws, and the system under which I have
suffered a wrong and unjust system.  But, somehow, I have got to make
both of these things just and right to me.  And exactly as in Art one is
only concerned with what a particular thing is at a particular moment to
oneself, so it is also in the ethical evolution of one's character.  I
have got to make everything that has happened to me good for me.  The
plank bed, the loathsome food, the hard ropes shredded into oakum till
one's finger-tips grow dull with pain, the menial offices with which each
day begins and finishes, the harsh orders that routine seems to
necessitate, the dreadful dress that makes sorrow grotesque to look at,
the silence, the solitude, the shame--each and all of these things I have
to transform into a spiritual experience.  There is not a single
degradation of the body which I must not try and make into a
spiritualising of the soul.

I want to get to the point when I shall be able to say quite simply, and
without affectation that the two great turning-points in my life were
when my father sent me to Oxford, and when society sent me to prison.  I
will not say that prison is the best thing that could have happened to
me: for that phrase would savour of too great bitterness towards myself.
I would sooner say, or hear it said of me, that I was so typical a child
of my age, that in my perversity, and for that perversity's sake, I
turned the good things of my life to evil, and the evil things of my life
to good.

What is said, however, by myself or by others, matters little.  The
important thing, the thing that lies before me, the thing that I have to
do, if the brief remainder of my days is not to be maimed, marred, and
incomplete, is to absorb into my nature all that has been done to me, to
make it part of me, to accept it without complaint, fear, or reluctance.
The supreme vice is shallowness.  Whatever is realised is right.

When first I was put into prison some people advised me to try and forget
who I was.  It was ruinous advice.  It is only by realising what I am
that I have found comfort of any kind.  Now I am advised by others to try
on my release to forget that I have ever been in a prison at all.  I know
that would be equally fatal.  It would mean that I would always be
haunted by an intolerable sense of disgrace, and that those things that
are meant for me as much as for anybody else--the beauty of the sun and
moon, the pageant of the seasons, the music of daybreak and the silence
of great nights, the rain falling through the leaves, or the dew creeping
over the grass and making it silver--would all be tainted for me, and
lose their healing power, and their power of communicating joy.  To
regret one's own experiences is to arrest one's own development.  To deny
one's own experiences is to put a lie into the lips of one's own life.  It
is no less than a denial of the soul.

For just as the body absorbs things of all kinds, things common and
unclean no less than those that the priest or a vision has cleansed, and
converts them into swiftness or strength, into the play of beautiful
muscles and the moulding of fair flesh, into the curves and colours of
the hair, the lips, the eye; so the soul in its turn has its nutritive
functions also, and can transform into noble moods of thought and
passions of high import what in itself is base, cruel and degrading; nay,
more, may find in these its most august modes of assertion, and can often
reveal itself most perfectly through what was intended to desecrate or
destroy.

The fact of my having been the common prisoner of a common gaol I must
frankly accept, and, curious as it may seem, one of the things I shall
have to teach myself is not to be ashamed of it.  I must accept it as a
punishment, and if one is ashamed of having been punished, one might just
as well never have been punished at all.  Of course there are many things
of which I was convicted that I had not done, but then there are many
things of which I was convicted that I had done, and a still greater
number of things in my life for which I was never indicted at all.  And
as the gods are strange, and punish us for what is good and humane in us
as much as for what is evil and perverse, I must accept the fact that one
is punished for the good as well as for the evil that one does.  I have
no doubt that it is quite right one should be.  It helps one, or should
help one, to realise both, and not to be too conceited about either.  And
if I then am not ashamed of my punishment, as I hope not to be, I shall
be able to think, and walk, and live with freedom.

Many men on their release carry their prison about with them into the
air, and hide it as a secret disgrace in their hearts, and at length,
like poor poisoned things, creep into some hole and die.  It is wretched
that they should have to do so, and it is wrong, terribly wrong, of
society that it should force them to do so.  Society takes upon itself
the right to inflict appalling punishment on the individual, but it also
has the supreme vice of shallowness, and fails to realise what it has
done.  When the man's punishment is over, it leaves him to himself; that
is to say, it abandons him at the very moment when its highest duty
towards him begins.  It is really ashamed of its own actions, and shuns
those whom it has punished, as people shun a creditor whose debt they
cannot pay, or one on whom they have inflicted an irreparable, an
irremediable wrong.  I can claim on my side that if I realise what I have
suffered, society should realise what it has inflicted on me; and that
there should be no bitterness or hate on either side.

Of course I know that from one point of view things will be made
different for me than for others; must indeed, by the very nature of the
case, be made so.  The poor thieves and outcasts who are imprisoned here
with me are in many respects more fortunate than I am.  The little way in
grey city or green field that saw their sin is small; to find those who
know nothing of what they have done they need go no further than a bird
might fly between the twilight and the dawn; but for me the world is
shrivelled to a handsbreadth, and everywhere I turn my name is written on
the rocks in lead.  For I have come, not from obscurity into the
momentary notoriety of crime, but from a sort of eternity of fame to a
sort of eternity of infamy, and sometimes seem to myself to have shown,
if indeed it required showing, that between the famous and the infamous
there is but one step, if as much as one.

Still, in the very fact that people will recognise me wherever I go, and
know all about my life, as far as its follies go, I can discern something
good for me.  It will force on me the necessity of again asserting myself
as an artist, and as soon as I possibly can.  If I can produce only one
beautiful work of art I shall be able to rob malice of its venom, and
cowardice of its sneer, and to pluck out the tongue of scorn by the
roots.

And if life be, as it surely is, a problem to me, I am no less a problem
to life.  People must adopt some attitude towards me, and so pass
judgment, both on themselves and me.  I need not say I am not talking of
particular individuals.  The only people I would care to be with now are
artists and people who have suffered: those who know what beauty is, and
those who know what sorrow is: nobody else interests me.  Nor am I making
any demands on life.  In all that I have said I am simply concerned with
my own mental attitude towards life as a whole; and I feel that not to be
ashamed of having been punished is one of the first points I must attain
to, for the sake of my own perfection, and because I am so imperfect.

Then I must learn how to be happy.  Once I knew it, or thought I knew it,
by instinct.  It was always springtime once in my heart.  My temperament
was akin to joy.  I filled my life to the very brim with pleasure, as one
might fill a cup to the very brim with wine.  Now I am approaching life
from a completely new standpoint, and even to conceive happiness is often
extremely difficult for me.  I remember during my first term at Oxford
reading in Pater's _Renaissance_--that book which has had such strange
influence over my life--how Dante places low in the Inferno those who
wilfully live in sadness; and going to the college library and turning to
the passage in the _Divine Comedy_ where beneath the dreary marsh lie
those who were 'sullen in the sweet air,' saying for ever and ever
through their sighs--

   'Tristi fummo
   Nell aer dolce che dal sol s'allegra.'

I knew the church condemned _accidia_, but the whole idea seemed to me
quite fantastic, just the sort of sin, I fancied, a priest who knew
nothing about real life would invent.  Nor could I understand how Dante,
who says that 'sorrow remarries us to God,' could have been so harsh to
those who were enamoured of melancholy, if any such there really were.  I
had no idea that some day this would become to me one of the greatest
temptations of my life.

While I was in Wandsworth prison I longed to die.  It was my one desire.
When after two months in the infirmary I was transferred here, and found
myself growing gradually better in physical health, I was filled with
rage.  I determined to commit suicide on the very day on which I left
prison.  After a time that evil mood passed away, and I made up my mind
to live, but to wear gloom as a king wears purple: never to smile again:
to turn whatever house I entered into a house of mourning: to make my
friends walk slowly in sadness with me: to teach them that melancholy is
the true secret of life: to maim them with an alien sorrow: to mar them
with my own pain.  Now I feel quite differently.  I see it would be both
ungrateful and unkind of me to pull so long a face that when my friends
came to see me they would have to make their faces still longer in order
to show their sympathy; or, if I desired to entertain them, to invite
them to sit down silently to bitter herbs and funeral baked meats.  I
must learn how to be cheerful and happy.

The last two occasions on which I was allowed to see my friends here, I
tried to be as cheerful as possible, and to show my cheerfulness, in
order to make them some slight return for their trouble in coming all the
way from town to see me.  It is only a slight return, I know, but it is
the one, I feel certain, that pleases them most.  I saw R--- for an hour
on Saturday week, and I tried to give the fullest possible expression of
the delight I really felt at our meeting.  And that, in the views and
ideas I am here shaping for myself, I am quite right is shown to me by
the fact that now for the first time since my imprisonment I have a real
desire for life.

There is before me so much to do, that I would regard it as a terrible
tragedy if I died before I was allowed to complete at any rate a little
of it.  I see new developments in art and life, each one of which is a
fresh mode of perfection.  I long to live so that I can explore what is
no less than a new world to me.  Do you want to know what this new world
is?  I think you can guess what it is.  It is the world in which I have
been living.  Sorrow, then, and all that it teaches one, is my new world.

I used to live entirely for pleasure.  I shunned suffering and sorrow of
every kind.  I hated both.  I resolved to ignore them as far as possible:
to treat them, that is to say, as modes of imperfection.  They were not
part of my scheme of life.  They had no place in my philosophy.  My
mother, who knew life as a whole, used often to quote to me Goethe's
lines--written by Carlyle in a book he had given her years ago, and
translated by him, I fancy, also:--

   'Who never ate his bread in sorrow,
   Who never spent the midnight hours
   Weeping and waiting for the morrow,--
   He knows you not, ye heavenly powers.'

They were the lines which that noble Queen of Prussia, whom Napoleon
treated with such coarse brutality, used to quote in her humiliation and
exile; they were the lines my mother often quoted in the troubles of her
later life.  I absolutely declined to accept or admit the enormous truth
hidden in them.  I could not understand it.  I remember quite well how I
used to tell her that I did not want to eat my bread in sorrow, or to
pass any night weeping and watching for a more bitter dawn.

I had no idea that it was one of the special things that the Fates had in
store for me: that for a whole year of my life, indeed, I was to do
little else.  But so has my portion been meted out to me; and during the
last few months I have, after terrible difficulties and struggles, been
able to comprehend some of the lessons hidden in the heart of pain.
Clergymen and people who use phrases without wisdom sometimes talk of
suffering as a mystery.  It is really a revelation.  One discerns things
one never discerned before.  One approaches the whole of history from a
different standpoint.  What one had felt dimly, through instinct, about
art, is intellectually and emotionally realised with perfect clearness of
vision and absolute intensity of apprehension.

I now see that sorrow, being the supreme emotion of which man is capable,
is at once the type and test of all great art.  What the artist is always
looking for is the mode of existence in which soul and body are one and
indivisible: in which the outward is expressive of the inward: in which
form reveals.  Of such modes of existence there are not a few: youth and
the arts preoccupied with youth may serve as a model for us at one
moment: at another we may like to think that, in its subtlety and
sensitiveness of impression, its suggestion of a spirit dwelling in
external things and making its raiment of earth and air, of mist and city
alike, and in its morbid sympathy of its moods, and tones, and colours,
modern landscape art is realising for us pictorially what was realised in
such plastic perfection by the Greeks.  Music, in which all subject is
absorbed in expression and cannot be separated from it, is a complex
example, and a flower or a child a simple example, of what I mean; but
sorrow is the ultimate type both in life and art.

Behind joy and laughter there may be a temperament, coarse, hard and
callous.  But behind sorrow there is always sorrow.  Pain, unlike
pleasure, wears no mask.  Truth in art is not any correspondence between
the essential idea and the accidental existence; it is not the
resemblance of shape to shadow, or of the form mirrored in the crystal to
the form itself; it is no echo coming from a hollow hill, any more than
it is a silver well of water in the valley that shows the moon to the
moon and Narcissus to Narcissus.  Truth in art is the unity of a thing
with itself: the outward rendered expressive of the inward: the soul made
incarnate: the body instinct with spirit.  For this reason there is no
truth comparable to sorrow.  There are times when sorrow seems to me to
be the only truth.  Other things may be illusions of the eye or the
appetite, made to blind the one and cloy the other, but out of sorrow
have the worlds been built, and at the birth of a child or a star there
is pain.

More than this, there is about sorrow an intense, an extraordinary
reality.  I have said of myself that I was one who stood in symbolic
relations to the art and culture of my age.  There is not a single
wretched man in this wretched place along with me who does not stand in
symbolic relation to the very secret of life.  For the secret of life is
suffering.  It is what is hidden behind everything.  When we begin to
live, what is sweet is so sweet to us, and what is bitter so bitter, that
we inevitably direct all our desires towards pleasures, and seek not
merely for a 'month or twain to feed on honeycomb,' but for all our years
to taste no other food, ignorant all the while that we may really be
starving the soul.

I remember talking once on this subject to one of the most beautiful
personalities I have ever known: a woman, whose sympathy and noble
kindness to me, both before and since the tragedy of my imprisonment,
have been beyond power and description; one who has really assisted me,
though she does not know it, to bear the burden of my troubles more than
any one else in the whole world has, and all through the mere fact of her
existence, through her being what she is--partly an ideal and partly an
influence: a suggestion of what one might become as well as a real help
towards becoming it; a soul that renders the common air sweet, and makes
what is spiritual seem as simple and natural as sunlight or the sea: one
for whom beauty and sorrow walk hand in hand, and have the same message.
On the occasion of which I am thinking I recall distinctly how I said to
her that there was enough suffering in one narrow London lane to show
that God did not love man, and that wherever there was any sorrow, though
but that of a child, in some little garden weeping over a fault that it
had or had not committed, the whole face of creation was completely
marred.  I was entirely wrong.  She told me so, but I could not believe
her.  I was not in the sphere in which such belief was to be attained to.
Now it seems to me that love of some kind is the only possible
explanation of the extraordinary amount of suffering that there is in the
world.  I cannot conceive of any other explanation.  I am convinced that
there is no other, and that if the world has indeed, as I have said, been
built of sorrow, it has been built by the hands of love, because in no
other way could the soul of man, for whom the world was made, reach the
full stature of its perfection.  Pleasure for the beautiful body, but
pain for the beautiful soul.

When I say that I am convinced of these things I speak with too much
pride.  Far off, like a perfect pearl, one can see the city of God.  It
is so wonderful that it seems as if a child could reach it in a summer's
day.  And so a child could.  But with me and such as me it is different.
One can realise a thing in a single moment, but one loses it in the long
hours that follow with leaden feet.  It is so difficult to keep 'heights
that the soul is competent to gain.'  We think in eternity, but we move
slowly through time; and how slowly time goes with us who lie in prison I
need not tell again, nor of the weariness and despair that creep back
into one's cell, and into the cell of one's heart, with such strange
insistence that one has, as it were, to garnish and sweep one's house for
their coming, as for an unwelcome guest, or a bitter master, or a slave
whose slave it is one's chance or choice to be.

And, though at present my friends may find it a hard thing to believe, it
is true none the less, that for them living in freedom and idleness and
comfort it is more easy to learn the lessons of humility than it is for
me, who begin the day by going down on my knees and washing the floor of
my cell.  For prison life with its endless privations and restrictions
makes one rebellious.  The most terrible thing about it is not that it
breaks one's heart--hearts are made to be broken--but that it turns one's
heart to stone.  One sometimes feels that it is only with a front of
brass and a lip of scorn that one can get through the day at all.  And he
who is in a state of rebellion cannot receive grace, to use the phrase of
which the Church is so fond--so rightly fond, I dare say--for in life as
in art the mood of rebellion closes up the channels of the soul, and
shuts out the airs of heaven.  Yet I must learn these lessons here, if I
am to learn them anywhere, and must be filled with joy if my feet are on
the right road and my face set towards 'the gate which is called
beautiful,' though I may fall many times in the mire and often in the
mist go astray.

This New Life, as through my love of Dante I like sometimes to call it,
is of course no new life at all, but simply the continuance, by means of
development, and evolution, of my former life.  I remember when I was at
Oxford saying to one of my friends as we were strolling round Magdalen's
narrow bird-haunted walks one morning in the year before I took my
degree, that I wanted to eat of the fruit of all the trees in the garden
of the world, and that I was going out into the world with that passion
in my soul.  And so, indeed, I went out, and so I lived.  My only mistake
was that I confined myself so exclusively to the trees of what seemed to
me the sun-lit side of the garden, and shunned the other side for its
shadow and its gloom.  Failure, disgrace, poverty, sorrow, despair,
suffering, tears even, the broken words that come from lips in pain,
remorse that makes one walk on thorns, conscience that condemns, self-
abasement that punishes, the misery that puts ashes on its head, the
anguish that chooses sack-cloth for its raiment and into its own drink
puts gall:--all these were things of which I was afraid.  And as I had
determined to know nothing of them, I was forced to taste each of them in
turn, to feed on them, to have for a season, indeed, no other food at
all.

I don't regret for a single moment having lived for pleasure.  I did it
to the full, as one should do everything that one does.  There was no
pleasure I did not experience.  I threw the pearl of my soul into a cup
of wine.  I went down the primrose path to the sound of flutes.  I lived
on honeycomb.  But to have continued the same life would have been wrong
because it would have been limiting.  I had to pass on.  The other half
of the garden had its secrets for me also.  Of course all this is
foreshadowed and prefigured in my books.  Some of it is in _The Happy
Prince_, some of it in _The Young King_, notably in the passage where the
bishop says to the kneeling boy, 'Is not He who made misery wiser than
thou art'? a phrase which when I wrote it seemed to me little more than a
phrase; a great deal of it is hidden away in the note of doom that like a
purple thread runs through the texture of _Dorian Gray_; in _The Critic
as Artist_ it is set forth in many colours; in _The Soul of Man_ it is
written down, and in letters too easy to read; it is one of the refrains
whose recurring _motifs_ make _Salome_ so like a piece of music and bind
it together as a ballad; in the prose poem of the man who from the bronze
of the image of the 'Pleasure that liveth for a moment' has to make the
image of the 'Sorrow that abideth for ever' it is incarnate.  It could
not have been otherwise.  At every single moment of one's life one is
what one is going to be no less than what one has been.  Art is a symbol,
because man is a symbol.

It is, if I can fully attain to it, the ultimate realisation of the
artistic life.  For the artistic life is simply self-development.
Humility in the artist is his frank acceptance of all experiences, just
as love in the artist is simply the sense of beauty that reveals to the
world its body and its soul.  In _Marius the Epicurean_ Pater seeks to
reconcile the artistic life with the life of religion, in the deep,
sweet, and austere sense of the word.  But Marius is little more than a
spectator: an ideal spectator indeed, and one to whom it is given 'to
contemplate the spectacle of life with appropriate emotions,' which
Wordsworth defines as the poet's true aim; yet a spectator merely, and
perhaps a little too much occupied with the comeliness of the benches of
the sanctuary to notice that it is the sanctuary of sorrow that he is
gazing at.

I see a far more intimate and immediate connection between the true life
of Christ and the true life of the artist; and I take a keen pleasure in
the reflection that long before sorrow had made my days her own and bound
me to her wheel I had written in _The Soul of Man_ that he who would lead
a Christ-like life must be entirely and absolutely himself, and had taken
as my types not merely the shepherd on the hillside and the prisoner in
his cell, but also the painter to whom the world is a pageant and the
poet for whom the world is a song.  I remember saying once to Andre Gide,
as we sat together in some Paris _cafe_, that while meta-physics had but
little real interest for me, and morality absolutely none, there was
nothing that either Plato or Christ had said that could not be
transferred immediately into the sphere of Art and there find its
complete fulfilment.

Nor is it merely that we can discern in Christ that close union of
personality with perfection which forms the real distinction between the
classical and romantic movement in life, but the very basis of his nature
was the same as that of the nature of the artist--an intense and
flamelike imagination.  He realised in the entire sphere of human
relations that imaginative sympathy which in the sphere of Art is the
sole secret of creation.  He understood the leprosy of the leper, the
darkness of the blind, the fierce misery of those who live for pleasure,
the strange poverty of the rich.  Some one wrote to me in trouble, 'When
you are not on your pedestal you are not interesting.'  How remote was
the writer from what Matthew Arnold calls 'the Secret of Jesus.'  Either
would have taught him that whatever happens to another happens to
oneself, and if you want an inscription to read at dawn and at
night-time, and for pleasure or for pain, write up on the walls of your
house in letters for the sun to gild and the moon to silver, 'Whatever
happens to oneself happens to another.'

Christ's place indeed is with the poets.  His whole conception of
Humanity sprang right out of the imagination and can only be realised by
it.  What God was to the pantheist, man was to Him.  He was the first to
conceive the divided races as a unity.  Before his time there had been
gods and men, and, feeling through the mysticism of sympathy that in
himself each had been made incarnate, he calls himself the Son of the one
or the Son of the other, according to his mood.  More than any one else
in history he wakes in us that temper of wonder to which romance always
appeals.  There is still something to me almost incredible in the idea of
a young Galilean peasant imagining that he could bear on his own
shoulders the burden of the entire world; all that had already been done
and suffered, and all that was yet to be done and suffered: the sins of
Nero, of Caesar Borgia, of Alexander VI., and of him who was Emperor of
Rome and Priest of the Sun: the sufferings of those whose names are
legion and whose dwelling is among the tombs: oppressed nationalities,
factory children, thieves, people in prison, outcasts, those who are dumb
under oppression and whose silence is heard only of God; and not merely
imagining this but actually achieving it, so that at the present moment
all who come in contact with his personality, even though they may
neither bow to his altar nor kneel before his priest, in some way find
that the ugliness of their sin is taken away and the beauty of their
sorrow revealed to them.

I had said of Christ that he ranks with the poets.  That is true.  Shelley
and Sophocles are of his company.  But his entire life also is the most
wonderful of poems.  For 'pity and terror' there is nothing in the entire
cycle of Greek tragedy to touch it.  The absolute purity of the
protagonist raises the entire scheme to a height of romantic art from
which the sufferings of Thebes and Pelops' line are by their very horror
excluded, and shows how wrong Aristotle was when he said in his treatise
on the drama that it would be impossible to bear the spectacle of one
blameless in pain.  Nor in AEschylus nor Dante, those stern masters of
tenderness, in Shakespeare, the most purely human of all the great
artists, in the whole of Celtic myth and legend, where the loveliness of
the world is shown through a mist of tears, and the life of a man is no
more than the life of a flower, is there anything that, for sheer
simplicity of pathos wedded and made one with sublimity of tragic effect,
can be said to equal or even approach the last act of Christ's passion.
The little supper with his companions, one of whom has already sold him
for a price; the anguish in the quiet moon-lit garden; the false friend
coming close to him so as to betray him with a kiss; the friend who still
believed in him, and on whom as on a rock he had hoped to build a house
of refuge for Man, denying him as the bird cried to the dawn; his own
utter loneliness, his submission, his acceptance of everything; and along
with it all such scenes as the high priest of orthodoxy rending his
raiment in wrath, and the magistrate of civil justice calling for water
in the vain hope of cleansing himself of that stain of innocent blood
that makes him the scarlet figure of history; the coronation ceremony of
sorrow, one of the most wonderful things in the whole of recorded time;
the crucifixion of the Innocent One before the eyes of his mother and of
the disciple whom he loved; the soldiers gambling and throwing dice for
his clothes; the terrible death by which he gave the world its most
eternal symbol; and his final burial in the tomb of the rich man, his
body swathed in Egyptian linen with costly spices and perfumes as though
he had been a king's son.  When one contemplates all this from the point
of view of art alone one cannot but be grateful that the supreme office
of the Church should be the playing of the tragedy without the shedding
of blood: the mystical presentation, by means of dialogue and costume and
gesture even, of the Passion of her Lord; and it is always a source of
pleasure and awe to me to remember that the ultimate survival of the
Greek chorus, lost elsewhere to art, is to be found in the servitor
answering the priest at Mass.

Yet the whole life of Christ--so entirely may sorrow and beauty be made
one in their meaning and manifestation--is really an idyll, though it
ends with the veil of the temple being rent, and the darkness coming over
the face of the earth, and the stone rolled to the door of the sepulchre.
One always thinks of him as a young bridegroom with his companions, as
indeed he somewhere describes himself; as a shepherd straying through a
valley with his sheep in search of green meadow or cool stream; as a
singer trying to build out of the music the walls of the City of God; or
as a lover for whose love the whole world was too small.  His miracles
seem to me to be as exquisite as the coming of spring, and quite as
natural.  I see no difficulty at all in believing that such was the charm
of his personality that his mere presence could bring peace to souls in
anguish, and that those who touched his garments or his hands forgot
their pain; or that as he passed by on the highway of life people who had
seen nothing of life's mystery, saw it clearly, and others who had been
deaf to every voice but that of pleasure heard for the first time the
voice of love and found it as 'musical as Apollo's lute'; or that evil
passions fled at his approach, and men whose dull unimaginative lives had
been but a mode of death rose as it were from the grave when he called
them; or that when he taught on the hillside the multitude forgot their
hunger and thirst and the cares of this world, and that to his friends
who listened to him as he sat at meat the coarse food seemed delicate,
and the water had the taste of good wine, and the whole house became full
of the odour and sweetness of nard.

Renan in his _Vie de Jesus_--that gracious fifth gospel, the gospel
according to St. Thomas, one might call it--says somewhere that Christ's
great achievement was that he made himself as much loved after his death
as he had been during his lifetime.  And certainly, if his place is among
the poets, he is the leader of all the lovers.  He saw that love was the
first secret of the world for which the wise men had been looking, and
that it was only through love that one could approach either the heart of
the leper or the feet of God.

And above all, Christ is the most supreme of individualists.  Humility,
like the artistic, acceptance of all experiences, is merely a mode of
manifestation.  It is man's soul that Christ is always looking for.  He
calls it 'God's Kingdom,' and finds it in every one.  He compares it to
little things, to a tiny seed, to a handful of leaven, to a pearl.  That
is because one realises one's soul only by getting rid of all alien
passions, all acquired culture, and all external possessions, be they
good or evil.

I bore up against everything with some stubbornness of will and much
rebellion of nature, till I had absolutely nothing left in the world but
one thing.  I had lost my name, my position, my happiness, my freedom, my
wealth.  I was a prisoner and a pauper.  But I still had my children
left.  Suddenly they were taken away from me by the law.  It was a blow
so appalling that I did not know what to do, so I flung myself on my
knees, and bowed my head, and wept, and said, 'The body of a child is as
the body of the Lord: I am not worthy of either.'  That moment seemed to
save me.  I saw then that the only thing for me was to accept everything.
Since then--curious as it will no doubt sound--I have been happier.  It
was of course my soul in its ultimate essence that I had reached.  In
many ways I had been its enemy, but I found it waiting for me as a
friend.  When one comes in contact with the soul it makes one simple as a
child, as Christ said one should be.

It is tragic how few people ever 'possess their souls' before they die.
'Nothing is more rare in any man,' says Emerson, 'than an act of his
own.'  It is quite true.  Most people are other people.  Their thoughts
are some one else's opinions, their lives a mimicry, their passions a
quotation.  Christ was not merely the supreme individualist, but he was
the first individualist in history.  People have tried to make him out an
ordinary philanthropist, or ranked him as an altruist with the scientific
and sentimental.  But he was really neither one nor the other.  Pity he
has, of course, for the poor, for those who are shut up in prisons, for
the lowly, for the wretched; but he has far more pity for the rich, for
the hard hedonists, for those who waste their freedom in becoming slaves
to things, for those who wear soft raiment and live in kings' houses.
Riches and pleasure seemed to him to be really greater tragedies than
poverty or sorrow.  And as for altruism, who knew better than he that it
is vocation not volition that determines us, and that one cannot gather
grapes of thorns or figs from thistles?

To live for others as a definite self-conscious aim was not his creed.  It
was not the basis of his creed.  When he says, 'Forgive your enemies,' it
is not for the sake of the enemy, but for one's own sake that he says so,
and because love is more beautiful than hate.  In his own entreaty to the
young man, 'Sell all that thou hast and give to the poor,' it is not of
the state of the poor that he is thinking but of the soul of the young
man, the soul that wealth was marring.  In his view of life he is one
with the artist who knows that by the inevitable law of self-perfection,
the poet must sing, and the sculptor think in bronze, and the painter
make the world a mirror for his moods, as surely and as certainly as the
hawthorn must blossom in spring, and the corn turn to gold at harvest-
time, and the moon in her ordered wanderings change from shield to
sickle, and from sickle to shield.

But while Christ did not say to men, 'Live for others,' he pointed out
that there was no difference at all between the lives of others and one's
own life.  By this means he gave to man an extended, a Titan personality.
Since his coming the history of each separate individual is, or can be
made, the history of the world.  Of course, culture has intensified the
personality of man.  Art has made us myriad-minded.  Those who have the
artistic temperament go into exile with Dante and learn how salt is the
bread of others, and how steep their stairs; they catch for a moment the
serenity and calm of Goethe, and yet know but too well that Baudelaire
cried to God--

   'O Seigneur, donnez moi la force et le courage
   De contempler mon corps et mon coeur sans degout.'

Out of Shakespeare's sonnets they draw, to their own hurt it may be, the
secret of his love and make it their own; they look with new eyes on
modern life, because they have listened to one of Chopin's nocturnes, or
handled Greek things, or read the story of the passion of some dead man
for some dead woman whose hair was like threads of fine gold, and whose
mouth was as a pomegranate.  But the sympathy of the artistic temperament
is necessarily with what has found expression.  In words or in colours,
in music or in marble, behind the painted masks of an AEschylean play, or
through some Sicilian shepherds' pierced and jointed reeds, the man and
his message must have been revealed.

To the artist, expression is the only mode under which he can conceive
life at all.  To him what is dumb is dead.  But to Christ it was not so.
With a width and wonder of imagination that fills one almost with awe, he
took the entire world of the inarticulate, the voiceless world of pain,
as his kingdom, and made of himself its eternal mouthpiece.  Those of
whom I have spoken, who are dumb under oppression, and 'whose silence is
heard only of God,' he chose as his brothers.  He sought to become eyes
to the blind, ears to the deaf, and a cry in the lips of those whose
tongues had been tied.  His desire was to be to the myriads who had found
no utterance a very trumpet through which they might call to heaven.  And
feeling, with the artistic nature of one to whom suffering and sorrow
were modes through which he could realise his conception of the
beautiful, that an idea is of no value till it becomes incarnate and is
made an image, he made of himself the image of the Man of Sorrows, and as
such has fascinated and dominated art as no Greek god ever succeeded in
doing.

For the Greek gods, in spite of the white and red of their fair fleet
limbs, were not really what they appeared to be.  The curved brow of
Apollo was like the sun's disc crescent over a hill at dawn, and his feet
were as the wings of the morning, but he himself had been cruel to
Marsyas and had made Niobe childless.  In the steel shields of Athena's
eyes there had been no pity for Arachne; the pomp and peacocks of Hera
were all that was really noble about her; and the Father of the Gods
himself had been too fond of the daughters of men.  The two most deeply
suggestive figures of Greek Mythology were, for religion, Demeter, an
Earth Goddess, not one of the Olympians, and for art, Dionysus, the son
of a mortal woman to whom the moment of his birth had proved also the
moment of her death.

But Life itself from its lowliest and most humble sphere produced one far
more marvellous than the mother of Proserpina or the son of Semele.  Out
of the Carpenter's shop at Nazareth had come a personality infinitely
greater than any made by myth and legend, and one, strangely enough,
destined to reveal to the world the mystical meaning of wine and the real
beauties of the lilies of the field as none, either on Cithaeron or at
Enna, had ever done.

The song of Isaiah, 'He is despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrows
and acquainted with grief: and we hid as it were our faces from him,' had
seemed to him to prefigure himself, and in him the prophecy was
fulfilled.  We must not be afraid of such a phrase.  Every single work of
art is the fulfilment of a prophecy: for every work of art is the
conversion of an idea into an image.  Every single human being should be
the fulfilment of a prophecy: for every human being should be the
realisation of some ideal, either in the mind of God or in the mind of
man.  Christ found the type and fixed it, and the dream of a Virgilian
poet, either at Jerusalem or at Babylon, became in the long progress of
the centuries incarnate in him for whom the world was waiting.

To me one of the things in history the most to be regretted is that the
Christ's own renaissance, which has produced the Cathedral at Chartres,
the Arthurian cycle of legends, the life of St. Francis of Assisi, the
art of Giotto, and Dante's _Divine Comedy_, was not allowed to develop on
its own lines, but was interrupted and spoiled by the dreary classical
Renaissance that gave us Petrarch, and Raphael's frescoes, and Palladian
architecture, and formal French tragedy, and St. Paul's Cathedral, and
Pope's poetry, and everything that is made from without and by dead
rules, and does not spring from within through some spirit informing it.
But wherever there is a romantic movement in art there somehow, and under
some form, is Christ, or the soul of Christ.  He is in _Romeo and
Juliet_, in the _Winter's Tale_, in Provencal poetry, in the _Ancient
Mariner_, in _La Belle Dame sans merci_, and in Chatterton's _Ballad of
Charity_.

We owe to him the most diverse things and people.  Hugo's _Les
Miserables_, Baudelaire's _Fleurs du Mal_, the note of pity in Russian
novels, Verlaine and Verlaine's poems, the stained glass and tapestries
and the quattro-cento work of Burne-Jones and Morris, belong to him no
less than the tower of Giotto, Lancelot and Guinevere, Tannhauser, the
troubled romantic marbles of Michael Angelo, pointed architecture, and
the love of children and flowers--for both of which, indeed, in classical
art there was but little place, hardly enough for them to grow or play
in, but which, from the twelfth century down to our own day, have been
continually making their appearances in art, under various modes and at
various times, coming fitfully and wilfully, as children, as flowers, are
apt to do: spring always seeming to one as if the flowers had been in
hiding, and only came out into the sun because they were afraid that
grown up people would grow tired of looking for them and give up the
search; and the life of a child being no more than an April day on which
there is both rain and sun for the narcissus.

It is the imaginative quality of Christ's own nature that makes him this
palpitating centre of romance.  The strange figures of poetic drama and
ballad are made by the imagination of others, but out of his own
imagination entirely did Jesus of Nazareth create himself.  The cry of
Isaiah had really no more to do with his coming than the song of the
nightingale has to do with the rising of the moon--no more, though
perhaps no less.  He was the denial as well as the affirmation of
prophecy.  For every expectation that he fulfilled there was another that
he destroyed.  'In all beauty,' says Bacon, 'there is some strangeness of
proportion,' and of those who are born of the spirit--of those, that is
to say, who like himself are dynamic forces--Christ says that they are
like the wind that 'bloweth where it listeth, and no man can tell whence
it cometh and whither it goeth.'  That is why he is so fascinating to
artists.  He has all the colour elements of life: mystery, strangeness,
pathos, suggestion, ecstasy, love.  He appeals to the temper of wonder,
and creates that mood in which alone he can be understood.

And to me it is a joy to remember that if he is 'of imagination all
compact,' the world itself is of the same substance.  I said in _Dorian
Gray_ that the great sins of the world take place in the brain: but it is
in the brain that everything takes place.  We know now that we do not see
with the eyes or hear with the ears.  They are really channels for the
transmission, adequate or inadequate, of sense impressions.  It is in the
brain that the poppy is red, that the apple is odorous, that the skylark
sings.

Of late I have been studying with diligence the four prose poems about
Christ.  At Christmas I managed to get hold of a Greek Testament, and
every morning, after I had cleaned my cell and polished my tins, I read a
little of the Gospels, a dozen verses taken by chance anywhere.  It is a
delightful way of opening the day.  Every one, even in a turbulent, ill-
disciplined life, should do the same.  Endless repetition, in and out of
season, has spoiled for us the freshness, the naivete, the simple
romantic charm of the Gospels.  We hear them read far too often and far
too badly, and all repetition is anti-spiritual.  When one returns to the
Greek; it is like going into a garden of lilies out of some, narrow and
dark house.

And to me, the pleasure is doubled by the reflection that it is extremely
probable that we have the actual terms, the _ipsissima verba_, used by
Christ.  It was always supposed that Christ talked in Aramaic.  Even
Renan thought so.  But now we know that the Galilean peasants, like the
Irish peasants of our own day, were bilingual, and that Greek was the
ordinary language of intercourse all over Palestine, as indeed all over
the Eastern world.  I never liked the idea that we knew of Christ's own
words only through a translation of a translation.  It is a delight to me
to think that as far as his conversation was concerned, Charmides might
have listened to him, and Socrates reasoned with him, and Plato
understood him: that he really said [Greek text], that when he thought of
the lilies of the field and how they neither toil nor spin, his absolute
expression was [Greek text], and that his last word when he cried out 'my
life has been completed, has reached its fulfilment, has been perfected,'
was exactly as St. John tells us it was: [Greek text]--no more.

While in reading the Gospels--particularly that of St. John himself, or
whatever early Gnostic took his name and mantle--I see the continual
assertion of the imagination as the basis of all spiritual and material
life, I see also that to Christ imagination was simply a form of love,
and that to him love was lord in the fullest meaning of the phrase.  Some
six weeks ago I was allowed by the doctor to have white bread to eat
instead of the coarse black or brown bread of ordinary prison fare.  It
is a great delicacy.  It will sound strange that dry bread could possibly
be a delicacy to any one.  To me it is so much so that at the close of
each meal I carefully eat whatever crumbs may be left on my tin plate, or
have fallen on the rough towel that one uses as a cloth so as not to soil
one's table; and I do so not from hunger--I get now quite sufficient
food--but simply in order that nothing should be wasted of what is given
to me.  So one should look on love.

Christ, like all fascinating personalities, had the power of not merely
saying beautiful things himself, but of making other people say beautiful
things to him; and I love the story St. Mark tells us about the Greek
woman, who, when as a trial of her faith he said to her that he could not
give her the bread of the children of Israel, answered him that the
little dogs--([Greek text], 'little dogs' it should be rendered)--who are
under the table eat of the crumbs that the children let fall.  Most
people live for love and admiration.  But it is by love and admiration
that we should live.  If any love is shown us we should recognise that we
are quite unworthy of it.  Nobody is worthy to be loved.  The fact that
God loves man shows us that in the divine order of ideal things it is
written that eternal love is to be given to what is eternally unworthy.
Or if that phrase seems to be a bitter one to bear, let us say that every
one is worthy of love, except him who thinks that he is.  Love is a
sacrament that should be taken kneeling, and _Domine, non sum dignus_
should be on the lips and in the hearts of those who receive it.

If ever I write again, in the sense of producing artistic work, there are
just two subjects on which and through which I desire to express myself:
one is 'Christ as the precursor of the romantic movement in life': the
other is 'The artistic life considered in its relation to conduct.'  The
first is, of course, intensely fascinating, for I see in Christ not
merely the essentials of the supreme romantic type, but all the
accidents, the wilfulnesses even, of the romantic temperament also.  He
was the first person who ever said to people that they should live
'flower-like lives.'  He fixed the phrase.  He took children as the type
of what people should try to become.  He held them up as examples to
their elders, which I myself have always thought the chief use of
children, if what is perfect should have a use.  Dante describes the soul
of a man as coming from the hand of God 'weeping and laughing like a
little child,' and Christ also saw that the soul of each one should be _a
guisa di fanciulla che piangendo e ridendo pargoleggia_.  He felt that
life was changeful, fluid, active, and that to allow it to be stereotyped
into any form was death.  He saw that people should not be too serious
over material, common interests: that to be unpractical was to be a great
thing: that one should not bother too much over affairs.  The birds
didn't, why should man?  He is charming when he says, 'Take no thought
for the morrow; is not the soul more than meat? is not the body more than
raiment?'  A Greek might have used the latter phrase.  It is full of
Greek feeling.  But only Christ could have said both, and so summed up
life perfectly for us.

His morality is all sympathy, just what morality should be.  If the only
thing that he ever said had been, 'Her sins are forgiven her because she
loved much,' it would have been worth while dying to have said it.  His
justice is all poetical justice, exactly what justice should be.  The
beggar goes to heaven because he has been unhappy.  I cannot conceive a
better reason for his being sent there.  The people who work for an hour
in the vineyard in the cool of the evening receive just as much reward as
those who have toiled there all day long in the hot sun.  Why shouldn't
they?  Probably no one deserved anything.  Or perhaps they were a
different kind of people.  Christ had no patience with the dull lifeless
mechanical systems that treat people as if they were things, and so treat
everybody alike: for him there were no laws: there were exceptions
merely, as if anybody, or anything, for that matter, was like aught else
in the world!

That which is the very keynote of romantic art was to him the proper
basis of natural life.  He saw no other basis.  And when they brought him
one, taken in the very act of sin and showed him her sentence written in
the law, and asked him what was to be done, he wrote with his finger on
the ground as though he did not hear them, and finally, when they pressed
him again, looked up and said, 'Let him of you who has never sinned be
the first to throw the stone at her.'  It was worth while living to have
said that.

Like all poetical natures he loved ignorant people.  He knew that in the
soul of one who is ignorant there is always room for a great idea.  But
he could not stand stupid people, especially those who are made stupid by
education: people who are full of opinions not one of which they even
understand, a peculiarly modern type, summed up by Christ when he
describes it as the type of one who has the key of knowledge, cannot use
it himself, and does not allow other people to use it, though it may be
made to open the gate of God's Kingdom.  His chief war was against the
Philistines.  That is the war every child of light has to wage.
Philistinism was the note of the age and community in which he lived.  In
their heavy inaccessibility to ideas, their dull respectability, their
tedious orthodoxy, their worship of vulgar success, their entire
preoccupation with the gross materialistic side of life, and their
ridiculous estimate of themselves and their importance, the Jews of
Jerusalem in Christ's day were the exact counterpart of the British
Philistine of our own.  Christ mocked at the 'whited sepulchre' of
respectability, and fixed that phrase for ever.  He treated worldly
success as a thing absolutely to be despised.  He saw nothing in it at
all.  He looked on wealth as an encumbrance to a man.  He would not hear
of life being sacrificed to any system of thought or morals.  He pointed
out that forms and ceremonies were made for man, not man for forms and
ceremonies.  He took sabbatarianism as a type of the things that should
be set at nought.  The cold philanthropies, the ostentatious public
charities, the tedious formalisms so dear to the middle-class mind, he
exposed with utter and relentless scorn.  To us, what is termed orthodoxy
is merely a facile unintelligent acquiescence; but to them, and in their
hands, it was a terrible and paralysing tyranny.  Christ swept it aside.
He showed that the spirit alone was of value.  He took a keen pleasure in
pointing out to them that though they were always reading the law and the
prophets, they had not really the smallest idea of what either of them
meant.  In opposition to their tithing of each separate day into the
fixed routine of prescribed duties, as they tithe mint and rue, he
preached the enormous importance of living completely for the moment.

Those whom he saved from their sins are saved simply for beautiful
moments in their lives.  Mary Magdalen, when she sees Christ, breaks the
rich vase of alabaster that one of her seven lovers had given her, and
spills the odorous spices over his tired dusty feet, and for that one
moment's sake sits for ever with Ruth and Beatrice in the tresses of the
snow-white rose of Paradise.  All that Christ says to us by the way of a
little warning is that every moment should be beautiful, that the soul
should always be ready for the coming of the bridegroom, always waiting
for the voice of the lover, Philistinism being simply that side of man's
nature that is not illumined by the imagination.  He sees all the lovely
influences of life as modes of light: the imagination itself is the world
of light.  The world is made by it, and yet the world cannot understand
it: that is because the imagination is simply a manifestation of love,
and it is love and the capacity for it that distinguishes one human being
from another.

But it is when he deals with a sinner that Christ is most romantic, in
the sense of most real.  The world had always loved the saint as being
the nearest possible approach to the perfection of God.  Christ, through
some divine instinct in him, seems to have always loved the sinner as
being the nearest possible approach to the perfection of man.  His
primary desire was not to reform people, any more than his primary desire
was to a relieve suffering.  To turn an interesting thief into a tedious
honest man was not his aim.  He would have thought little of the
Prisoners' Aid Society and other modern movements of the kind.  The
conversion of a publican into a Pharisee would not have seemed to him a
great achievement.  But in a manner not yet understood of the world he
regarded sin and suffering as being in themselves beautiful holy things
and modes of perfection.

It seems a very dangerous idea.  It is--all great ideas are dangerous.
That it was Christ's creed admits of no doubt.  That it is the true creed
I don't doubt myself.

Of course the sinner must repent.  But why?  Simply because otherwise he
would be unable to realise what he had done.  The moment of repentance is
the moment of initiation.  More than that: it is the means by which one
alters one's past.  The Greeks thought that impossible.  They often say
in their Gnomic aphorisms, 'Even the Gods cannot alter the past.'  Christ
showed that the commonest sinner could do it, that it was the one thing
he could do.  Christ, had he been asked, would have said--I feel quite
certain about it--that the moment the prodigal son fell on his knees and
wept, he made his having wasted his substance with harlots, his swine-
herding and hungering for the husks they ate, beautiful and holy moments
in his life.  It is difficult for most people to grasp the idea.  I dare
say one has to go to prison to understand it.  If so, it may be worth
while going to prison.

There is something so unique about Christ.  Of course just as there are
false dawns before the dawn itself, and winter days so full of sudden
sunlight that they will cheat the wise crocus into squandering its gold
before its time, and make some foolish bird call to its mate to build on
barren boughs, so there were Christians before Christ.  For that we
should be grateful.  The unfortunate thing is that there have been none
since.  I make one exception, St. Francis of Assisi.  But then God had
given him at his birth the soul of a poet, as he himself when quite young
had in mystical marriage taken poverty as his bride: and with the soul of
a poet and the body of a beggar he found the way to perfection not
difficult.  He understood Christ, and so he became like him.  We do not
require the Liber Conformitatum to teach us that the life of St. Francis
was the true _Imitatio Christi_, a poem compared to which the book of
that name is merely prose.

Indeed, that is the charm about Christ, when all is said: he is just like
a work of art.  He does not really teach one anything, but by being
brought into his presence one becomes something.  And everybody is
predestined to his presence.  Once at least in his life each man walks
with Christ to Emmaus.

As regards the other subject, the Relation of the Artistic Life to
Conduct, it will no doubt seem strange to you that I should select it.
People point to Reading Gaol and say, 'That is where the artistic life
leads a man.'  Well, it might lead to worse places.  The more mechanical
people to whom life is a shrewd speculation depending on a careful
calculation of ways and means, always know where they are going, and go
there.  They start with the ideal desire of being the parish beadle, and
in whatever sphere they are placed they succeed in being the parish
beadle and no more.  A man whose desire is to be something separate from
himself, to be a member of Parliament, or a successful grocer, or a
prominent solicitor, or a judge, or something equally tedious, invariably
succeeds in being what he wants to be.  That is his punishment.  Those
who want a mask have to wear it.

But with the dynamic forces of life, and those in whom those dynamic
forces become incarnate, it is different.  People whose desire is solely
for self-realisation never know where they are going.  They can't know.
In one sense of the word it is of course necessary, as the Greek oracle
said, to know oneself: that is the first achievement of knowledge.  But
to recognise that the soul of a man is unknowable, is the ultimate
achievement of wisdom.  The final mystery is oneself.  When one has
weighed the sun in the balance, and measured the steps of the moon, and
mapped out the seven heavens star by star, there still remains oneself.
Who can calculate the orbit of his own soul?  When the son went out to
look for his father's asses, he did not know that a man of God was
waiting for him with the very chrism of coronation, and that his own soul
was already the soul of a king.

I hope to live long enough and to produce work of such a character that I
shall be able at the end of my days to say, 'Yes! this is just where the
artistic life leads a man!'  Two of the most perfect lives I have come
across in my own experience are the lives of Verlaine and of Prince
Kropotkin: both of them men who have passed years in prison: the first,
the one Christian poet since Dante; the other, a man with a soul of that
beautiful white Christ which seems coming out of Russia.  And for the
last seven or eight months, in spite of a succession of great troubles
reaching me from the outside world almost without intermission, I have
been placed in direct contact with a new spirit working in this prison
through man and things, that has helped me beyond any possibility of
expression in words: so that while for the first year of my imprisonment
I did nothing else, and can remember doing nothing else, but wring my
hands in impotent despair, and say, 'What an ending, what an appalling
ending!' now I try to say to myself, and sometimes when I am not
torturing myself do really and sincerely say, 'What a beginning, what a
wonderful beginning!'  It may really be so.  It may become so.  If it
does I shall owe much to this new personality that has altered every
man's life in this place.

You may realise it when I say that had I been released last May, as I
tried to be, I would have left this place loathing it and every official
in it with a bitterness of hatred that would have poisoned my life.  I
have had a year longer of imprisonment, but humanity has been in the
prison along with us all, and now when I go out I shall always remember
great kindnesses that I have received here from almost everybody, and on
the day of my release I shall give many thanks to many people, and ask to
be remembered by them in turn.

The prison style is absolutely and entirely wrong.  I would give anything
to be able to alter it when I go out.  I intend to try.  But there is
nothing in the world so wrong but that the spirit of humanity, which is
the spirit of love, the spirit of the Christ who is not in churches, may
make it, if not right, at least possible to be borne without too much
bitterness of heart.

I know also that much is waiting for me outside that is very delightful,
from what St. Francis of Assisi calls 'my brother the wind, and my sister
the rain,' lovely things both of them, down to the shop-windows and
sunsets of great cities.  If I made a list of all that still remains to
me, I don't know where I should stop: for, indeed, God made the world
just as much for me as for any one else.  Perhaps I may go out with
something that I had not got before.  I need not tell you that to me
reformations in morals are as meaningless and vulgar as Reformations in
theology.  But while to propose to be a better man is a piece of
unscientific cant, to have become a deeper man is the privilege of those
who have suffered.  And such I think I have become.

If after I am free a friend of mine gave a feast, and did not invite me
to it, I should not mind a bit.  I can be perfectly happy by myself.  With
freedom, flowers, books, and the moon, who could not be perfectly happy?
Besides, feasts are not for me any more.  I have given too many to care
about them.  That side of life is over for me, very fortunately, I dare
say.  But if after I am free a friend of mine had a sorrow and refused to
allow me to share it, I should feel it most bitterly.  If he shut the
doors of the house of mourning against me, I would come back again and
again and beg to be admitted, so that I might share in what I was
entitled to share in.  If he thought me unworthy, unfit to weep with him,
I should feel it as the most poignant humiliation, as the most terrible
mode in which disgrace could be inflicted on me.  But that could not be.
I have a right to share in sorrow, and he who can look at the loveliness
of the world and share its sorrow, and realise something of the wonder of
both, is in immediate contact with divine things, and has got as near to
God's secret as any one can get.

Perhaps there may come into my art also, no less than into my life, a
still deeper note, one of greater unity of passion, and directness of
impulse.  Not width but intensity is the true aim of modern art.  We are
no longer in art concerned with the type.  It is with the exception that
we have to do.  I cannot put my sufferings into any form they took, I
need hardly say.  Art only begins where Imitation ends, but something
must come into my work, of fuller memory of words perhaps, of richer
cadences, of more curious effects, of simpler architectural order, of
some aesthetic quality at any rate.

When Marsyas was 'torn from the scabbard of his limbs'--_della vagina
della membre sue_, to use one of Dante's most terrible Tacitean
phrases--he had no more song, the Greek said.  Apollo had been victor.
The lyre had vanquished the reed.  But perhaps the Greeks were mistaken.
I hear in much modern Art the cry of Marsyas.  It is bitter in
Baudelaire, sweet and plaintive in Lamartine, mystic in Verlaine.  It is
in the deferred resolutions of Chopin's music.  It is in the discontent
that haunts Burne-Jones's women.  Even Matthew Arnold, whose song of
Callicles tells of 'the triumph of the sweet persuasive lyre,' and the
'famous final victory,' in such a clear note of lyrical beauty, has not a
little of it; in the troubled undertone of doubt and distress that haunts
his verses, neither Goethe nor Wordsworth could help him, though he
followed each in turn, and when he seeks to mourn for _Thyrsis_ or to
sing of the _Scholar Gipsy_, it is the reed that he has to take for the
rendering of his strain.  But whether or not the Phrygian Faun was
silent, I cannot be.  Expression is as necessary to me as leaf and
blossoms are to the black branches of the trees that show themselves
above the prison walls and are so restless in the wind.  Between my art
and the world there is now a wide gulf, but between art and myself there
is none.  I hope at least that there is none.

To each of us different fates are meted out.  My lot has been one of
public infamy, of long imprisonment, of misery, of ruin, of disgrace, but
I am not worthy of it--not yet, at any rate.  I remember that I used to
say that I thought I could bear a real tragedy if it came to me with
purple pall and a mask of noble sorrow, but that the dreadful thing about
modernity was that it put tragedy into the raiment of comedy, so that the
great realities seemed commonplace or grotesque or lacking in style.  It
is quite true about modernity.  It has probably always been true about
actual life.  It is said that all martyrdoms seemed mean to the looker
on.  The nineteenth century is no exception to the rule.

Everything about my tragedy has been hideous, mean, repellent, lacking in
style; our very dress makes us grotesque.  We are the zanies of sorrow.
We are clowns whose hearts are broken.  We are specially designed to
appeal to the sense of humour.  On November 13th, 1895, I was brought
down here from London.  From two o'clock till half-past two on that day I
had to stand on the centre platform of Clapham Junction in convict dress,
and handcuffed, for the world to look at.  I had been taken out of the
hospital ward without a moment's notice being given to me.  Of all
possible objects I was the most grotesque.  When people saw me they
laughed.  Each train as it came up swelled the audience.  Nothing could
exceed their amusement.  That was, of course, before they knew who I was.
As soon as they had been informed they laughed still more.  For half an
hour I stood there in the grey November rain surrounded by a jeering mob.

For a year after that was done to me I wept every day at the same hour
and for the same space of time.  That is not such a tragic thing as
possibly it sounds to you.  To those who are in prison tears are a part
of every day's experience.  A day in prison on which one does not weep is
a day on which one's heart is hard, not a day on which one's heart is
happy.

Well, now I am really beginning to feel more regret for the people who
laughed than for myself.  Of course when they saw me I was not on my
pedestal, I was in the pillory.  But it is a very unimaginative nature
that only cares for people on their pedestals.  A pedestal may be a very
unreal thing.  A pillory is a terrific reality.  They should have known
also how to interpret sorrow better.  I have said that behind sorrow
there is always sorrow.  It were wiser still to say that behind sorrow
there is always a soul.  And to mock at a soul in pain is a dreadful
thing.  In the strangely simple economy of the world people only get what
they give, and to those who have not enough imagination to penetrate the
mere outward of things, and feel pity, what pity can be given save that
of scorn?

I write this account of the mode of my being transferred here simply that
it should be realised how hard it has been for me to get anything out of
my punishment but bitterness and despair.  I have, however, to do it, and
now and then I have moments of submission and acceptance.  All the spring
may be hidden in the single bud, and the low ground nest of the lark may
hold the joy that is to herald the feet of many rose-red dawns.  So
perhaps whatever beauty of life still remains to me is contained in some
moment of surrender, abasement, and humiliation.  I can, at any rate,
merely proceed on the lines of my own development, and, accepting all
that has happened to me, make myself worthy of it.

People used to say of me that I was too individualistic.  I must be far
more of an individualist than ever I was.  I must get far more out of
myself than ever I got, and ask far less of the world than ever I asked.
Indeed, my ruin came not from too great individualism of life, but from
too little.  The one disgraceful, unpardonable, and to all time
contemptible action of my life was to allow myself to appeal to society
for help and protection.  To have made such an appeal would have been
from the individualist point of view bad enough, but what excuse can
there ever be put forward for having made it?  Of course once I had put
into motion the forces of society, society turned on me and said, 'Have
you been living all this time in defiance of my laws, and do you now
appeal to those laws for protection?  You shall have those laws exercised
to the full.  You shall abide by what you have appealed to.'  The result
is I am in gaol.  Certainly no man ever fell so ignobly, and by such
ignoble instruments, as I did.

The Philistine element in life is not the failure to understand art.
Charming people, such as fishermen, shepherds, ploughboys, peasants and
the like, know nothing about art, and are the very salt of the earth.  He
is the Philistine who upholds and aids the heavy, cumbrous, blind,
mechanical forces of society, and who does not recognise dynamic force
when he meets it either in a man or a movement.

People thought it dreadful of me to have entertained at dinner the evil
things of life, and to have found pleasure in their company.  But then,
from the point of view through which I, as an artist in life, approach
them they were delightfully suggestive and stimulating.  The danger was
half the excitement. . . . My business as an artist was with Ariel.  I
set myself to wrestle with Caliban. . . .

A great friend of mine--a friend of ten years' standing--came to see me
some time ago, and told me that he did not believe a single word of what
was said against me, and wished me to know that he considered me quite
innocent, and the victim of a hideous plot.  I burst into tears at what
he said, and told him that while there was much amongst the definite
charges that was quite untrue and transferred to me by revolting malice,
still that my life had been full of perverse pleasures, and that unless
he accepted that as a fact about me and realised it to the full I could
not possibly be friends with him any more, or ever be in his company.  It
was a terrible shock to him, but we are friends, and I have not got his
friendship on false pretences.

Emotional forces, as I say somewhere in _Intentions_, are as limited in
extent and duration as the forces of physical energy.  The little cup
that is made to hold so much can hold so much and no more, though all the
purple vats of Burgundy be filled with wine to the brim, and the treaders
stand knee-deep in the gathered grapes of the stony vineyards of Spain.
There is no error more common than that of thinking that those who are
the causes or occasions of great tragedies share in the feelings suitable
to the tragic mood: no error more fatal than expecting it of them.  The
martyr in his 'shirt of flame' may be looking on the face of God, but to
him who is piling the faggots or loosening the logs for the blast the
whole scene is no more than the slaying of an ox is to the butcher, or
the felling of a tree to the charcoal burner in the forest, or the fall
of a flower to one who is mowing down the grass with a scythe.  Great
passions are for the great of soul, and great events can be seen only by
those who are on a level with them.

* * * * *

I know of nothing in all drama more incomparable from the point of view
of art, nothing more suggestive in its subtlety of observation, than
Shakespeare's drawing of Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.  They are Hamlet's
college friends.  They have been his companions.  They bring with them
memories of pleasant days together.  At the moment when they come across
him in the play he is staggering under the weight of a burden intolerable
to one of his temperament.  The dead have come armed out of the grave to
impose on him a mission at once too great and too mean for him.  He is a
dreamer, and he is called upon to act.  He has the nature of the poet,
and he is asked to grapple with the common complexity of cause and
effect, with life in its practical realisation, of which he knows
nothing, not with life in its ideal essence, of which he knows so much.
He has no conception of what to do, and his folly is to feign folly.
Brutus used madness as a cloak to conceal the sword of his purpose, the
dagger of his will, but the Hamlet madness is a mere mask for the hiding
of weakness.  In the making of fancies and jests he sees a chance of
delay.  He keeps playing with action as an artist plays with a theory.  He
makes himself the spy of his proper actions, and listening to his own
words knows them to be but 'words, words, words.'  Instead of trying to
be the hero of his own history, he seeks to be the spectator of his own
tragedy.  He disbelieves in everything, including himself, and yet his
doubt helps him not, as it comes not from scepticism but from a divided
will.

Of all this Guildenstern and Rosencrantz realise nothing.  They bow and
smirk and smile, and what the one says the other echoes with sickliest
intonation.  When, at last, by means of the play within the play, and the
puppets in their dalliance, Hamlet 'catches the conscience' of the King,
and drives the wretched man in terror from his throne, Guildenstern and
Rosencrantz see no more in his conduct than a rather painful breach of
Court etiquette.  That is as far as they can attain to in 'the
contemplation of the spectacle of life with appropriate emotions.'  They
are close to his very secret and know nothing of it.  Nor would there be
any use in telling them.  They are the little cups that can hold so much
and no more.  Towards the close it is suggested that, caught in a cunning
spring set for another, they have met, or may meet, with a violent and
sudden death.  But a tragic ending of this kind, though touched by
Hamlet's humour with something of the surprise and justice of comedy, is
really not for such as they.  They never die.  Horatio, who in order to
'report Hamlet and his cause aright to the unsatisfied,'

   'Absents him from felicity a while,
   And in this harsh world draws his breath in pain,'

dies, but Guildenstern and Rosencrantz are as immortal as Angelo and
Tartuffe, and should rank with them.  They are what modern life has
contributed to the antique ideal of friendship.  He who writes a new _De
Amicitia_ must find a niche for them, and praise them in Tusculan prose.
They are types fixed for all time.  To censure them would show 'a lack of
appreciation.'  They are merely out of their sphere: that is all.  In
sublimity of soul there is no contagion.  High thoughts and high emotions
are by their very existence isolated.

* * * * *

I am to be released, if all goes well with me, towards the end of May,
and hope to go at once to some little sea-side village abroad with R---
and M---.

The sea, as Euripides says in one of his plays about Iphigeneia, washes
away the stains and wounds of the world.

I hope to be at least a month with my friends, and to gain peace and
balance, and a less troubled heart, and a sweeter mood.  I have a strange
longing for the great simple primeval things, such as the sea, to me no
less of a mother than the Earth.  It seems to me that we all look at
Nature too much, and live with her too little.  I discern great sanity in
the Greek attitude.  They never chattered about sunsets, or discussed
whether the shadows on the grass were really mauve or not.  But they saw
that the sea was for the swimmer, and the sand for the feet of the
runner.  They loved the trees for the shadow that they cast, and the
forest for its silence at noon.  The vineyard-dresser wreathed his hair
with ivy that he might keep off the rays of the sun as he stooped over
the young shoots, and for the artist and the athlete, the two types that
Greece gave us, they plaited with garlands the leaves of the bitter
laurel and of the wild parsley, which else had been of no service to men.

We call ours a utilitarian age, and we do not know the uses of any single
thing.  We have forgotten that water can cleanse, and fire purify, and
that the Earth is mother to us all.  As a consequence our art is of the
moon and plays with shadows, while Greek art is of the sun and deals
directly with things.  I feel sure that in elemental forces there is
purification, and I want to go back to them and live in their presence.

Of course to one so modern as I am, 'Enfant de mon siecle,' merely to
look at the world will be always lovely.  I tremble with pleasure when I
think that on the very day of my leaving prison both the laburnum and the
lilac will be blooming in the gardens, and that I shall see the wind stir
into restless beauty the swaying gold of the one, and make the other toss
the pale purple of its plumes, so that all the air shall be Arabia for
me.  Linnaeus fell on his knees and wept for joy when he saw for the
first time the long heath of some English upland made yellow with the
tawny aromatic brooms of the common furze; and I know that for me, to
whom flowers are part of desire, there are tears waiting in the petals of
some rose.  It has always been so with me from my boyhood.  There is not
a single colour hidden away in the chalice of a flower, or the curve of a
shell, to which, by some subtle sympathy with the very soul of things, my
nature does not answer.  Like Gautier, I have always been one of those
'pour qui le monde visible existe.'

Still, I am conscious now that behind all this beauty, satisfying though
it may be, there is some spirit hidden of which the painted forms and
shapes are but modes of manifestation, and it is with this spirit that I
desire to become in harmony.  I have grown tired of the articulate
utterances of men and things.  The Mystical in Art, the Mystical in Life,
the Mystical in Nature this is what I am looking for.  It is absolutely
necessary for me to find it somewhere.

All trials are trials for one's life, just as all sentences are sentences
of death; and three times have I been tried.  The first time I left the
box to be arrested, the second time to be led back to the house of
detention, the third time to pass into a prison for two years.  Society,
as we have constituted it, will have no place for me, has none to offer;
but Nature, whose sweet rains fall on unjust and just alike, will have
clefts in the rocks where I may hide, and secret valleys in whose silence
I may weep undisturbed.  She will hang the night with stars so that I may
walk abroad in the darkness without stumbling, and send the wind over my
footprints so that none may track me to my hurt: she will cleanse me in
great waters, and with bitter herbs make me whole.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DE PROFUNDIS***


******* This file should be named 921.txt or 921.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/9/2/921



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
﻿SALOMÉ

A TRAGEDY IN ONE ACT:

TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH OF

OSCAR WILDE,

WITH SIXTEEN DRAWINGS BY AUBREY BEARDSLEY

LONDON: JOHN LANE, THE BODLEY HEAD

NEW YORK: JOHN LANE COMPANY, MCMVII

[Illustration: COVER DESIGN]




    THE PERSONS OF THE PLAY.

    HEROD ANTIPAS, TETRARCH OF JUDÆA.
    JOKANAAN, THE PROPHET.
    THE YOUNG SYRIAN, CAPTAIN of the GUARD.
    TIGELLINUS, A YOUNG ROMAN.
    A CAPPADOCIAN.
    A NUBIAN.
    FIRST SOLDIER.
    SECOND SOLDIER.
    THE PAGE OF HERODIAS.
    JEWS, NAZARENES, ETC.
    A SLAVE.
    NAAMAN, THE EXECUTIONER.
    HERODIAS, WIFE OF THE TETRARCH.
    SALOMÉ, DAUGHTER OF HERODIAS.
    THE SLAVES OF SALOMÉ.




A NOTE ON "SALOMÉ."


"SALOMÉ" has made the author's name a household word wherever the
English language is not spoken. Few English plays have such a
peculiar history. Written in French in 1892 it was in full
rehearsal by Madame Bernhardt at the Palace Theatre when it was
prohibited by the Censor. Oscar Wilde immediately announced his
intention of changing his nationality, a characteristic jest,
which was only taken seriously, oddly enough, in Ireland. The
interference of the Censor has seldom been more popular or more
heartily endorsed by English critics. On its publication in book
form "Salomé" was greeted by a chorus of ridicule, and it may be
noted in passing that at least two of the more violent reviews
were from the pens of unsuccessful dramatists, while all those
whose French never went beyond Ollendorff were glad to find in
that venerable school classic an unsuspected asset in their
education--a handy missile with which to pelt "Salomé" and its
author. The correctness of the French was, of course, impugned,
although the scrip had been passed by a distinguished French
writer, to whom I have heard the whole work attributed. The
Times, while depreciating the drama, gave its author credit for
a _tour de force_, in being capable of writing a French play for
Madame Bernhardt, and this drew from him the following letter:--

     The Times, Thursday, March 2, 1893, p. 4.

      MR. OSCAR WILDE ON "SALOMÉ."

      To the Editor of The Times.

      Sir, My attention has been drawn to a review of
      "Salomé" which was published in your columns last
      week. The opinions of English critics on a French work
      of mine have, of course, little, if any, interest for
      me. I write simply to ask you to allow me to correct a
      misstatement that appears in the review in question.

      The fact that the greatest tragic actress of any stage
      now living saw in my play such beauty that she was
      anxious to produce it, to take herself the part of the
      heroine, to lend to the entire poem the glamour of her
      personality, and to my prose the music of her
      flute-like voice--this was naturally, and always will
      be, a source of pride and pleasure to me, and I look
      forward with delight to seeing Mme. Bernhardt present
      my play in Paris, that vivid centre of art, where
      religious dramas are often performed. But my play was
      in no sense of the words written for this great
      actress. I have never written a play for any actor or
      actress, nor shall I ever do so. Such work is for the
      artisan in literature--not for the artist.

      I remain, Sir, your obedient servant,

      OSCAR WILDE.



When "Salomé" was translated into English by Lord Alfred Douglas,
the illustrator, Aubrey Beardsley, shared some of the obloquy
heaped on Wilde. It is interesting that he should have found
inspiration for his finest work in a play he never admired and by
a writer he cordially disliked. The motives are, of course, made
to his hand, and never was there a more suitable material for
that odd tangent art in which there are no tactile values. The
amusing caricatures of Wilde which appear in the _Frontispiece_,
"Enter Herodias" and "The Eyes of Herod," are the only pieces of
vraisemblance in these exquisite designs. The colophon is a real
masterpiece and a witty criticism of the play as well.

On the production of "Salomé" by the New Stage Club in May,
1905,[1] the dramatic critics again expressed themselves
vehemently, vociferating their regrets that the play had been
dragged from its obscurity. The obscure drama, however, had
become for five years past part of the literature of Europe. It
is performed regularly or intermittently in Holland, Sweden,
Italy, France, and Russia, and it has been translated into every
European language, including the Czech. It forms part of the
repertoire of the German stage, where it is performed more often
than any play by any English writer except Shakespeare. Owing,
perhaps, to what I must call its _obscure_ popularity in the
continental theatres, Dr. Strauss was preparing his remarkable
opera at the very moment when there appeared the criticisms to
which I refer, and since the production of the opera in Dresden
in December, 1905, English musical journalists and correspondents
always refer to the work as founded on Wilde's drama. That is the
only way in which they can evade an awkward truth--a palpable
contravention to their own wishes and theories. The music,
however, has been set to the actual words of "Salomé" in Madame
Hedwig Lachmann's admirable translation. The words have not been
transfigured into ordinary operatic nonsense to suit the score,
or the susceptibilities of the English people. I observe that
admirers of Dr. Strauss are a little mortified that the great
master should have found an occasion for composition in a play
which they long ago consigned to oblivion and the shambles of
Aubrey Beardsley. Wilde himself, in a rhetorical period, seems to
have contemplated the possibility of his prose drama for a
musical theme. In "De Profundis" he says: "The refrains, whose
recurring motifs make 'Salomé' so like a piece of music, and bind
it together as a ballad."

He was still incarcerated in 1896, when Mons. Luigne Poë produced
the play for the first time at the Théâtre Libre in Paris, with
Lina Muntz in the title role. A rather pathetic reference to this
occasion occurs in a letter Wilde wrote to me from Reading:--

"Please say how gratified I was at the performance of my play,
and have my thanks conveyed to Luigne Poë. It is something that
at a time of disgrace and shame I should still be regarded as an
artist. I wish I could feel more pleasure, but I seem dead to all
emotions except those of anguish and despair. However, please let
Luigne Poë know that I am sensible of the honour he has done me.
He is a poet himself. Write to me in answer to this, and try and
see what Lemaitre, Bauer, and Sarcey said of 'Salomé.'"

The bias of personal friendship precludes me from praising or
defending "Salomé," even if it were necessary to do so. Nothing I
might say would add to the reputation of its detractors. Its
sources are obvious; particularly Flaubert and Maeterlinck, in
whose peculiar and original style it is an essay. A critic, for
whom I have a greater regard than many of his contemporaries,
says that "Salomé" is only a catalogue; but a catalogue can be
intensely dramatic, as we know when the performance takes place
at Christie's; few plays are more exciting than an auction in
King Street when the stars are fighting _for_ Sisera.

It has been remarked that Wilde confuses Herod the Great (_Mat._
xi. 1), Herod Antipas (_Mat._ xiv. 3), and Herod Agrippa (Acts
xiii), but the confusion is intentional, as in mediæval mystery
plays Herod is taken for a type, not an historical character, and
the criticism is about as valuable as that of people who
laboriously point out the anachronisms in Beardsley's designs.
With reference to the charge of plagiarism brought against
"Salomé" and its author, I venture to mention a personal
recollection.

Wilde complained to me one day that someone in a well-known novel
had stolen an idea of his. I pleaded in defence of the culprit
that Wilde himself was a fearless literary thief. "My dear
fellow," he said, with his usual drawling emphasis, "when I see a
monstrous tulip with four wonderful petals in someone else's
garden, I am impelled to grow a monstrous tulip with five
wonderful petals, but that is no reason why someone should grow a
tulip with only three petals." THAT WAS OSCAR WILDE.

ROBERT ROSS.


[1] A more recent performance of "Salomé" (1906), by the Literary
Theatre Club, has again produced an ebullition of rancour and
deliberate misrepresentation on the part of the dramatic critics,
the majority of whom are anxious to parade their ignorance of the
continental stage. The production was remarkable on account of
the beautiful dresses and mounting, for which Mr. Charles
Ricketts was responsible, and the marvellous impersonation of
Herod by Mr. Robert Farquharson. Wilde used to say that "Salomé"
was a mirror in which everyone could see himself. The artist,
art; the dull, dulness; the vulgar, vulgarity.



[Illustration]

LIST OF THE PICTURES BY AUBREY BEARDSLEY.

1. THE WOMAN IN THE MOON. 2. TITLE PAGE. 3. COVER DESIGN. 4. LIST
OF THE PICTURES. 5. THE PEACOCK SKIRT. 6. THE BLACK CAPE. 7. A
PLATONIC LAMENT. 8. JOHN AND SALOMÉ. 9. ENTER HERODIAS. 10. THE
EYES OF HEROD. 11. THE STOMACH DANCE. 12. THE TOILETTE OF
SALOMÉ--I. 13. THE TOILETTE OF SALOMÉ--II. 14. THE DANCER'S
REWARD. 15. THE CLIMAX. 16. CUL DE LAMPE.


       *       *       *       *       *




Cast of the Performance of "Salomé," represented in England for
the first time.

NEW STAGE CLUB.

"SALOMÉ,"

BY OSCAR WILDE.

May 10th and 13th 1905.

     A YOUNG SYRIAN CAPTAIN -- MR. HERBERT ALEXANDER.
     PAGE OF HERODIAS       -- MRS. GWENDOLEN BISHOP.
     FIRST SOLDIER          -- MR. CHARLES GEE.
     SECOND SOLDIER         -- MR. RALPH DE ROHAN.
     CAPPADOCIAN            -- MR. CHARLES DALMON.
     JOKANAAN               -- MR. VINCENT NELLO.
     NAAMAN, THE EXECUTIONER-- MR. W. EVELYN OSBORN.
     SALOMÉ                 -- Miss MILLICENT MURBY.
     SLAVE                  -- Miss CARRIE KEITH.
     HEROD                  -- MR. ROBERT FARQUHARSON.
     HERODIAS               -- Miss LOUISE SALOM.
     TIGELLINUS             -- MR. C.L. DELPH.
     SLAVE                  -- Miss STANSFELD.
     FIRST JEW              -- MR. F. STANLEY SMITH.
     SECOND JEW             -- MR. BERNHARD SMITH.
     THIRD JEW              -- MR. JOHN BATE.
     FOURTH JEW             -- STEPHEN BAGEHOT
     FIFTH JEW              -- FREDERICK LAWRENCE.

Scene--THE GREAT TERRACE OUTSIDE THE PALACE.




       *       *       *       *       *


SCENE.--_A great terrace in the Palace of Herod, set above the
banqueting-hall. Some soldiers are leaning over the balcony. To
the right there is a gigantic staircase, to the left, at the
back, an old cistern surrounded by a wall of green bronze.
Moonlight._

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

How beautiful is the Princess Salomé to-night!

THE PAGE OF HERODIAS

Look at the moon! How strange the moon seems! She is like a woman
rising from a tomb. She is like a dead woman. You would fancy she
was looking for dead things.

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

She has a strange look. She is like a little princess who wears a
yellow veil, and whose feet are of silver. She is like a princess
who has little white doves for feet. You would fancy she was
dancing.

THE PAGE OF HERODIAS

She is like a woman who is dead. She moves very slowly.

[_Noise in the banqueting-hall._]

FIRST SOLDIER

What an uproar! Who are those wild beasts howling?

SECOND SOLDIER

The Jews. They are always like that. They are disputing about
their religion.

FIRST SOLDIER

Why do they dispute about their religion?

SECOND SOLDIER

I cannot tell. They are always doing it. The Pharisees, for
instance, say that there are angels, and the Sadducees declare
that angels do not exist.

FIRST SOLDIER

I think it is ridiculous to dispute about such things.

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

How beautiful is the Princess Salomé to-night!

THE PAGE OF HERODIAS

You are always looking at her. You look at her too much. It is
dangerous to look at people in such fashion. Something terrible
may happen.


[Illustration: THE PEACOCK SKIRT]


THE YOUNG SYRIAN

She is very beautiful to-night.

FIRST SOLDIER

The Tetrarch has a sombre look.

SECOND SOLDIER

Yes; he has a sombre look.

FIRST SOLDIER

He is looking at something.

SECOND SOLDIER

He is looking at some one.

FIRST SOLDIER

At whom is he looking?

SECOND SOLDIER

I cannot tell.

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

How pale the Princess is! Never have I seen her so pale. She is
like the shadow of a white rose in a mirror of silver.

THE PAGE OF HERODIAS

You must not look at her. You look too much at her.

FIRST SOLDIER

Herodias has filled the cup of the Tetrarch.

THE CAPPADOCIAN

Is that the Queen Herodias, she who wears a black mitre sewn with
pearls, and whose hair is powdered with blue dust?

FIRST SOLDIER

Yes; that is Herodias, the Tetrarch's wife.

SECOND SOLDIER

The Tetrarch is very fond of wine. He has wine of three sorts.
One which is brought from the Island of Samothrace, and is purple
like the cloak of Cæsar.

THE CAPPADOCIAN

I have never seen Cæsar.

SECOND SOLDIER

Another that comes from a town called Cyprus, and is yellow like
gold.

THE CAPPADOCIAN

I love gold.

SECOND SOLDIER

And the third is a wine of Sicily. That wine is red like blood.

THE NUBIAN

The gods of my country are very fond of blood. Twice in the year
we sacrifice to them young men and maidens; fifty young men and
a hundred maidens. But it seems we never give them quite enough,
for they are very harsh to us.

THE CAPPADOCIAN

In my country there are no gods left. The Romans have driven them
out. There are some who say that they have hidden themselves in
the mountains, but I do not believe it. Three nights I have been
on the mountains seeking them everywhere. I did not find them.
And at last I called them by their names, and they did not come.
I think they are dead.

FIRST SOLDIER

The Jews worship a God that you cannot see.

THE CAPPADOCIAN

I cannot understand that.

FIRST SOLDIER

In fact, they only believe in things that you cannot see.

THE CAPPADOCIAN

That seems to me altogether ridiculous.

THE VOICE OF JOKANAAN

After me shall come another mightier than I. I am not worthy so
much as to unloose the latchet of his shoes. When he cometh, the
solitary places shall be glad. They shall blossom like the lily.
The eyes of the blind shall see the day, and the ears of the deaf
shall be opened. The new-born child shall put his hand upon the
dragon's lair, he shall lead the lions by their manes.

SECOND SOLDIER

Make him be silent. He is always saying ridiculous things.

FIRST SOLDIER

No, no. He is a holy man. He is very gentle, too. Every day, when
I give him to eat he thanks me.

THE CAPPADOCIAN

Who is he?

FIRST SOLDIER

A prophet.

THE CAPPADOCIAN

What is his name?

FIRST SOLDIER

Jokanaan.

THE CAPPADOCIAN

Whence comes he?

FIRST SOLDIER

From the desert, where he fed on locusts and wild honey. He was
clothed in camel's hair, and round his loins he had a leathern
belt. He was very terrible to look upon. A great multitude used
to follow him. He even had disciples.

THE CAPPADOCIAN

What is he talking of?

FIRST SOLDIER

We can never tell. Sometimes he says terrible things, but it is
impossible to understand what he says.

THE CAPPADOCIAN

May one see him?

FIRST SOLDIER

No. The Tetrarch has forbidden it.

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

The Princess has hidden her face behind her fan! Her little white
hands are fluttering like doves that fly to their dove-cots. They
are like white butterflies. They are just like white butterflies.

THE PAGE OF HERODIAS

What is that to you? Why do you look at her? You must not look at
her.... Something terrible may happen.

THE CAPPADOCIAN

[_Pointing to the cistern._]

What a strange prison!

SECOND SOLDIER

It is an old cistern.

THE CAPPADOCIAN

An old cistern! It must be very unhealthy.

SECOND SOLDIER

Oh no! For instance, the Tetrarch's brother, his elder brother,
the first husband of Herodias the Queen, was imprisoned there for
twelve years. It did not kill him. At the end of the twelve years
he had to be strangled.

THE CAPPADOCIAN

Strangled? Who dared to do that?

SECOND SOLDIER

[_Pointing to the Executioner, a huge Negro._]

That man yonder, Naaman.

THE CAPPADOCIAN

He was not afraid?

SECOND SOLDIER

Oh no! The Tetrarch sent him the ring.

THE CAPPADOCIAN

What ring?

[Illustration: THE BLACK CAPE]

SECOND SOLDIER

The death-ring. So he was not afraid.

THE CAPPADOCIAN

Yet it is a terrible thing to strangle a king.

FIRST SOLDIER

Why? Kings have but one neck, like other folk.

THE CAPPADOCIAN

I think it terrible.

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

The Princess rises! She is leaving the table! She looks very
troubled. Ah, she is coming this way. Yes, she is coming towards
us. How pale she is! Never have I seen her so pale.

THE PAGE OF HERODIAS

Do not look at her. I pray you not to look at her.

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

She is like a dove that has strayed.... She is like a narcissus
trembling in the wind.... She is like a silver flower.

[_Enter Salomé_.]

SALOMÉ

I will not stay. I cannot stay. Why does the Tetrarch look at me
all the while with his mole's eyes under his shaking eyelids? It
is strange that the husband of my mother looks at me like that.
I know not what it means. In truth, yes, I know it.

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

You have just left the feast, Princess?

SALOMÉ

How sweet the air is here! I can breathe here! Within there are
Jews from Jerusalem who are tearing each other in pieces over
their foolish ceremonies, and barbarians who drink and drink, and
spill their wine on the pavement, and Greeks from Smyrna with
painted eyes and painted cheeks, and frizzed hair curled in
twisted coils, and silent, subtle Egyptians, with long nails of
jade and russett cloaks, and Romans brutal and coarse, with their
uncouth jargon. Ah! how I loathe the Romans! They are rough and
common, and they give themselves the airs of noble lords.

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

Will you be seated, Princess?

THE PAGE OF HERODIAS

Why do you speak to her? Why do you look at her? Oh! something
terrible will happen.

SALOMÉ

How good to see the moon! She is like a little piece of money,
you would think she was a little silver flower. The moon is cold
and chaste. I am sure she is a virgin, she has a virgin's beauty.
Yes, she is a virgin. She has never defiled herself. She has
never abandoned herself to men, like the other goddesses.

THE VOICE OF JOKANAAN

The Lord hath come. The son of man hath come. The centaurs have
hidden themselves in the rivers, and the sirens have left the
rivers, and are lying beneath the leaves of the forest.

SALOMÉ

Who was that who cried out?

SECOND SOLDIER

The prophet, Princess.

SALOMÉ

Ah, the prophet! He of whom the Tetrarch is afraid?

SECOND SOLDIER

We know nothing of that, Princess. It was the prophet Jokanaan
who cried out.

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

Is it your pleasure that I bid them bring your litter, Princess?
The night is fair in the garden.

SALOMÉ

He says terrible things about my mother, does he not?

SECOND SOLDIER

We never understand what he says, Princess.

SALOMÉ

Yes; he says terrible things about her.

[_Enter a Slave_.]

THE SLAVE

Princess, the Tetrarch prays you to return to the feast.

SALOMÉ

I will not go back.

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

Pardon me, Princess, but if you do not return some misfortune may
happen.

SALOMÉ

Is he an old man, this prophet?

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

Princess, it were better to return. Suffer me to lead you in.

SALOMÉ

This prophet ... is he an old man?

FIRST SOLDIER

No, Princess, he is quite a young man.

SECOND SOLDIER

You cannot be sure. There are those who say he is Elias.

SALOMÉ

Who is Elias?

SECOND SOLDIER

A very ancient prophet of this country, Princess.

THE SLAVE

What answer may I give the Tetrarch from the Princess?

THE VOICE OF JOKANAAN

Rejoice not thou, land of Palestine, because the rod of him who
smote thee is broken. For from the seed of the serpent shall come
forth a basilisk, and that which is born of it shall devour the
birds.

SALOMÉ

What a strange voice! I would speak with him.

FIRST SOLDIER

I fear it is impossible, Princess. The Tetrarch does not wish any
one to speak with him. He has even forbidden the high priest to
speak with him.

SALOMÉ

I desire to speak with him.

FIRST SOLDIER

It is impossible, Princess.

SALOMÉ

I will speak with him.

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

Would it not be better to return to the banquet?

SALOMÉ

Bring forth this prophet.

                             [_Exit the slave._]

FIRST SOLDIER

We dare not, Princess.

SALOMÉ

[_Approaching the cistern and looking down into it._]

How black it is, down there! It must be terrible to be in so
black a pit! It is like a tomb.... [_To the soldiers._] Did you
not hear me? Bring out the prophet. I wish to see him.

SECOND SOLDIER

Princess, I beg you do not require this of us.

SALOMÉ

You keep me waiting!

FIRST SOLDIER

Princess, our lives belong to you, but we cannot do what you have
asked of us. And indeed, it is not of us that you should ask this
thing.

SALOMÉ

[_Looking at the young Syrian._]

Ah!

THE PAGE OF HERODIAS

Oh! what is going to happen? I am sure that some misfortune will
happen.

SALOMÉ

[_Going up to the young Syrian._]

You will do this tiling for me, will you not, Narraboth? You will
do this thing for me. I have always been kind to you. You will do
it for me. I would but look at this strange prophet. Men have
talked so much of him. Often have I heard the Tetrarch talk of
him. I think the Tetrarch is afraid of him. Are you, even you,
also afraid of him, Narraboth?

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

I fear him not, Princess; there is no man I fear. But the
Tetrarch has formally forbidden that any man should raise the
cover of this well.

SALOMÉ

You will do this thing for me, Narraboth, and to-morrow when I
pass in my litter beneath the gateway of the idol-sellers I will
let fall for you a little flower, a little green flower.

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

Princess, I cannot, I cannot.

SALOMÉ

[_Smiling_.]

You will do this thing for me, Narraboth. You know that you will
do this thing for me. And to-morrow when I pass in my litter by
the bridge of the idol-buyers, I will look at you through the
muslin veils, I will look at you, Narraboth, it may be I will
smile at you. Look at me, Narraboth, look at me. Ah! you know
that you will do what I ask of you. You know it well.... I know
that you will do this thing.

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

[_Signing to the third soldier._]

Let the prophet come forth.... The Princess Salomé desires to see
him.

SALOMÉ

Ah!

THE PAGE OF HERODIAS

Oh! How strange the moon looks. You would think it was the hand
of a dead woman who is seeking to cover herself with a shroud.

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

She has a strange look! She is like a little princess, whose eyes
are eyes of amber. Through the clouds of muslin she is smiling
like a little princess.

[_The prophet comes out of the cistern. Salomé looks at him and
steps slowly back._]

[Illustration: A PLATONIC LAMENT]

JOKANAAN

Where is he whose cup of abominations is now full? Where is he,
who in a robe of silver shall one day die in the face of all the
people? Bid him come forth, that he may hear the voice of him who
hath cried in the waste places and in the houses of kings.

SALOMÉ

Of whom is he speaking?

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

You can never tell, Princess.

JOKANAAN

Where is she who having seen the images of men painted on the
walls, the images of the Chaldeans limned in colours, gave
herself up unto the lust of her eyes, and sent ambassadors into
Chaldea?

SALOMÉ

It is of my mother that he speaks.

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

Oh, no, Princess.

SALOMÉ

Yes; it is of my mother that he speaks.

JOKANAAN

Where is she who gave herself unto the Captains of Assyria, who
have baldricks on their loins, and tiaras of divers colours on
their heads? Where is she who hath given herself to the young men
of Egypt, who are clothed in fine linen and purple, whose shields
are of gold, whose helmets are of silver, whose bodies are
mighty? Bid her rise up from the bed of her abominations, from
the bed of her incestuousness, that she may hear the words of him
who prepareth the way of the Lord, that she may repent her of her
iniquities. Though she will never repent, but will stick fast in
her abominations; bid her come, for the fan of the Lord is in His
hand.

SALOMÉ

But he is terrible, he is terrible!

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

Do not stay here, Princess, I beseech you.

SALOMÉ

It is his eyes above all that are terrible. They are like black
holes burned by torches in a Tyrian tapestry. They are like black
caverns where dragons dwell. They are like the black caverns of
Egypt in which the dragons make their lairs. They are like black
lakes troubled by fantastic moons.... Do you think he will speak
again?

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

Do not stay here, Princess. I pray you do not stay here.

SALOMÉ

How wasted he is! He is like a thin ivory statue. He is like an
image of silver. I am sure he is chaste as the moon is. He is
like a moonbeam, like a shaft of silver. His flesh must be cool
like ivory. I would look closer at him.

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

No, no, Princess.

SALOMÉ

I must look at him closer.

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

Princess! Princess!

JOKANAAN

Who is this woman who is looking at me? I will not have her look
at me. Wherefore doth she look at me with her golden eyes, under
her gilded eyelids? I know not who she is. I do not wish to know
who she is. Bid her begone. It is not to her that I would speak.

SALOMÉ

I am Salomé, daughter of Herodias, Princess of Judæa.

JOKANAAN

Back! daughter of Babylon! Come not near the chosen of the Lord.
Thy mother hath filled the earth with the wine of her iniquities,
and the cry of her sins hath come up to the ears of God.

SALOMÉ

Speak again, Jokanaan. Thy voice is wine to me.

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

Princess! Princess! Princess!

SALOMÉ

Speak again! Speak again, Jokanaan, and tell me what I must do.

JOKANAAN

Daughter of Sodom, come not near me! But cover thy face with a
veil, and scatter ashes upon thine head, and get thee to the
desert and seek out the Son of Man.

SALOMÉ

Who is he, the Son of Man? Is he as beautiful as thou art,
Jokanaan?

JOKANAAN

Get thee behind me! I hear in the palace the beating of the wings
of the angel of death.

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

Princess, I beseech thee to go within.

JOKANAAN

Angel of the Lord God, what dost thou here with thy sword? Whom
seekest thou in this foul palace? The day of him who shall die in
a robe of silver has not yet come.

[Illustration: JOHN AND SALOMÉ]

SALOMÉ

Jokanaan!

JOKANAAN

Who speaketh?

SALOMÉ

Jokanaan, I am amorous of thy body! Thy body is white like the
lilies of a field that the mower hath never mowed. Thy body is
white like the snows that lie on the mountains, like the snows
that lie on the mountains of Judæa, and come down into the
valleys. The roses in the garden of the Queen of Arabia are not
so white as thy body. Neither the roses in the garden of the
Queen of Arabia, the perfumed garden of spices of the Queen of
Arabia, nor the feet of the dawn when they light on the leaves,
nor the breast of the moon when she lies on the breast of the
sea.... There is nothing in the world so white as thy body. Let
me touch thy body.

JOKANAAN

Back! daughter of Babylon! By woman came evil into the world.
Speak not to me. I will not listen to thee. I listen but to the
voice of the Lord God.

SALOMÉ

Thy body is hideous. It is like the body of a leper. It is like a
plastered wall where vipers have crawled; like a plastered wall
where the scorpions have made their nest. It is like a whitened
sepulchre full of loathsome things. It is horrible, thy body is
horrible. It is of thy hair that I am enamoured, Jokanaan. Thy
hair is like clusters of grapes, like the clusters of black
grapes that hang from the vine-trees of Edom in the land of the
Edomites. Thy hair is like the cedars of Lebanon, like the great
cedars of Lebanon that give their shade to the lions and to the
robbers who would hide themselves by day. The long black nights,
when the moon hides her face, when the stars are afraid, are not
so black. The silence that dwells in the forest is not so black.
There is nothing in the world so black as thy hair.... Let me
touch thy hair.

JOKANAAN

Back, daughter of Sodom! Touch me not. Profane not the temple of
the Lord God.

SALOMÉ

Thy hair is horrible. It is covered with mire and dust. It is
like a crown of thorns which they have placed on thy forehead. It
is like a knot of black serpents writhing round thy neck. I love
not thy hair.... It is thy mouth that I desire, Jokanaan. Thy
mouth is like a band of scarlet on a tower of ivory. It is like a
pomegranate cut with a knife of ivory. The pomegranate-flowers
that blossom in the gardens of Tyre, and are redder than roses,
are not so red. The red blasts of trumpets that herald the
approach of kings, and make afraid the enemy, are not so red.
Thy mouth is redder than the feet of those who tread the wine in
the wine-press. Thy mouth is redder than the feet of the doves
who haunt the temples and are fed by the priests. It is redder
than the feet of him who cometh from a forest where he hath slain
a lion, and seen gilded tigers. Thy mouth is like a branch of
coral that fishers have found in the twilight of the sea, the
coral that they keep for the kings!... It is like the vermilion
that the Moabites find in the mines of Moab, the vermilion that
the kings take from them. It is like the bow of the King of the
Persians, that is painted with vermilion, and is tipped with
coral. There is nothing in the world so red as thy mouth.... Let
me kiss thy mouth.

JOKANAAN

Never! daughter of Babylon! Daughter of Sodom! Never.

SALOMÉ

I will kiss thy mouth, Jokanaan. I will kiss thy mouth.

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

Princess, Princess, thou who art like a garden of myrrh, thou who
art the dove of all doves, look not at this man, look not at him!
Do not speak such words to him. I cannot suffer them....
Princess, Princess, do not speak these things.

SALOMÉ

I will kiss thy mouth, Jokanaan.

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

Ah! [_He kills himself and falls between Salomé and Jokanaan._]

THE PAGE OF HERODIAS

The young Syrian has slain himself! The young captain has slain
himself! He has slain himself who was my friend! I gave him a
little box of perfumes and ear-rings wrought in silver, and now
he has killed himself! Ah, did he not foretell that some
misfortune would happen? I, too, foretold it, and it has
happened. Well I knew that the moon was seeking a dead thing, but
I knew not that it was he whom she sought. Ah! why did I not hide
him from the moon? If I had hidden him in a cavern she would not
have seen him.

FIRST SOLDIER

Princess, the young captain has just killed himself.

SALOMÉ

Let me kiss thy mouth, Jokanaan.

JOKANAAN

Art thou not afraid, daughter of Herodias? Did I not tell thee
that I had heard in the palace the beatings of the wings of the
angel of death, and hath he not come, the angel of death?

[Illustration: ENTER HERODIAS]

SALOMÉ

Let me kiss thy mouth.

JOKANAAN

Daughter of adultery, there is but one who can save thee, it is
He of whom I spake. Go seek Him. He is in a boat on the sea of
Galilee, and He talketh with His disciples. Kneel down on the
shore of the sea, and call unto Him by His name. When He cometh
to thee (and to all who call on Him He cometh), bow thyself at
His feet and ask of Him the remission of thy sins.

SALOMÉ

Let me kiss thy mouth.

JOKANAAN

Cursed be thou! daughter of an incestuous mother, be thou
accursed!

SALOMÉ

I will kiss thy mouth, Jokanaan.

JOKANAAN

I do no wish to look at thee. I will not look at thee, thou art
accursed, Salomé, thou art accursed. [_He goes down into the
cistern._]

SALOMÉ

I will kiss thy mouth, Jokanaan; I will kiss thy mouth.

FIRST SOLDIER

We must bear away the body to another place. The Tetrarch does
not care to see dead bodies, save the bodies of those whom he
himself has slain.

THE PAGE OF HERODIAS

He was my brother, and nearer to me than a brother. I gave him a
little box full of perfumes, and a ring of agate that he wore
always on his hand. In the evening we used to walk by the river,
among the almond trees, and he would tell me of the things of his
country. He spake ever very low. The sound of his voice was like
the sound of the flute, of a flute player. Also he much loved to
gaze at himself in the river. I used to reproach him for that.

SECOND SOLDIER

You are right; we must hide the body. The Tetrarch must not see
it.

FIRST SOLDIER

The Tetrarch will not come to this place. He never comes on the
terrace. He is too much afraid of the prophet.

[_Enter Herod, Herodias, and all the Court._]

HEROD

Where is Salomé? Where is the Princess? Why did she not return to
the banquet as I commanded her? Ah! there she is!

HERODIAS

You must not look at her! You are always looking at her!

HEROD

The moon has a strange look to-night. Has she not a strange look?
She is like a mad woman, a mad woman who is seeking everywhere
for lovers. She is naked too. She is quite naked. The clouds are
seeking to clothe her nakedness, but she will not let them. She
shows herself naked in the sky. She reels through the clouds like
a drunken woman.... I am sure she is looking for lovers. Does she
not reel like a drunken woman? She is like a mad woman, is she
not?

HERODIAS

No; the moon is like the moon, that is all. Let us go within....
You have nothing to do here.

HEROD

I will stay here! Manesseh, lay carpets there. Light torches,
bring forth the ivory tables, and the tables of jasper. The air
here is delicious. I will drink more wine with my guests. We must
show all honours to the ambassadors of Cæsar.

HERODIAS

It is not because of them that you remain.

HEROD

Yes; the air is delicious. Come, Herodias, our guests await us.
Ah! I have slipped! I have slipped in blood! It is an ill omen.
It is a very evil omen. Wherefore is there blood here?... and
this body, what does this body here? Think you I am like the King
of Egypt, who gives no feast to his guests but that he shows them
a corpse? Whose is it? I will not look on it.

FIRST SOLDIER

It is our captain, sire. He is the young Syrian whom you made
captain only three days ago.

HEROD

I gave no order that he should be slain.

SECOND SOLDIER

He killed himself, sire.

HEROD

For what reason? I had made him captain.

SECOND SOLDIER

We do not know, sire. But he killed himself.

HEROD

That seems strange to me. I thought it was only the Roman
philosophers who killed themselves. Is it not true, Tigellinus,
that the philosophers at Rome kill themselves?

TIGELLINUS

There are some who kill themselves, sire. They are the Stoics.
The Stoics are coarse people. They are ridiculous people. I
myself regard them as being perfectly ridiculous.

HEROD

I also. It is ridiculous to kill oneself.

TIGELLINUS

Everybody at Rome laughs at them. The Emperor has written a
satire against them. It is recited everywhere.

HEROD

Ah! he has written a satire against them? Cæsar is wonderful. He
can do everything.... It is strange that the young Syrian has
killed himself. I am sorry he has killed himself. I am very
sorry; for he was fair to look upon. He was even very fair. He
had very languorous eyes. I remember that I saw that he looked
languorously at Salomé. Truly, I thought he looked too much at
her.

HERODIAS

There are others who look at her too much.

HEROD

His father was a king. I drove him from his kingdom. And you made
a slave of his mother, who was a queen, Herodias. So he was here
as my guest, as it were, and for that reason I made him my
captain. I am sorry he is dead. Ho! why have you left the body
here? I will not look at it--away with it! [_They take away the
body._] It is cold here. There is a wind blowing. Is there not a
wind blowing?

HERODIAS

No; there is no wind.

HEROD

I tell you there is a wind that blows.... And I hear in the air
something that is like the beating of wings, like the beating of
vast wings. Do you not hear it?

HERODIAS

I hear nothing.

HEROD

I hear it no longer. But I heard it. It was the blowing of the
wind, no doubt. It has passed away. But no, I hear it again. Do
you not hear it? It is just like the beating of wings.

HERODIAS

I tell you there is nothing. You are ill. Let us go within.

HEROD

I am not ill. It is your daughter who is sick. She has the mien
of a sick person. Never have I seen her so pale.

HERODIAS

I have told you not to look at her.

HEROD

Pour me forth wine [_wine is brought_]. Salomé, come drink a
little wine with me. I have here a wine that is exquisite. Cæsar
himself sent it me. Dip into it thy little red lips, that I may
drain the cup.

SALOMÉ

I am not thirsty, Tetrarch.

HEROD

You hear how she answers me, this daughter of yours?

HERODIAS

She does right. Why are you always gazing at her?

HEROD

Bring me ripe fruits [_fruits are brought_]. Salomé, come and eat
fruit with me. I love to see in a fruit the mark of thy little
teeth. Bite but a little of this fruit and then I will eat what
is left.

SALOMÉ

I am not hungry, Tetrarch.

HEROD

[_To Herodias._] You see how you have brought up this daughter of
yours.

HERODIAS

My daughter and I come of a royal race. As for thee, thy father
was a camel driver! He was also a robber!

HEROD

Thou liest!

HERODIAS

Thou knowest well that it is true.

HEROD

Salomé, come and sit next to me. I will give thee the throne of
thy mother.

SALOMÉ

I am not tired, Tetrarch.

HERODIAS

You see what she thinks of you.

HEROD

Bring me--what is it that I desire? I forget. Ah! ah! I remember.

[Illustration: THE EYES OF HEROD]

THE VOICE OF JOKANAAN

Lo! the time is come! That which I foretold has come to pass,
saith the Lord God. Lo! the day of which I spoke.

HERODIAS

Bid him be silent. I will not listen to his voice. This man is
for ever vomiting insults against me.

HEROD

He has said nothing against you. Besides, he is a very great
prophet.

HERODIAS

I do not believe in prophets. Can a man tell what will come to
pass? No man knows it. Moreover, he is for ever insulting me. But
I think you are afraid of him.... I know well that you are afraid
of him.

HEROD

I am not afraid of him. I am afraid of no man.

HERODIAS

I tell you, you are afraid of him. If you are not afraid of him
why do you not deliver him to the Jews, who for these six months
past have been clamouring for him?

A JEW

Truly, my lord, it were better to deliver him into our hands.

HEROD

Enough on this subject. I have already given you my answer. I
will not deliver him into your hands. He is a holy man. He is a
man who has seen God.

A JEW

That cannot be. There is no man who hath seen God since the
prophet Elias. He is the last man who saw God. In these days God
doth not show Himself. He hideth Himself. Therefore great evils
have come upon the land.

ANOTHER JEW

Verily, no man knoweth if Elias the prophet did indeed see God.
Peradventure it was but the shadow of God that he saw.

A THIRD JEW

God is at no time hidden. He showeth Himself at all times and in
everything. God is in what is evil even as He is in what is good.

A FOURTH JEW

That must not be said. It is a very dangerous doctrine. It is a
doctrine that cometh from the schools at Alexandria, where men
teach the philosophy of the Greeks. And the Greeks are Gentiles:
They are not even circumcised.

A FIFTH JEW

No one can tell how God worketh. His ways are very mysterious. It
may be that the things which we call evil are good, and that the
things which we call good are evil. There is no knowledge of any
thing. We must needs submit to everything, for God is very
strong. He breaketh in pieces the strong together with the weak,
for He regardeth not any man.

FIRST JEW

Thou speaketh truly. God is terrible; He breaketh the strong and
the weak as a man brays corn in a mortar. But this man hath never
seen God. No man hath seen God since the prophet Elias.

HERODIAS

Make them be silent. They weary me.

HEROD

But I have heard it said that Jokanaan himself is your prophet
Elias.

THE JEW

That cannot be. It is more than three hundred years since the
days of the prophet Elias.

HEROD

There be some who say that this man is the prophet Elias..

A NAZARENE

I am sure that he is the prophet Elias.

THE JEW

Nay, but he is not the prophet Elias.

THE VOICE OF JOKANAAN

So the day is come, the day of the Lord, and I hear upon the
mountains the feet of Him who shall be the Saviour of the world.

HEROD

What does that mean? The Saviour of the world.

TIGELLINUS

It is a title that Cæsar takes.

HEROD

But Cæsar is not coming into Judæa. Only yesterday I received
letters from Rome. They contained nothing concerning this matter.
And you, Tigellinus, who were at Rome during the winter, you
heard nothing concerning this matter, did you?

TIGELLINUS

Sire, I heard nothing concerning the matter. I was explaining the
title. It is one of Cæsar's titles.

HEROD

But Cæsar cannot come. He is too gouty. They say that his feet
are like the feet of an elephant. Also there are reasons of
State. He who leaves Rome loses Rome. He will not come. Howbeit,
Cæsar is lord, he will come if he wishes. Nevertheless, I do not
think he will come.

FIRST NAZARENE

It was not concerning Cæsar that the prophet spake these words,
sire.

HEROD

Not of Cæsar?

FIRST NAZARENE

No, sire.

HEROD

Concerning whom then did he speak?

FIRST NAZARENE

Concerning Messias who has come.

A JEW

Messiah hath not come.

FIRST NAZARENE

He hath come, and everywhere He worketh miracles.

HERODIAS Ho! ho! miracles! I do not believe in miracles. I have
seen too many. [_To the page._] My fan!

FIRST NAZARENE

This man worketh true miracles. Thus, at a marriage which took
place in a little town of Galilee, a town of some importance, He
changed water into wine. Certain persons who were present related
it to me. Also He healed two lepers that were seated before the
Gate of Capernaum simply by touching them.

SECOND NAZARENE

Nay, it was blind men that he healed at Capernaum.

FIRST NAZARENE

Nay; they were lepers. But He hath healed blind people also, and
He was seen on a mountain talking with angels.

A SADDUCEE

Angels do not exist.

A PHARISEE

Angels exist, but I do not believe that this Man has talked with
them.

FIRST NAZARENE

He was seen by a great multitude of people talking with angels.

A SADDUCEE

Not with angels.

HERODIAS

How these men weary me! They are ridiculous! [_To the page._]
Well! my fan! [_The page gives her the fan._] You have a
dreamer's look; you must not dream. It is only sick people who
dream. [_She strikes the page with her fan._]

SECOND NAZARENE

There is also the miracle of the daughter of Jairus.

FIRST NAZARENE

Yes, that is sure. No man can gainsay it.

HERODIAS

These men are mad. They have looked too long on the moon. Command
them to be silent.

HEROD

What is this miracle of the daughter of Jairus?

FIRST NAZARENE

The daughter of Jairus was dead. He raised her from the dead.

HEROD

He raises the dead?

FIRST NAZARENE

Yea, sire, He raiseth the dead.

HEROD

I do not wish Him to do that. I forbid Him to do that. I allow no
man to raise the dead. This Man must be found and told that I
forbid Him to raise the dead. Where is this Man at present?

SECOND NAZARENE

He is in every place, my lord, but it is hard to find Him.

FIRST NAZARENE

It is said that He is now in Samaria.

A JEW

It is easy to see that this is not Messias, if He is in Samaria.
It is not to the Samaritans that Messias shall come. The
Samaritans are accursed. They bring no offerings to the Temple.

SECOND NAZARENE

He left Samaria a few days since. I think that at the present
moment He is in the neighbourhood of Jerusalem.

FIRST NAZARENE

No; He is not there. I have just come from Jerusalem. For two
months they have had no tidings of Him.

HEROD

No matter! But let them find Him, and tell Him from me, I will
not allow him to raise the dead! To change water into wine, to
heal the lepers and the blind.... He may do these things if He
will. I say nothing against these things. In truth I hold it a
good deed to heal a leper. But I allow no man to raise the dead.
It would be terrible if the dead came back.

[Illustration: THE STOMACH DANCE]

THE VOICE OF JOKANAAN

Ah! the wanton! The harlot! Ah! the daughter of Babylon with her
golden eyes and her gilded eyelids!--Thus saith the Lord God, Let
there come up against her a multitude of men. Let the people take
stones and stone her....

HERODIAS

Command him to be silent.

THE VOICE OF JOKANAAN

Let the war captains pierce her with their swords, let them crush
her beneath their shields.

HERODIAS

Nay, but it is infamous.

THE VOICE OF JOKANAAN

It is thus that I will wipe out all wickedness from the earth,
and that all women shall learn not to imitate her abominations.

HERODIAS

You hear what he says against me? You allow him to revile your
wife?

HEROD

He did not speak your name.

HERODIAS

What does that matter? You know well that it is I whom he seeks
to revile. And I am your wife, am I not?

HEROD

Of a truth, dear and noble Herodias, you are my wife, and before
that you were the wife of my brother.

HERODIAS

It was you who tore me from his arms.

HEROD

Of a truth I was stronger.... But let us not talk of that matter.
I do not desire to talk of it. It is the cause of the terrible
words that the prophet has spoken. Peradventure on account of it
a misfortune will come. Let us not speak of this matter. Noble
Herodias, we are not mindful of our guests. Fill thou my cup, my
well-beloved. Fill with wine the great goblets of silver, and the
great goblets of glass. I will drink to Cæsar. There are Romans
here, we must drink to Cæsar.

ALL

Cæsar! Cæsar!

HEROD

Do you not see your daughter, how pale she is?

HERODIAS

What is it to you if she be pale or not?

HEROD

Never have I seen her so pale.

HERODIAS

You must not look at her.

THE VOICE OF JOKANAAN

In that day the sun shall become black like sackcloth of hair,
and the moon shall become like blood, and the stars of the
heavens shall fall upon the earth like ripe figs that fall from
the fig-tree, and the kings of the earth shall be afraid.

HERODIAS

Ah! Ah! I should like to see that day of which he speaks, when
the moon shall become like blood, and when the stars shall fall
upon the earth like ripe figs. This prophet talks like a drunken
man ... but I cannot suffer the sound of his voice. I hate his
voice. Command him to be silent.

HEROD

I will not. I cannot understand what it is that he saith, but it
may be an omen.

HERODIAS

I do not believe in omens. He speaks like a drunken man.

HEROD

It may be he is drunk with the wine of God.

HERODIAS

What wine is that, the wine of God? From what vineyards is it
gathered? In what wine-press may one find it?

HEROD

[_From this point he looks all the while at Salomé._]

Tigellinus, when you were at Rome of late, did the Emperor speak
with you: on the subject of...?

TIGELLINUS

On what subject, sire?

HEROD

On what subject? Ah! I asked you a question, did I not? I have
forgotten what I would have asked you.

HERODIAS

You are looking again at my daughter. You must not look at her. I
have already said so.

HEROD

You say nothing else.

HERODIAS

I say it again.

HEROD

And that restoration of the Temple about which they have talked
so much, will anything be done? They say the veil of the
Sanctuary has disappeared, do they not?

HERODIAS

It was thyself didst steal it. Thou speakest at random. I will
not stay here. Let us go within.

HEROD

Dance for me, Salomé.

HERODIAS

I will not have her dance.

SALOMÉ

I have no desire to dance, Tetrarch.

HEROD

Salomé, daughter of Herodias, dance for me.

HERODIAS

Let her alone.

HEROD

I command thee to dance, Salomé.

SALOMÉ

I will not dance, Tetrarch.

HERODIAS

[_Laughing_].

You see how she obeys you.

HEROD

What is it to me whether she dance or not? It is naught to me.
To-night I am happy, I am exceeding happy. Never have I been so
happy.

FIRST SOLDIER

The Tetrarch has a sombre look. Has he not a sombre look?

SECOND SOLDIER

Yes, he has a sombre look.

HEROD

Wherefore should I not be happy? Cæsar, who is lord of the world,
who is lord of all things, loves me well. He has just sent me
most precious gifts. Also he has promised me to summon to Rome
the King of Cappadocia, who is my enemy. It may be that at Rome
he will crucify him, for he is able to do all things that he
wishes. Verily, Cæsar is lord. Thus you see I have a right to be
happy. Indeed, I am happy. I have never been so happy. There is
nothing in the world that can mar my happiness.

THE VOICE OF JOKANAAN

He shall be seated on this throne. He shall be clothed in scarlet
and purple. In his hand he shall bear a golden cup full of his
blasphemies. And the angel of the Lord shall smite him. He shall
be eaten of worms.

HERODIAS

You hear what he says about you. He says that you will be eaten
of worms.

HEROD

It is not of me that he speaks. He speaks never against me. It is
of the King of Cappadocia that he speaks; the King of Cappadocia,
who is mine enemy. It is he who shall be eaten of worms. It is
not I. Never has he spoken word against me, this prophet, save
that I sinned in taking to wife the wife of my brother. It may be
he is right. For, of a truth, you are sterile.

HERODIAS

I am sterile, I? You say that, you that are ever looking at my
daughter, you that would have her dance for your pleasure? It is
absurd to say that. I have borne a child. You have gotten no
child, no, not even from one of your slaves. It is you who are
sterile, not I.

HEROD

Peace, woman! I say that you are sterile. You have borne me no
child, and the prophet says that our marriage is not a true
marriage. He says that it is an incestuous marriage, a marriage
that will bring evils.... I fear he is right; I am sure that he
is right. But it is not the moment to speak of such things. I
would be happy at this moment. Of a truth, I am happy. There is
nothing I lack.

HERODIAS

I am glad you are of so fair a humour to-night. It is not your
custom. But it is late. Let us go within. Do not forget that we
hunt at sunrise. All honours must be shown to Cæsar's
ambassadors, must they not?

SECOND SOLDIER

What a sombre look the Tetrarch wears.

FIRST SOLDIER

Yes, he wears a sombre look.

HEROD

Salomé, Salomé, dance for me. I pray thee dance for me. I am sad
to-night. Yes; I am passing sad to-night. When I came hither I
slipped in blood, which is an evil omen; and I heard, I am sure I
heard in the air a beating of wings, a beating of giant wings. I
cannot tell what they mean ... I am sad to-night. Therefore dance
for me. Dance for me, Salomé, I beseech you. If you dance for me
you may ask of me what you will, and I will give it you, even
unto the half of my kingdom.

[Illustration: THE TOILETTE OF SALOMÉ--I]

SALOMÉ

[_Rising._] Will you indeed give me whatsoever I shall ask,
Tetrarch?

HERODIAS

Do not dance, my daughter.

HEROD

Everything, even the half of my kingdom.

SALOMÉ

You swear it, Tetrarch?

HEROD

I swear it, Salomé.

HERODIAS

Do not dance, my daughter.

SALOMÉ

By what will you swear, Tetrarch?

HEROD

By my life, by my crown, by my gods. Whatsoever you desire I will
give it you, even to the half of my kingdom, if you will but
dance for me. O, Salomé, Salomé, dance for me!

SALOMÉ

You have sworn, Tetrarch.

HEROD

I have sworn, Salomé.

SALOMÉ

All this I ask, even the half of your kingdom.

HERODIAS

My daughter, do not dance.

HEROD

Even to the half of my kingdom. Thou wilt be passing fair as a
queen, Salomé, if it please thee to ask for the half of my
kingdom. Will she not be fair as a queen? Ah! it is cold here!
There is an icy wind, and I hear ... wherefore do I hear in the
air this beating of wings? Ah! one might fancy a bird, a huge
black bird that hovers over the terrace. Why can I not see it,
this bird? The beat of its wings is terrible. The breath of the
wind of its wings is terrible. It is a chill wind. Nay, but it is
not cold, it is hot. I am choking. Pour water on my hands. Give
me snow to eat. Loosen my mantle. Quick! quick! loosen my mantle.
Nay, but leave it. It is my garland that hurts me, my garland of
roses. The flowers are like fire. They have burned my forehead.
[_He tears the wreath from his head and throws it on the table._]
Ah! I can breathe now. How red those petals are! They are like
stains of blood on the cloth. That does not matter. You must not
find symbols in everything you see. It makes life impossible. It
were better to say that stains of blood are as lovely as rose
petals. It were better far to say that.... But we will not speak
of this. Now I am happy, I am passing happy. Have I not the
right to be happy? Your daughter is going to dance for me. Will
you not dance for me, Salomé? You have promised to dance for me.

[Illustration: THE TOILETTE OF SALOMÉ--II]

HERODIAS

I will not have her dance.

SALOMÉ

I will dance for you, Tetrarch.

HEROD

You hear what your daughter says. She is going to dance for me.
You do well to dance for me, Salomé. And when you have danced for
me, forget not to ask of me whatsoever you wish. Whatsoever you
wish I will give it you, even to the half of my kingdom. I have
sworn it, have I not?

SALOMÉ

You have sworn it, Tetrarch.

HEROD

And I have never broken my word. I am not of those who break
their oaths. I know not how to lie. I am the slave of my word,
and my word is the word of a king. The King of Cappadocia always
lies, but he is no true king. He is a coward. Also he owes me
money that he will not repay. He has even insulted my
ambassadors. He has spoken words that were wounding. But Cæsar
will crucify him when he comes to Rome. I am sure that Cæsar will
crucify him. And if not, yet will he die, being eaten of worms.
The prophet has prophesied it. Well! wherefore dost thou tarry,
Salomé?

SALOMÉ

I am awaiting until my slaves bring perfumes to me and the seven
veils, and take off my sandals. [_Slaves bring perfumes and the
seven veils, and take off the sandals of Salomé._]

HEROD

Ah, you are going to dance with naked feet. 'Tis well!--'Tis
well. Your little feet will be like white doves. They will be
like little white flowers that dance upon the trees.... No, no,
she is going to dance on blood. There is blood spilt on the
ground. She must not dance on blood. It were an evil omen.

HERODIAS

What is it to you if she dance on blood? Thou hast waded deep
enough therein....

HEROD

What is it to me? Ah! look at the moon! She has become red. She
has become red as blood. Ah! the prophet prophesied truly. He
prophesied that the moon would become red as blood. Did he not
prophesy it? All of you heard him. And now the moon has become
red as blood. Do ye not see it?

HERODIAS

Oh, yes, I see it well, and the stars are falling like ripe figs,
are they not? and the sun is becoming black like sackcloth of
hair, and the kings of the earth are afraid. That at least one
can see. The prophet, for once in his life, was right, the kings
of the earth are afraid.... Let us go within. You are sick. They
will say at Rome that you are mad. Let us go within, I tell you.

THE VOICE OF JOKANAAN

Who is this who cometh from Edom, who is this who cometh from
Bozra, whose raiment is dyed with purple, who shineth in the
beauty of his garments, who walketh mighty in his greatness?
Wherefore is thy raiment stained with scarlet?

HERODIAS

Let us go within. The voice of that man maddens me. I will not
have my daughter dance while he is continually crying out. I will
not have her dance while you look at her in this fashion. In a
word, I will not have her dance.

HEROD

Do not rise, my wife, my queen, it will avail thee nothing. I
will not go within till she hath danced. Dance, Salomé, dance for
me.

HERODIAS

Do not dance, my daughter.

SALOMÉ

I am ready, Tetrarch.

[_Salomé dances the dance of the seven veils._]

HEROD

Ah! wonderful! wonderful! You see that she has danced for me,
your daughter. Come near, Salomé, come near, that I may give you
your reward. Ah! I pay the dancers well. I will pay thee royally.
I will give thee whatsoever thy soul desireth. What wouldst thou
have? Speak.

SALOMÉ

[_Kneeling_].

I would that they presently bring me in a silver charger....

HEROD

[Laughing.]

In a silver charger? Surely yes, in a silver charger. She is
charming, is she not? What is it you would have in a silver
charger, O sweet and fair Salomé, you who are fairer than all the
daughters of Judæa? What would you have them bring thee in a
silver charger? Tell me. Whatsoever it may be, they shall give it
you. My treasures belong to thee. What is it, Salomé?

SALOMÉ

[_Rising_].

The head of Jokanaan.

HERODIAS

Ah! that is well said, my daughter.

HEROD

No, no!

HERODIAS

That is well said, my daughter.

HEROD

No, no, Salomé. You do not ask me that. Do not listen to your
mother's voice. She is ever giving you evil counsel. Do not heed
her.

SALOMÉ

I do not heed my mother. It is for mine own pleasure that I ask
the head of Jokanaan in a silver charger. You hath sworn, Herod.
Forget not that you have sworn an oath.

HEROD

I know it. I have sworn by my gods. I know it well. But I pray
you, Salomé, ask of me something else. Ask of me the half of my
kingdom, and I will give it you. But ask not of me what you have
asked.

SALOMÉ

I ask of you the head of Jokanaan.

HEROD

No, no, I do not wish it.

SALOMÉ

You have sworn, Herod.

HERODIAS

Yes, you have sworn. Everybody heard you. You swore it before
everybody.

HEROD

Be silent! It is not to you I speak.

HERODIAS

My daughter has done well to ask the head of Jokanaan. He has
covered me with insults. He has said monstrous things against me.
One can see that she loves her mother well. Do not yield, my
daughter. He has sworn, he has sworn.

HEROD

Be silent, speak not to me!... Come, Salomé, be reasonable. I
have never been hard to you. I have ever loved you.... It may be
that I have loved you too much. Therefore ask not this thing of
me. This is a terrible thing, an awful thing to ask of me.
Surely, I think thou art jesting. The head of a man that is cut
from his body is ill to look upon, is it not? It is not meet
that the eyes of a virgin should look upon such a thing. What
pleasure could you have in it? None. No, no, it is not what you
desire. Hearken to me. I have an emerald, a great round emerald,
which Cæsar's minion sent me. If you look through this emerald
you can see things which happen at a great distance. Cæsar
himself carries such an emerald when he goes to the circus. But
my emerald is larger. I know well that it is larger. It is the
largest emerald in the whole world. You would like that, would
you not? Ask it of me and I will give it you.

[Illustration: THE DANCER'S REWARD]

SALOMÉ

I demand the head of Jokanaan.

HEROD

You are not listening. You are not listening. Suffer me to speak,
Salomé.

SALOMÉ

The head of Jokanaan.

HEROD

No, no, you would not have that. You say that to trouble me,
because I have looked at you all this evening. It is true, I have
looked at you all this evening. Your beauty troubled me. Your
beauty has grievously troubled me, and I have looked at you too
much. But I will look at you no more. Neither at things, nor at
people should one look. Only in mirrors should one look, for
mirrors do but show us masks. Oh! oh! bring wine! I thirst....
Salomé, Salomé, let us be friends. Come now!... Ah! what would I
say? What was't? Ah! I remember!... Salomé--nay, but come nearer
to me; I fear you will not hear me--Salomé, you know my white
peacocks, my beautiful white peacocks, that walk in the garden
between the myrtles and the tall cypress trees. Their beaks are
gilded with gold, and the grains that they eat are gilded with
gold also, and their feet are stained with purple. When they cry
out the rain comes, and the moon shows herself in the heavens
when they spread their tails. Two by two they walk between the
cypress trees and the black myrtles, and each has a slave to tend
it. Sometimes they fly across the trees, and anon they crouch in
the grass, and round the lake. There are not in all the world
birds so wonderful. There is no king in all the world who
possesses such wonderful birds. I am sure that Cæsar himself has
no birds so fair as my birds. I will give you fifty of my
peacocks. They will follow you whithersoever you go, and in the
midst of them you will be like the moon in the midst of a great
white cloud.... I will give them all to you. I have but a
hundred, and in the whole world there is no king who has peacocks
like unto my peacocks. But I will give them all to you. Only you
must loose me from my oath, and must not ask of me that which you
have asked of me.

                        [_He empties the cup of wine._]

SALOMÉ

Give me the head of Jokanaan.

HERODIAS

Well said, my daughter! As for you, you are ridiculous with your
peacocks.

HEROD

Be silent! You cry out always; you cry out like a beast of prey.
You must not. Your voice wearies me. Be silent, I say Salomé,
think of what you are doing. This man comes perchance from God.
He is a holy man. The finger of God has touched him. God has put
into his mouth terrible words. In the palace as in the desert God
is always with him.... At least it is possible. One does not
know. It is possible that God is for him and with him.
Furthermore, if he died some misfortune might happen to me. In
any case, he said that the day he dies a misfortune will happen
to some one. That could only be to me. Remember, I slipped in
blood when I entered. Also, I heard a beating of wings in the
air, a beating of mighty wings. These are very evil omens, and
there were others. I am sure there were others though I did not
see them. Well, Salomé, you do not wish a misfortune to happen to
me? You do not wish that. Listen to me, then.

SALOMÉ

Give me the head of Jokanaan.

HEROD

Ah! you are not listening to me. Be calm. I--I am calm. I am
quite calm. Listen. I have jewels hidden in this place--jewels
that your mother even has never seen; jewels that are marvellous.
I have a collar of pearls, set in four rows. They are like unto
moons chained with rays of silver. They are like fifty moons
caught in a golden net. On the ivory of her breast a queen has
worn it. Thou shalt be as fair as a queen when thou wearest it. I
have amethysts of two kinds, one that is black like wine, and one
that is red like wine which has been coloured with water. I have
topazes, yellow as are the eyes of tigers, and topazes that are
pink as the eyes of a wood-pigeon, and green topazes that are as
the eyes of cats. I have opals that burn always, with an icelike
flame, opals that make sad men's minds, and are fearful of the
shadows. I have onyxes like the eyeballs of a dead woman. I have
moonstones that change when the moon changes, and are wan when
they see the sun. I have sapphires big like eggs, and as blue as
blue flowers. The sea wanders within them and the moon comes
never to trouble the blue of their waves. I have chrysolites and
beryls and chrysoprases and rubies. I have sardonyx and hyacinth
stones, and stones of chalcedony, and I will give them all to
you, all, and other things will I add to them. The King of the
Indies has but even now sent me four fans fashioned from the
feathers of parrots, and the King of Numidia a garment of ostrich
feathers. I have a crystal, into which it is not lawful for a
woman to look, nor may young men behold it until they have been
beaten with rods. In a coffer of nacre I have three wondrous
turquoises. He who wears them on his forehead can imagine things
which are not, and he who carries them in his hand can make women
sterile. These are great treasures above all price. They are
treasures without price. But this is not all. In an ebony coffer
I have two cups of amber, that are like apples of gold. If an
enemy pour poison into these cups, they become like an apple of
silver. In a coffer incrusted with amber I have sandals incrusted
with glass. I have mantles that have been brought from the land
of the Seres, and bracelets decked about with carbuncles and with
jade that come from the city of Euphrates.... What desirest thou
more than this, Salomé? Tell me the thing that thou desirest, and
I will give it thee. All that thou askest I will give thee, save
one thing. I will give thee all that is mine, save one life. I
will give thee the mantle of the high priest. I will give thee
the veil of the sanctuary.

THE JEWS

Oh! oh!

SALOMÉ

Give me the head of Jokanaan.

HEROD

[_Sinking back in his seat_]. Let her be given what she asks! Of
a truth she is her mother's child! [_The first Soldier
approaches. Herodias draws from the hand of the Tetrarch the ring
of death and gives it to the Soldier, who straightway bears it to
the Executioner. The Executioner looks scared._] Who has taken my
ring? There was a ring on my right hand. Who has drunk my wine?
There was wine in my cup. It was full of wine. Someone has drunk
it! Oh! surely some evil will befall some one. [_The Executioner
goes down into the cistern._] Ah! Wherefore did I give my oath?
Kings ought never to pledge their word. If they keep it not, it
is terrible, and if they keep it, it is terrible also.

HERODIAS

My daughter has done well.

HEROD

I am sure that some misfortune will happen.

SALOMÉ

[_She leans over the cistern and listens._]

There is no sound. I hear nothing. Why does he not cry out, this
man? Ah! if any man sought to kill me, I would cry out, I would
struggle, I would not suffer.... Strike, strike, Naaman, strike,
I tell you.... No, I hear nothing. There is a silence, a terrible
silence. Ah! something has fallen upon the ground. I heard
something fall. It is the sword of the headsman. He is afraid,
this slave. He has let his sword fall. He dare not kill him. He
is a coward, this slave! Let soldiers be sent. [_She sees the
Page of Herodias and addresses him._] Come hither, thou wert the
friend of him who is dead, is it not so? Well, I tell thee, there
are not dead men enough. Go to the soldiers and bid them go down
and bring me the thing I ask, the thing the Tetrarch has promised
me, the thing that is mine. [_The Page recoils. She turns to the
soldiers._] Hither, ye soldiers. Get ye down into this cistern
and bring me the head of this man. [_The Soldiers recoil._]
Tetrarch, Tetrarch, command your soldiers that they bring me the
head of Jokanaan.

[_A huge black arm, the arm of the Executioner, comes forth from
the cistern, bearing on a silver shield the head of Jokanaan.
Salomé seizes it. Herod hides his face with his cloak. Herodias
smiles and fans herself. The Nazarenes fall on their knees and
begin to pray._]

Ah! thou wouldst not suffer me to kiss thy mouth, Jokanaan. Well!
I will kiss it now. I will bite it with my teeth as one bites a
ripe fruit. Yes, I will kiss thy mouth, Jokanaan. I said it; did
I not say it? I said it. Ah! I will kiss it now.... But,
wherefore dost thou not look at me, Jokanaan? Thine eyes that
were so terrible, so full of rage and scorn, are shut now.
Wherefore are they shut? Open thine eyes! Lift up thine eyelids,
Jokanaan! Wherefore dost thou not look at me? Art thou afraid of
me, Jokanaan, that thou wilt not look at me?... And thy tongue,
that was like a red snake darting poison, it moves no more, it
says nothing now, Jokanaan, that scarlet viper that spat its
venom upon me. It is strange, is it not? How is it that the red
viper stirs no longer?... Thou wouldst have none of me, Jokanaan.
Thou didst reject me. Thou didst speak evil words against me.
Thou didst treat me as a harlot, as a wanton, me, Salomé,
daughter of Herodias, Princess of Judæa! Well, Jokanaan, I still
live, but thou, thou art dead, and thy head belongs to me. I can
do with it what I will. I can throw it to the dogs and to the
birds of the air. That which the dogs leave, the birds of the air
shall devour.... Ah, Jokanaan, Jokanaan, thou wert the only man
that I have loved. All other men are hateful to me. But thou,
thou wert beautiful! Thy body was a column of ivory set on a
silver socket. It was a garden full of doves and of silver
lilies. It was a tower of silver decked with shields of ivory.
There was nothing in the world so white as thy body. There was
nothing in the world so black as thy hair. In the whole world
there was nothing so red as thy mouth. Thy voice was a censer
that scattered strange perfumes, and when I looked on thee I
heard a strange music. Ah! wherefore didst thou not look at me,
Jokanaan? Behind thine hands and thy curses thou didst hide thy
face. Thou didst put upon thine eyes the covering of him who
would see his God. Well, thou hast seen thy God, Jokanaan, but
me, me, thou didst never see. If thou hadst seen me thou wouldst
have loved me. I, I saw thee, Jokanaan, and I loved thee. Oh, how
I loved thee! I love thee yet, Jokanaan, I love thee only.... I
am athirst for thy beauty; I am hungry for thy body; and neither
wine nor fruits can appease my desire. What shall I do now,
Jokanaan? Neither the floods nor the great waters can quench my
passion. I was a princess, and thou didst scorn me. I was a
virgin, and thou didst take my virginity from me. I was chaste,
and thou didst fill my veins with fire.... Ah! ah! wherefore
didst thou not look at me, Jokanaan? If thou hadst looked at me
thou hadst loved me. Well I know that thou wouldst have loved me,
and the mystery of love is greater than the mystery of death.
Love only should one consider.

[Illustration: THE CLIMAX]

HEROD

She is monstrous, thy daughter, she is altogether monstrous. In
truth, what she has done is a great crime. I am sure that it was
a crime against an unknown God.

HERODIAS

I approve of what my daughter has done. And I will stay here now.

HEROD

[_Rising_].

Ah! There speaks the incestuous wife! Come! I will not stay here.
Come, I tell thee. Surely some terrible thing will befall.
Manasseh, Issachar, Ozias, put out the torches. I will not look
at things, I will not suffer things to look at me. Put out the
torches! Hide the moon! Hide the stars! Let us hide ourselves in
our palace, Herodias. I begin to be afraid.

[_The slaves put out the torches. The stars disappear. A great
black cloud crosses the moon and conceals it completely. The
stage becomes very dark. The Tetrarch begins to climb the
staircase._]

THE VOICE OF SALOMÉ

Ah! I have kissed thy mouth, Jokanaan, I have kissed thy mouth.
There was a bitter taste on thy lips. Was it the taste of
blood?... But perchance it is the taste of love.... They say that
love hath a bitter taste.... But what of that? what of that? I
have kissed thy mouth, Jokanaan.

[_A moonbeam falls on Salomé covering her with light._]

HEROD

[_Turning round and seeing Salomé_.]

Kill that woman!

[_The soldiers rush forward and crush beneath their shields
Salomé, daughter of Herodias, Princess of Judæa._]

CURTAIN.


[Illustration: CUL DE LAMPE]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Salomé, by Oscar Wilde

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SALOMÉ ***

***** This file should be named 42704-8.txt or 42704-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/2/7/0/42704/

Produced by Marc D'Hooghe at http://www.freeliterature.org
(Images generously made available by the Internet Archive.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of Salomé, by Oscar Wilde

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Salomé
       A Tragedy in One Act

Author: Oscar Wilde

Illustrator: Aubrey Beardsley

Translator: Alfred, Lord Douglas

Release Date: May 12, 2013 [EBook #42704]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SALOMÉ ***




Produced by Marc D'Hooghe at http://www.freeliterature.org
(Images generously made available by the Internet Archive.)





[Illustration: THE WOMAN IN THE MOON]

[Illustration: TITLE PAGE]


SALOMÉ

A TRAGEDY IN ONE ACT:

TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH OF

OSCAR WILDE,

WITH SIXTEEN DRAWINGS BY AUBREY BEARDSLEY

LONDON: JOHN LANE, THE BODLEY HEAD

NEW YORK: JOHN LANE COMPANY, MCMVII

[Illustration: COVER DESIGN]




    THE PERSONS OF THE PLAY.

    HEROD ANTIPAS, TETRARCH OF JUDÆA.
    JOKANAAN, THE PROPHET.
    THE YOUNG SYRIAN, CAPTAIN of the GUARD.
    TIGELLINUS, A YOUNG ROMAN.
    A CAPPADOCIAN.
    A NUBIAN.
    FIRST SOLDIER.
    SECOND SOLDIER.
    THE PAGE OF HERODIAS.
    JEWS, NAZARENES, ETC.
    A SLAVE.
    NAAMAN, THE EXECUTIONER.
    HERODIAS, WIFE OF THE TETRARCH.
    SALOMÉ, DAUGHTER OF HERODIAS.
    THE SLAVES OF SALOMÉ.




A NOTE ON "SALOMÉ."


"SALOMÉ" has made the author's name a household word wherever the
English language is not spoken. Few English plays have such a
peculiar history. Written in French in 1892 it was in full
rehearsal by Madame Bernhardt at the Palace Theatre when it was
prohibited by the Censor. Oscar Wilde immediately announced his
intention of changing his nationality, a characteristic jest,
which was only taken seriously, oddly enough, in Ireland. The
interference of the Censor has seldom been more popular or more
heartily endorsed by English critics. On its publication in book
form "Salomé" was greeted by a chorus of ridicule, and it may be
noted in passing that at least two of the more violent reviews
were from the pens of unsuccessful dramatists, while all those
whose French never went beyond Ollendorff were glad to find in
that venerable school classic an unsuspected asset in their
education--a handy missile with which to pelt "Salomé" and its
author. The correctness of the French was, of course, impugned,
although the scrip had been passed by a distinguished French
writer, to whom I have heard the whole work attributed. The
Times, while depreciating the drama, gave its author credit for
a _tour de force_, in being capable of writing a French play for
Madame Bernhardt, and this drew from him the following letter:--

     The Times, Thursday, March 2, 1893, p. 4.

      MR. OSCAR WILDE ON "SALOMÉ."

      To the Editor of The Times.

      Sir, My attention has been drawn to a review of
      "Salomé" which was published in your columns last
      week. The opinions of English critics on a French work
      of mine have, of course, little, if any, interest for
      me. I write simply to ask you to allow me to correct a
      misstatement that appears in the review in question.

      The fact that the greatest tragic actress of any stage
      now living saw in my play such beauty that she was
      anxious to produce it, to take herself the part of the
      heroine, to lend to the entire poem the glamour of her
      personality, and to my prose the music of her
      flute-like voice--this was naturally, and always will
      be, a source of pride and pleasure to me, and I look
      forward with delight to seeing Mme. Bernhardt present
      my play in Paris, that vivid centre of art, where
      religious dramas are often performed. But my play was
      in no sense of the words written for this great
      actress. I have never written a play for any actor or
      actress, nor shall I ever do so. Such work is for the
      artisan in literature--not for the artist.

      I remain, Sir, your obedient servant,

      OSCAR WILDE.



When "Salomé" was translated into English by Lord Alfred Douglas,
the illustrator, Aubrey Beardsley, shared some of the obloquy
heaped on Wilde. It is interesting that he should have found
inspiration for his finest work in a play he never admired and by
a writer he cordially disliked. The motives are, of course, made
to his hand, and never was there a more suitable material for
that odd tangent art in which there are no tactile values. The
amusing caricatures of Wilde which appear in the _Frontispiece_,
"Enter Herodias" and "The Eyes of Herod," are the only pieces of
vraisemblance in these exquisite designs. The colophon is a real
masterpiece and a witty criticism of the play as well.

On the production of "Salomé" by the New Stage Club in May,
1905,[1] the dramatic critics again expressed themselves
vehemently, vociferating their regrets that the play had been
dragged from its obscurity. The obscure drama, however, had
become for five years past part of the literature of Europe. It
is performed regularly or intermittently in Holland, Sweden,
Italy, France, and Russia, and it has been translated into every
European language, including the Czech. It forms part of the
repertoire of the German stage, where it is performed more often
than any play by any English writer except Shakespeare. Owing,
perhaps, to what I must call its _obscure_ popularity in the
continental theatres, Dr. Strauss was preparing his remarkable
opera at the very moment when there appeared the criticisms to
which I refer, and since the production of the opera in Dresden
in December, 1905, English musical journalists and correspondents
always refer to the work as founded on Wilde's drama. That is the
only way in which they can evade an awkward truth--a palpable
contravention to their own wishes and theories. The music,
however, has been set to the actual words of "Salomé" in Madame
Hedwig Lachmann's admirable translation. The words have not been
transfigured into ordinary operatic nonsense to suit the score,
or the susceptibilities of the English people. I observe that
admirers of Dr. Strauss are a little mortified that the great
master should have found an occasion for composition in a play
which they long ago consigned to oblivion and the shambles of
Aubrey Beardsley. Wilde himself, in a rhetorical period, seems to
have contemplated the possibility of his prose drama for a
musical theme. In "De Profundis" he says: "The refrains, whose
recurring motifs make 'Salomé' so like a piece of music, and bind
it together as a ballad."

He was still incarcerated in 1896, when Mons. Luigne Poë produced
the play for the first time at the Théâtre Libre in Paris, with
Lina Muntz in the title role. A rather pathetic reference to this
occasion occurs in a letter Wilde wrote to me from Reading:--

"Please say how gratified I was at the performance of my play,
and have my thanks conveyed to Luigne Poë. It is something that
at a time of disgrace and shame I should still be regarded as an
artist. I wish I could feel more pleasure, but I seem dead to all
emotions except those of anguish and despair. However, please let
Luigne Poë know that I am sensible of the honour he has done me.
He is a poet himself. Write to me in answer to this, and try and
see what Lemaitre, Bauer, and Sarcey said of 'Salomé.'"

The bias of personal friendship precludes me from praising or
defending "Salomé," even if it were necessary to do so. Nothing I
might say would add to the reputation of its detractors. Its
sources are obvious; particularly Flaubert and Maeterlinck, in
whose peculiar and original style it is an essay. A critic, for
whom I have a greater regard than many of his contemporaries,
says that "Salomé" is only a catalogue; but a catalogue can be
intensely dramatic, as we know when the performance takes place
at Christie's; few plays are more exciting than an auction in
King Street when the stars are fighting _for_ Sisera.

It has been remarked that Wilde confuses Herod the Great (_Mat._
xi. 1), Herod Antipas (_Mat._ xiv. 3), and Herod Agrippa (Acts
xiii), but the confusion is intentional, as in mediæval mystery
plays Herod is taken for a type, not an historical character, and
the criticism is about as valuable as that of people who
laboriously point out the anachronisms in Beardsley's designs.
With reference to the charge of plagiarism brought against
"Salomé" and its author, I venture to mention a personal
recollection.

Wilde complained to me one day that someone in a well-known novel
had stolen an idea of his. I pleaded in defence of the culprit
that Wilde himself was a fearless literary thief. "My dear
fellow," he said, with his usual drawling emphasis, "when I see a
monstrous tulip with four wonderful petals in someone else's
garden, I am impelled to grow a monstrous tulip with five
wonderful petals, but that is no reason why someone should grow a
tulip with only three petals." THAT WAS OSCAR WILDE.

ROBERT ROSS.


[1] A more recent performance of "Salomé" (1906), by the Literary
Theatre Club, has again produced an ebullition of rancour and
deliberate misrepresentation on the part of the dramatic critics,
the majority of whom are anxious to parade their ignorance of the
continental stage. The production was remarkable on account of
the beautiful dresses and mounting, for which Mr. Charles
Ricketts was responsible, and the marvellous impersonation of
Herod by Mr. Robert Farquharson. Wilde used to say that "Salomé"
was a mirror in which everyone could see himself. The artist,
art; the dull, dulness; the vulgar, vulgarity.



[Illustration]

LIST OF THE PICTURES BY AUBREY BEARDSLEY.

1. THE WOMAN IN THE MOON. 2. TITLE PAGE. 3. COVER DESIGN. 4. LIST
OF THE PICTURES. 5. THE PEACOCK SKIRT. 6. THE BLACK CAPE. 7. A
PLATONIC LAMENT. 8. JOHN AND SALOMÉ. 9. ENTER HERODIAS. 10. THE
EYES OF HEROD. 11. THE STOMACH DANCE. 12. THE TOILETTE OF
SALOMÉ--I. 13. THE TOILETTE OF SALOMÉ--II. 14. THE DANCER'S
REWARD. 15. THE CLIMAX. 16. CUL DE LAMPE.


       *       *       *       *       *




Cast of the Performance of "Salomé," represented in England for
the first time.

NEW STAGE CLUB.

"SALOMÉ,"

BY OSCAR WILDE.

May 10th and 13th 1905.

     A YOUNG SYRIAN CAPTAIN -- MR. HERBERT ALEXANDER.
     PAGE OF HERODIAS       -- MRS. GWENDOLEN BISHOP.
     FIRST SOLDIER          -- MR. CHARLES GEE.
     SECOND SOLDIER         -- MR. RALPH DE ROHAN.
     CAPPADOCIAN            -- MR. CHARLES DALMON.
     JOKANAAN               -- MR. VINCENT NELLO.
     NAAMAN, THE EXECUTIONER-- MR. W. EVELYN OSBORN.
     SALOMÉ                 -- Miss MILLICENT MURBY.
     SLAVE                  -- Miss CARRIE KEITH.
     HEROD                  -- MR. ROBERT FARQUHARSON.
     HERODIAS               -- Miss LOUISE SALOM.
     TIGELLINUS             -- MR. C.L. DELPH.
     SLAVE                  -- Miss STANSFELD.
     FIRST JEW              -- MR. F. STANLEY SMITH.
     SECOND JEW             -- MR. BERNHARD SMITH.
     THIRD JEW              -- MR. JOHN BATE.
     FOURTH JEW             -- STEPHEN BAGEHOT
     FIFTH JEW              -- FREDERICK LAWRENCE.

Scene--THE GREAT TERRACE OUTSIDE THE PALACE.




       *       *       *       *       *


SCENE.--_A great terrace in the Palace of Herod, set above the
banqueting-hall. Some soldiers are leaning over the balcony. To
the right there is a gigantic staircase, to the left, at the
back, an old cistern surrounded by a wall of green bronze.
Moonlight._

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

How beautiful is the Princess Salomé to-night!

THE PAGE OF HERODIAS

Look at the moon! How strange the moon seems! She is like a woman
rising from a tomb. She is like a dead woman. You would fancy she
was looking for dead things.

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

She has a strange look. She is like a little princess who wears a
yellow veil, and whose feet are of silver. She is like a princess
who has little white doves for feet. You would fancy she was
dancing.

THE PAGE OF HERODIAS

She is like a woman who is dead. She moves very slowly.

[_Noise in the banqueting-hall._]

FIRST SOLDIER

What an uproar! Who are those wild beasts howling?

SECOND SOLDIER

The Jews. They are always like that. They are disputing about
their religion.

FIRST SOLDIER

Why do they dispute about their religion?

SECOND SOLDIER

I cannot tell. They are always doing it. The Pharisees, for
instance, say that there are angels, and the Sadducees declare
that angels do not exist.

FIRST SOLDIER

I think it is ridiculous to dispute about such things.

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

How beautiful is the Princess Salomé to-night!

THE PAGE OF HERODIAS

You are always looking at her. You look at her too much. It is
dangerous to look at people in such fashion. Something terrible
may happen.


[Illustration: THE PEACOCK SKIRT]


THE YOUNG SYRIAN

She is very beautiful to-night.

FIRST SOLDIER

The Tetrarch has a sombre look.

SECOND SOLDIER

Yes; he has a sombre look.

FIRST SOLDIER

He is looking at something.

SECOND SOLDIER

He is looking at some one.

FIRST SOLDIER

At whom is he looking?

SECOND SOLDIER

I cannot tell.

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

How pale the Princess is! Never have I seen her so pale. She is
like the shadow of a white rose in a mirror of silver.

THE PAGE OF HERODIAS

You must not look at her. You look too much at her.

FIRST SOLDIER

Herodias has filled the cup of the Tetrarch.

THE CAPPADOCIAN

Is that the Queen Herodias, she who wears a black mitre sewn with
pearls, and whose hair is powdered with blue dust?

FIRST SOLDIER

Yes; that is Herodias, the Tetrarch's wife.

SECOND SOLDIER

The Tetrarch is very fond of wine. He has wine of three sorts.
One which is brought from the Island of Samothrace, and is purple
like the cloak of Cæsar.

THE CAPPADOCIAN

I have never seen Cæsar.

SECOND SOLDIER

Another that comes from a town called Cyprus, and is yellow like
gold.

THE CAPPADOCIAN

I love gold.

SECOND SOLDIER

And the third is a wine of Sicily. That wine is red like blood.

THE NUBIAN

The gods of my country are very fond of blood. Twice in the year
we sacrifice to them young men and maidens; fifty young men and
a hundred maidens. But it seems we never give them quite enough,
for they are very harsh to us.

THE CAPPADOCIAN

In my country there are no gods left. The Romans have driven them
out. There are some who say that they have hidden themselves in
the mountains, but I do not believe it. Three nights I have been
on the mountains seeking them everywhere. I did not find them.
And at last I called them by their names, and they did not come.
I think they are dead.

FIRST SOLDIER

The Jews worship a God that you cannot see.

THE CAPPADOCIAN

I cannot understand that.

FIRST SOLDIER

In fact, they only believe in things that you cannot see.

THE CAPPADOCIAN

That seems to me altogether ridiculous.

THE VOICE OF JOKANAAN

After me shall come another mightier than I. I am not worthy so
much as to unloose the latchet of his shoes. When he cometh, the
solitary places shall be glad. They shall blossom like the lily.
The eyes of the blind shall see the day, and the ears of the deaf
shall be opened. The new-born child shall put his hand upon the
dragon's lair, he shall lead the lions by their manes.

SECOND SOLDIER

Make him be silent. He is always saying ridiculous things.

FIRST SOLDIER

No, no. He is a holy man. He is very gentle, too. Every day, when
I give him to eat he thanks me.

THE CAPPADOCIAN

Who is he?

FIRST SOLDIER

A prophet.

THE CAPPADOCIAN

What is his name?

FIRST SOLDIER

Jokanaan.

THE CAPPADOCIAN

Whence comes he?

FIRST SOLDIER

From the desert, where he fed on locusts and wild honey. He was
clothed in camel's hair, and round his loins he had a leathern
belt. He was very terrible to look upon. A great multitude used
to follow him. He even had disciples.

THE CAPPADOCIAN

What is he talking of?

FIRST SOLDIER

We can never tell. Sometimes he says terrible things, but it is
impossible to understand what he says.

THE CAPPADOCIAN

May one see him?

FIRST SOLDIER

No. The Tetrarch has forbidden it.

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

The Princess has hidden her face behind her fan! Her little white
hands are fluttering like doves that fly to their dove-cots. They
are like white butterflies. They are just like white butterflies.

THE PAGE OF HERODIAS

What is that to you? Why do you look at her? You must not look at
her.... Something terrible may happen.

THE CAPPADOCIAN

[_Pointing to the cistern._]

What a strange prison!

SECOND SOLDIER

It is an old cistern.

THE CAPPADOCIAN

An old cistern! It must be very unhealthy.

SECOND SOLDIER

Oh no! For instance, the Tetrarch's brother, his elder brother,
the first husband of Herodias the Queen, was imprisoned there for
twelve years. It did not kill him. At the end of the twelve years
he had to be strangled.

THE CAPPADOCIAN

Strangled? Who dared to do that?

SECOND SOLDIER

[_Pointing to the Executioner, a huge Negro._]

That man yonder, Naaman.

THE CAPPADOCIAN

He was not afraid?

SECOND SOLDIER

Oh no! The Tetrarch sent him the ring.

THE CAPPADOCIAN

What ring?

[Illustration: THE BLACK CAPE]

SECOND SOLDIER

The death-ring. So he was not afraid.

THE CAPPADOCIAN

Yet it is a terrible thing to strangle a king.

FIRST SOLDIER

Why? Kings have but one neck, like other folk.

THE CAPPADOCIAN

I think it terrible.

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

The Princess rises! She is leaving the table! She looks very
troubled. Ah, she is coming this way. Yes, she is coming towards
us. How pale she is! Never have I seen her so pale.

THE PAGE OF HERODIAS

Do not look at her. I pray you not to look at her.

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

She is like a dove that has strayed.... She is like a narcissus
trembling in the wind.... She is like a silver flower.

[_Enter Salomé_.]

SALOMÉ

I will not stay. I cannot stay. Why does the Tetrarch look at me
all the while with his mole's eyes under his shaking eyelids? It
is strange that the husband of my mother looks at me like that.
I know not what it means. In truth, yes, I know it.

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

You have just left the feast, Princess?

SALOMÉ

How sweet the air is here! I can breathe here! Within there are
Jews from Jerusalem who are tearing each other in pieces over
their foolish ceremonies, and barbarians who drink and drink, and
spill their wine on the pavement, and Greeks from Smyrna with
painted eyes and painted cheeks, and frizzed hair curled in
twisted coils, and silent, subtle Egyptians, with long nails of
jade and russett cloaks, and Romans brutal and coarse, with their
uncouth jargon. Ah! how I loathe the Romans! They are rough and
common, and they give themselves the airs of noble lords.

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

Will you be seated, Princess?

THE PAGE OF HERODIAS

Why do you speak to her? Why do you look at her? Oh! something
terrible will happen.

SALOMÉ

How good to see the moon! She is like a little piece of money,
you would think she was a little silver flower. The moon is cold
and chaste. I am sure she is a virgin, she has a virgin's beauty.
Yes, she is a virgin. She has never defiled herself. She has
never abandoned herself to men, like the other goddesses.

THE VOICE OF JOKANAAN

The Lord hath come. The son of man hath come. The centaurs have
hidden themselves in the rivers, and the sirens have left the
rivers, and are lying beneath the leaves of the forest.

SALOMÉ

Who was that who cried out?

SECOND SOLDIER

The prophet, Princess.

SALOMÉ

Ah, the prophet! He of whom the Tetrarch is afraid?

SECOND SOLDIER

We know nothing of that, Princess. It was the prophet Jokanaan
who cried out.

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

Is it your pleasure that I bid them bring your litter, Princess?
The night is fair in the garden.

SALOMÉ

He says terrible things about my mother, does he not?

SECOND SOLDIER

We never understand what he says, Princess.

SALOMÉ

Yes; he says terrible things about her.

[_Enter a Slave_.]

THE SLAVE

Princess, the Tetrarch prays you to return to the feast.

SALOMÉ

I will not go back.

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

Pardon me, Princess, but if you do not return some misfortune may
happen.

SALOMÉ

Is he an old man, this prophet?

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

Princess, it were better to return. Suffer me to lead you in.

SALOMÉ

This prophet ... is he an old man?

FIRST SOLDIER

No, Princess, he is quite a young man.

SECOND SOLDIER

You cannot be sure. There are those who say he is Elias.

SALOMÉ

Who is Elias?

SECOND SOLDIER

A very ancient prophet of this country, Princess.

THE SLAVE

What answer may I give the Tetrarch from the Princess?

THE VOICE OF JOKANAAN

Rejoice not thou, land of Palestine, because the rod of him who
smote thee is broken. For from the seed of the serpent shall come
forth a basilisk, and that which is born of it shall devour the
birds.

SALOMÉ

What a strange voice! I would speak with him.

FIRST SOLDIER

I fear it is impossible, Princess. The Tetrarch does not wish any
one to speak with him. He has even forbidden the high priest to
speak with him.

SALOMÉ

I desire to speak with him.

FIRST SOLDIER

It is impossible, Princess.

SALOMÉ

I will speak with him.

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

Would it not be better to return to the banquet?

SALOMÉ

Bring forth this prophet.

                             [_Exit the slave._]

FIRST SOLDIER

We dare not, Princess.

SALOMÉ

[_Approaching the cistern and looking down into it._]

How black it is, down there! It must be terrible to be in so
black a pit! It is like a tomb.... [_To the soldiers._] Did you
not hear me? Bring out the prophet. I wish to see him.

SECOND SOLDIER

Princess, I beg you do not require this of us.

SALOMÉ

You keep me waiting!

FIRST SOLDIER

Princess, our lives belong to you, but we cannot do what you have
asked of us. And indeed, it is not of us that you should ask this
thing.

SALOMÉ

[_Looking at the young Syrian._]

Ah!

THE PAGE OF HERODIAS

Oh! what is going to happen? I am sure that some misfortune will
happen.

SALOMÉ

[_Going up to the young Syrian._]

You will do this tiling for me, will you not, Narraboth? You will
do this thing for me. I have always been kind to you. You will do
it for me. I would but look at this strange prophet. Men have
talked so much of him. Often have I heard the Tetrarch talk of
him. I think the Tetrarch is afraid of him. Are you, even you,
also afraid of him, Narraboth?

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

I fear him not, Princess; there is no man I fear. But the
Tetrarch has formally forbidden that any man should raise the
cover of this well.

SALOMÉ

You will do this thing for me, Narraboth, and to-morrow when I
pass in my litter beneath the gateway of the idol-sellers I will
let fall for you a little flower, a little green flower.

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

Princess, I cannot, I cannot.

SALOMÉ

[_Smiling_.]

You will do this thing for me, Narraboth. You know that you will
do this thing for me. And to-morrow when I pass in my litter by
the bridge of the idol-buyers, I will look at you through the
muslin veils, I will look at you, Narraboth, it may be I will
smile at you. Look at me, Narraboth, look at me. Ah! you know
that you will do what I ask of you. You know it well.... I know
that you will do this thing.

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

[_Signing to the third soldier._]

Let the prophet come forth.... The Princess Salomé desires to see
him.

SALOMÉ

Ah!

THE PAGE OF HERODIAS

Oh! How strange the moon looks. You would think it was the hand
of a dead woman who is seeking to cover herself with a shroud.

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

She has a strange look! She is like a little princess, whose eyes
are eyes of amber. Through the clouds of muslin she is smiling
like a little princess.

[_The prophet comes out of the cistern. Salomé looks at him and
steps slowly back._]

[Illustration: A PLATONIC LAMENT]

JOKANAAN

Where is he whose cup of abominations is now full? Where is he,
who in a robe of silver shall one day die in the face of all the
people? Bid him come forth, that he may hear the voice of him who
hath cried in the waste places and in the houses of kings.

SALOMÉ

Of whom is he speaking?

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

You can never tell, Princess.

JOKANAAN

Where is she who having seen the images of men painted on the
walls, the images of the Chaldeans limned in colours, gave
herself up unto the lust of her eyes, and sent ambassadors into
Chaldea?

SALOMÉ

It is of my mother that he speaks.

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

Oh, no, Princess.

SALOMÉ

Yes; it is of my mother that he speaks.

JOKANAAN

Where is she who gave herself unto the Captains of Assyria, who
have baldricks on their loins, and tiaras of divers colours on
their heads? Where is she who hath given herself to the young men
of Egypt, who are clothed in fine linen and purple, whose shields
are of gold, whose helmets are of silver, whose bodies are
mighty? Bid her rise up from the bed of her abominations, from
the bed of her incestuousness, that she may hear the words of him
who prepareth the way of the Lord, that she may repent her of her
iniquities. Though she will never repent, but will stick fast in
her abominations; bid her come, for the fan of the Lord is in His
hand.

SALOMÉ

But he is terrible, he is terrible!

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

Do not stay here, Princess, I beseech you.

SALOMÉ

It is his eyes above all that are terrible. They are like black
holes burned by torches in a Tyrian tapestry. They are like black
caverns where dragons dwell. They are like the black caverns of
Egypt in which the dragons make their lairs. They are like black
lakes troubled by fantastic moons.... Do you think he will speak
again?

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

Do not stay here, Princess. I pray you do not stay here.

SALOMÉ

How wasted he is! He is like a thin ivory statue. He is like an
image of silver. I am sure he is chaste as the moon is. He is
like a moonbeam, like a shaft of silver. His flesh must be cool
like ivory. I would look closer at him.

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

No, no, Princess.

SALOMÉ

I must look at him closer.

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

Princess! Princess!

JOKANAAN

Who is this woman who is looking at me? I will not have her look
at me. Wherefore doth she look at me with her golden eyes, under
her gilded eyelids? I know not who she is. I do not wish to know
who she is. Bid her begone. It is not to her that I would speak.

SALOMÉ

I am Salomé, daughter of Herodias, Princess of Judæa.

JOKANAAN

Back! daughter of Babylon! Come not near the chosen of the Lord.
Thy mother hath filled the earth with the wine of her iniquities,
and the cry of her sins hath come up to the ears of God.

SALOMÉ

Speak again, Jokanaan. Thy voice is wine to me.

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

Princess! Princess! Princess!

SALOMÉ

Speak again! Speak again, Jokanaan, and tell me what I must do.

JOKANAAN

Daughter of Sodom, come not near me! But cover thy face with a
veil, and scatter ashes upon thine head, and get thee to the
desert and seek out the Son of Man.

SALOMÉ

Who is he, the Son of Man? Is he as beautiful as thou art,
Jokanaan?

JOKANAAN

Get thee behind me! I hear in the palace the beating of the wings
of the angel of death.

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

Princess, I beseech thee to go within.

JOKANAAN

Angel of the Lord God, what dost thou here with thy sword? Whom
seekest thou in this foul palace? The day of him who shall die in
a robe of silver has not yet come.

[Illustration: JOHN AND SALOMÉ]

SALOMÉ

Jokanaan!

JOKANAAN

Who speaketh?

SALOMÉ

Jokanaan, I am amorous of thy body! Thy body is white like the
lilies of a field that the mower hath never mowed. Thy body is
white like the snows that lie on the mountains, like the snows
that lie on the mountains of Judæa, and come down into the
valleys. The roses in the garden of the Queen of Arabia are not
so white as thy body. Neither the roses in the garden of the
Queen of Arabia, the perfumed garden of spices of the Queen of
Arabia, nor the feet of the dawn when they light on the leaves,
nor the breast of the moon when she lies on the breast of the
sea.... There is nothing in the world so white as thy body. Let
me touch thy body.

JOKANAAN

Back! daughter of Babylon! By woman came evil into the world.
Speak not to me. I will not listen to thee. I listen but to the
voice of the Lord God.

SALOMÉ

Thy body is hideous. It is like the body of a leper. It is like a
plastered wall where vipers have crawled; like a plastered wall
where the scorpions have made their nest. It is like a whitened
sepulchre full of loathsome things. It is horrible, thy body is
horrible. It is of thy hair that I am enamoured, Jokanaan. Thy
hair is like clusters of grapes, like the clusters of black
grapes that hang from the vine-trees of Edom in the land of the
Edomites. Thy hair is like the cedars of Lebanon, like the great
cedars of Lebanon that give their shade to the lions and to the
robbers who would hide themselves by day. The long black nights,
when the moon hides her face, when the stars are afraid, are not
so black. The silence that dwells in the forest is not so black.
There is nothing in the world so black as thy hair.... Let me
touch thy hair.

JOKANAAN

Back, daughter of Sodom! Touch me not. Profane not the temple of
the Lord God.

SALOMÉ

Thy hair is horrible. It is covered with mire and dust. It is
like a crown of thorns which they have placed on thy forehead. It
is like a knot of black serpents writhing round thy neck. I love
not thy hair.... It is thy mouth that I desire, Jokanaan. Thy
mouth is like a band of scarlet on a tower of ivory. It is like a
pomegranate cut with a knife of ivory. The pomegranate-flowers
that blossom in the gardens of Tyre, and are redder than roses,
are not so red. The red blasts of trumpets that herald the
approach of kings, and make afraid the enemy, are not so red.
Thy mouth is redder than the feet of those who tread the wine in
the wine-press. Thy mouth is redder than the feet of the doves
who haunt the temples and are fed by the priests. It is redder
than the feet of him who cometh from a forest where he hath slain
a lion, and seen gilded tigers. Thy mouth is like a branch of
coral that fishers have found in the twilight of the sea, the
coral that they keep for the kings!... It is like the vermilion
that the Moabites find in the mines of Moab, the vermilion that
the kings take from them. It is like the bow of the King of the
Persians, that is painted with vermilion, and is tipped with
coral. There is nothing in the world so red as thy mouth.... Let
me kiss thy mouth.

JOKANAAN

Never! daughter of Babylon! Daughter of Sodom! Never.

SALOMÉ

I will kiss thy mouth, Jokanaan. I will kiss thy mouth.

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

Princess, Princess, thou who art like a garden of myrrh, thou who
art the dove of all doves, look not at this man, look not at him!
Do not speak such words to him. I cannot suffer them....
Princess, Princess, do not speak these things.

SALOMÉ

I will kiss thy mouth, Jokanaan.

THE YOUNG SYRIAN

Ah! [_He kills himself and falls between Salomé and Jokanaan._]

THE PAGE OF HERODIAS

The young Syrian has slain himself! The young captain has slain
himself! He has slain himself who was my friend! I gave him a
little box of perfumes and ear-rings wrought in silver, and now
he has killed himself! Ah, did he not foretell that some
misfortune would happen? I, too, foretold it, and it has
happened. Well I knew that the moon was seeking a dead thing, but
I knew not that it was he whom she sought. Ah! why did I not hide
him from the moon? If I had hidden him in a cavern she would not
have seen him.

FIRST SOLDIER

Princess, the young captain has just killed himself.

SALOMÉ

Let me kiss thy mouth, Jokanaan.

JOKANAAN

Art thou not afraid, daughter of Herodias? Did I not tell thee
that I had heard in the palace the beatings of the wings of the
angel of death, and hath he not come, the angel of death?

[Illustration: ENTER HERODIAS]

SALOMÉ

Let me kiss thy mouth.

JOKANAAN

Daughter of adultery, there is but one who can save thee, it is
He of whom I spake. Go seek Him. He is in a boat on the sea of
Galilee, and He talketh with His disciples. Kneel down on the
shore of the sea, and call unto Him by His name. When He cometh
to thee (and to all who call on Him He cometh), bow thyself at
His feet and ask of Him the remission of thy sins.

SALOMÉ

Let me kiss thy mouth.

JOKANAAN

Cursed be thou! daughter of an incestuous mother, be thou
accursed!

SALOMÉ

I will kiss thy mouth, Jokanaan.

JOKANAAN

I do no wish to look at thee. I will not look at thee, thou art
accursed, Salomé, thou art accursed. [_He goes down into the
cistern._]

SALOMÉ

I will kiss thy mouth, Jokanaan; I will kiss thy mouth.

FIRST SOLDIER

We must bear away the body to another place. The Tetrarch does
not care to see dead bodies, save the bodies of those whom he
himself has slain.

THE PAGE OF HERODIAS

He was my brother, and nearer to me than a brother. I gave him a
little box full of perfumes, and a ring of agate that he wore
always on his hand. In the evening we used to walk by the river,
among the almond trees, and he would tell me of the things of his
country. He spake ever very low. The sound of his voice was like
the sound of the flute, of a flute player. Also he much loved to
gaze at himself in the river. I used to reproach him for that.

SECOND SOLDIER

You are right; we must hide the body. The Tetrarch must not see
it.

FIRST SOLDIER

The Tetrarch will not come to this place. He never comes on the
terrace. He is too much afraid of the prophet.

[_Enter Herod, Herodias, and all the Court._]

HEROD

Where is Salomé? Where is the Princess? Why did she not return to
the banquet as I commanded her? Ah! there she is!

HERODIAS

You must not look at her! You are always looking at her!

HEROD

The moon has a strange look to-night. Has she not a strange look?
She is like a mad woman, a mad woman who is seeking everywhere
for lovers. She is naked too. She is quite naked. The clouds are
seeking to clothe her nakedness, but she will not let them. She
shows herself naked in the sky. She reels through the clouds like
a drunken woman.... I am sure she is looking for lovers. Does she
not reel like a drunken woman? She is like a mad woman, is she
not?

HERODIAS

No; the moon is like the moon, that is all. Let us go within....
You have nothing to do here.

HEROD

I will stay here! Manesseh, lay carpets there. Light torches,
bring forth the ivory tables, and the tables of jasper. The air
here is delicious. I will drink more wine with my guests. We must
show all honours to the ambassadors of Cæsar.

HERODIAS

It is not because of them that you remain.

HEROD

Yes; the air is delicious. Come, Herodias, our guests await us.
Ah! I have slipped! I have slipped in blood! It is an ill omen.
It is a very evil omen. Wherefore is there blood here?... and
this body, what does this body here? Think you I am like the King
of Egypt, who gives no feast to his guests but that he shows them
a corpse? Whose is it? I will not look on it.

FIRST SOLDIER

It is our captain, sire. He is the young Syrian whom you made
captain only three days ago.

HEROD

I gave no order that he should be slain.

SECOND SOLDIER

He killed himself, sire.

HEROD

For what reason? I had made him captain.

SECOND SOLDIER

We do not know, sire. But he killed himself.

HEROD

That seems strange to me. I thought it was only the Roman
philosophers who killed themselves. Is it not true, Tigellinus,
that the philosophers at Rome kill themselves?

TIGELLINUS

There are some who kill themselves, sire. They are the Stoics.
The Stoics are coarse people. They are ridiculous people. I
myself regard them as being perfectly ridiculous.

HEROD

I also. It is ridiculous to kill oneself.

TIGELLINUS

Everybody at Rome laughs at them. The Emperor has written a
satire against them. It is recited everywhere.

HEROD

Ah! he has written a satire against them? Cæsar is wonderful. He
can do everything.... It is strange that the young Syrian has
killed himself. I am sorry he has killed himself. I am very
sorry; for he was fair to look upon. He was even very fair. He
had very languorous eyes. I remember that I saw that he looked
languorously at Salomé. Truly, I thought he looked too much at
her.

HERODIAS

There are others who look at her too much.

HEROD

His father was a king. I drove him from his kingdom. And you made
a slave of his mother, who was a queen, Herodias. So he was here
as my guest, as it were, and for that reason I made him my
captain. I am sorry he is dead. Ho! why have you left the body
here? I will not look at it--away with it! [_They take away the
body._] It is cold here. There is a wind blowing. Is there not a
wind blowing?

HERODIAS

No; there is no wind.

HEROD

I tell you there is a wind that blows.... And I hear in the air
something that is like the beating of wings, like the beating of
vast wings. Do you not hear it?

HERODIAS

I hear nothing.

HEROD

I hear it no longer. But I heard it. It was the blowing of the
wind, no doubt. It has passed away. But no, I hear it again. Do
you not hear it? It is just like the beating of wings.

HERODIAS

I tell you there is nothing. You are ill. Let us go within.

HEROD

I am not ill. It is your daughter who is sick. She has the mien
of a sick person. Never have I seen her so pale.

HERODIAS

I have told you not to look at her.

HEROD

Pour me forth wine [_wine is brought_]. Salomé, come drink a
little wine with me. I have here a wine that is exquisite. Cæsar
himself sent it me. Dip into it thy little red lips, that I may
drain the cup.

SALOMÉ

I am not thirsty, Tetrarch.

HEROD

You hear how she answers me, this daughter of yours?

HERODIAS

She does right. Why are you always gazing at her?

HEROD

Bring me ripe fruits [_fruits are brought_]. Salomé, come and eat
fruit with me. I love to see in a fruit the mark of thy little
teeth. Bite but a little of this fruit and then I will eat what
is left.

SALOMÉ

I am not hungry, Tetrarch.

HEROD

[_To Herodias._] You see how you have brought up this daughter of
yours.

HERODIAS

My daughter and I come of a royal race. As for thee, thy father
was a camel driver! He was also a robber!

HEROD

Thou liest!

HERODIAS

Thou knowest well that it is true.

HEROD

Salomé, come and sit next to me. I will give thee the throne of
thy mother.

SALOMÉ

I am not tired, Tetrarch.

HERODIAS

You see what she thinks of you.

HEROD

Bring me--what is it that I desire? I forget. Ah! ah! I remember.

[Illustration: THE EYES OF HEROD]

THE VOICE OF JOKANAAN

Lo! the time is come! That which I foretold has come to pass,
saith the Lord God. Lo! the day of which I spoke.

HERODIAS

Bid him be silent. I will not listen to his voice. This man is
for ever vomiting insults against me.

HEROD

He has said nothing against you. Besides, he is a very great
prophet.

HERODIAS

I do not believe in prophets. Can a man tell what will come to
pass? No man knows it. Moreover, he is for ever insulting me. But
I think you are afraid of him.... I know well that you are afraid
of him.

HEROD

I am not afraid of him. I am afraid of no man.

HERODIAS

I tell you, you are afraid of him. If you are not afraid of him
why do you not deliver him to the Jews, who for these six months
past have been clamouring for him?

A JEW

Truly, my lord, it were better to deliver him into our hands.

HEROD

Enough on this subject. I have already given you my answer. I
will not deliver him into your hands. He is a holy man. He is a
man who has seen God.

A JEW

That cannot be. There is no man who hath seen God since the
prophet Elias. He is the last man who saw God. In these days God
doth not show Himself. He hideth Himself. Therefore great evils
have come upon the land.

ANOTHER JEW

Verily, no man knoweth if Elias the prophet did indeed see God.
Peradventure it was but the shadow of God that he saw.

A THIRD JEW

God is at no time hidden. He showeth Himself at all times and in
everything. God is in what is evil even as He is in what is good.

A FOURTH JEW

That must not be said. It is a very dangerous doctrine. It is a
doctrine that cometh from the schools at Alexandria, where men
teach the philosophy of the Greeks. And the Greeks are Gentiles:
They are not even circumcised.

A FIFTH JEW

No one can tell how God worketh. His ways are very mysterious. It
may be that the things which we call evil are good, and that the
things which we call good are evil. There is no knowledge of any
thing. We must needs submit to everything, for God is very
strong. He breaketh in pieces the strong together with the weak,
for He regardeth not any man.

FIRST JEW

Thou speaketh truly. God is terrible; He breaketh the strong and
the weak as a man brays corn in a mortar. But this man hath never
seen God. No man hath seen God since the prophet Elias.

HERODIAS

Make them be silent. They weary me.

HEROD

But I have heard it said that Jokanaan himself is your prophet
Elias.

THE JEW

That cannot be. It is more than three hundred years since the
days of the prophet Elias.

HEROD

There be some who say that this man is the prophet Elias..

A NAZARENE

I am sure that he is the prophet Elias.

THE JEW

Nay, but he is not the prophet Elias.

THE VOICE OF JOKANAAN

So the day is come, the day of the Lord, and I hear upon the
mountains the feet of Him who shall be the Saviour of the world.

HEROD

What does that mean? The Saviour of the world.

TIGELLINUS

It is a title that Cæsar takes.

HEROD

But Cæsar is not coming into Judæa. Only yesterday I received
letters from Rome. They contained nothing concerning this matter.
And you, Tigellinus, who were at Rome during the winter, you
heard nothing concerning this matter, did you?

TIGELLINUS

Sire, I heard nothing concerning the matter. I was explaining the
title. It is one of Cæsar's titles.

HEROD

But Cæsar cannot come. He is too gouty. They say that his feet
are like the feet of an elephant. Also there are reasons of
State. He who leaves Rome loses Rome. He will not come. Howbeit,
Cæsar is lord, he will come if he wishes. Nevertheless, I do not
think he will come.

FIRST NAZARENE

It was not concerning Cæsar that the prophet spake these words,
sire.

HEROD

Not of Cæsar?

FIRST NAZARENE

No, sire.

HEROD

Concerning whom then did he speak?

FIRST NAZARENE

Concerning Messias who has come.

A JEW

Messiah hath not come.

FIRST NAZARENE

He hath come, and everywhere He worketh miracles.

HERODIAS Ho! ho! miracles! I do not believe in miracles. I have
seen too many. [_To the page._] My fan!

FIRST NAZARENE

This man worketh true miracles. Thus, at a marriage which took
place in a little town of Galilee, a town of some importance, He
changed water into wine. Certain persons who were present related
it to me. Also He healed two lepers that were seated before the
Gate of Capernaum simply by touching them.

SECOND NAZARENE

Nay, it was blind men that he healed at Capernaum.

FIRST NAZARENE

Nay; they were lepers. But He hath healed blind people also, and
He was seen on a mountain talking with angels.

A SADDUCEE

Angels do not exist.

A PHARISEE

Angels exist, but I do not believe that this Man has talked with
them.

FIRST NAZARENE

He was seen by a great multitude of people talking with angels.

A SADDUCEE

Not with angels.

HERODIAS

How these men weary me! They are ridiculous! [_To the page._]
Well! my fan! [_The page gives her the fan._] You have a
dreamer's look; you must not dream. It is only sick people who
dream. [_She strikes the page with her fan._]

SECOND NAZARENE

There is also the miracle of the daughter of Jairus.

FIRST NAZARENE

Yes, that is sure. No man can gainsay it.

HERODIAS

These men are mad. They have looked too long on the moon. Command
them to be silent.

HEROD

What is this miracle of the daughter of Jairus?

FIRST NAZARENE

The daughter of Jairus was dead. He raised her from the dead.

HEROD

He raises the dead?

FIRST NAZARENE

Yea, sire, He raiseth the dead.

HEROD

I do not wish Him to do that. I forbid Him to do that. I allow no
man to raise the dead. This Man must be found and told that I
forbid Him to raise the dead. Where is this Man at present?

SECOND NAZARENE

He is in every place, my lord, but it is hard to find Him.

FIRST NAZARENE

It is said that He is now in Samaria.

A JEW

It is easy to see that this is not Messias, if He is in Samaria.
It is not to the Samaritans that Messias shall come. The
Samaritans are accursed. They bring no offerings to the Temple.

SECOND NAZARENE

He left Samaria a few days since. I think that at the present
moment He is in the neighbourhood of Jerusalem.

FIRST NAZARENE

No; He is not there. I have just come from Jerusalem. For two
months they have had no tidings of Him.

HEROD

No matter! But let them find Him, and tell Him from me, I will
not allow him to raise the dead! To change water into wine, to
heal the lepers and the blind.... He may do these things if He
will. I say nothing against these things. In truth I hold it a
good deed to heal a leper. But I allow no man to raise the dead.
It would be terrible if the dead came back.

[Illustration: THE STOMACH DANCE]

THE VOICE OF JOKANAAN

Ah! the wanton! The harlot! Ah! the daughter of Babylon with her
golden eyes and her gilded eyelids!--Thus saith the Lord God, Let
there come up against her a multitude of men. Let the people take
stones and stone her....

HERODIAS

Command him to be silent.

THE VOICE OF JOKANAAN

Let the war captains pierce her with their swords, let them crush
her beneath their shields.

HERODIAS

Nay, but it is infamous.

THE VOICE OF JOKANAAN

It is thus that I will wipe out all wickedness from the earth,
and that all women shall learn not to imitate her abominations.

HERODIAS

You hear what he says against me? You allow him to revile your
wife?

HEROD

He did not speak your name.

HERODIAS

What does that matter? You know well that it is I whom he seeks
to revile. And I am your wife, am I not?

HEROD

Of a truth, dear and noble Herodias, you are my wife, and before
that you were the wife of my brother.

HERODIAS

It was you who tore me from his arms.

HEROD

Of a truth I was stronger.... But let us not talk of that matter.
I do not desire to talk of it. It is the cause of the terrible
words that the prophet has spoken. Peradventure on account of it
a misfortune will come. Let us not speak of this matter. Noble
Herodias, we are not mindful of our guests. Fill thou my cup, my
well-beloved. Fill with wine the great goblets of silver, and the
great goblets of glass. I will drink to Cæsar. There are Romans
here, we must drink to Cæsar.

ALL

Cæsar! Cæsar!

HEROD

Do you not see your daughter, how pale she is?

HERODIAS

What is it to you if she be pale or not?

HEROD

Never have I seen her so pale.

HERODIAS

You must not look at her.

THE VOICE OF JOKANAAN

In that day the sun shall become black like sackcloth of hair,
and the moon shall become like blood, and the stars of the
heavens shall fall upon the earth like ripe figs that fall from
the fig-tree, and the kings of the earth shall be afraid.

HERODIAS

Ah! Ah! I should like to see that day of which he speaks, when
the moon shall become like blood, and when the stars shall fall
upon the earth like ripe figs. This prophet talks like a drunken
man ... but I cannot suffer the sound of his voice. I hate his
voice. Command him to be silent.

HEROD

I will not. I cannot understand what it is that he saith, but it
may be an omen.

HERODIAS

I do not believe in omens. He speaks like a drunken man.

HEROD

It may be he is drunk with the wine of God.

HERODIAS

What wine is that, the wine of God? From what vineyards is it
gathered? In what wine-press may one find it?

HEROD

[_From this point he looks all the while at Salomé._]

Tigellinus, when you were at Rome of late, did the Emperor speak
with you: on the subject of...?

TIGELLINUS

On what subject, sire?

HEROD

On what subject? Ah! I asked you a question, did I not? I have
forgotten what I would have asked you.

HERODIAS

You are looking again at my daughter. You must not look at her. I
have already said so.

HEROD

You say nothing else.

HERODIAS

I say it again.

HEROD

And that restoration of the Temple about which they have talked
so much, will anything be done? They say the veil of the
Sanctuary has disappeared, do they not?

HERODIAS

It was thyself didst steal it. Thou speakest at random. I will
not stay here. Let us go within.

HEROD

Dance for me, Salomé.

HERODIAS

I will not have her dance.

SALOMÉ

I have no desire to dance, Tetrarch.

HEROD

Salomé, daughter of Herodias, dance for me.

HERODIAS

Let her alone.

HEROD

I command thee to dance, Salomé.

SALOMÉ

I will not dance, Tetrarch.

HERODIAS

[_Laughing_].

You see how she obeys you.

HEROD

What is it to me whether she dance or not? It is naught to me.
To-night I am happy, I am exceeding happy. Never have I been so
happy.

FIRST SOLDIER

The Tetrarch has a sombre look. Has he not a sombre look?

SECOND SOLDIER

Yes, he has a sombre look.

HEROD

Wherefore should I not be happy? Cæsar, who is lord of the world,
who is lord of all things, loves me well. He has just sent me
most precious gifts. Also he has promised me to summon to Rome
the King of Cappadocia, who is my enemy. It may be that at Rome
he will crucify him, for he is able to do all things that he
wishes. Verily, Cæsar is lord. Thus you see I have a right to be
happy. Indeed, I am happy. I have never been so happy. There is
nothing in the world that can mar my happiness.

THE VOICE OF JOKANAAN

He shall be seated on this throne. He shall be clothed in scarlet
and purple. In his hand he shall bear a golden cup full of his
blasphemies. And the angel of the Lord shall smite him. He shall
be eaten of worms.

HERODIAS

You hear what he says about you. He says that you will be eaten
of worms.

HEROD

It is not of me that he speaks. He speaks never against me. It is
of the King of Cappadocia that he speaks; the King of Cappadocia,
who is mine enemy. It is he who shall be eaten of worms. It is
not I. Never has he spoken word against me, this prophet, save
that I sinned in taking to wife the wife of my brother. It may be
he is right. For, of a truth, you are sterile.

HERODIAS

I am sterile, I? You say that, you that are ever looking at my
daughter, you that would have her dance for your pleasure? It is
absurd to say that. I have borne a child. You have gotten no
child, no, not even from one of your slaves. It is you who are
sterile, not I.

HEROD

Peace, woman! I say that you are sterile. You have borne me no
child, and the prophet says that our marriage is not a true
marriage. He says that it is an incestuous marriage, a marriage
that will bring evils.... I fear he is right; I am sure that he
is right. But it is not the moment to speak of such things. I
would be happy at this moment. Of a truth, I am happy. There is
nothing I lack.

HERODIAS

I am glad you are of so fair a humour to-night. It is not your
custom. But it is late. Let us go within. Do not forget that we
hunt at sunrise. All honours must be shown to Cæsar's
ambassadors, must they not?

SECOND SOLDIER

What a sombre look the Tetrarch wears.

FIRST SOLDIER

Yes, he wears a sombre look.

HEROD

Salomé, Salomé, dance for me. I pray thee dance for me. I am sad
to-night. Yes; I am passing sad to-night. When I came hither I
slipped in blood, which is an evil omen; and I heard, I am sure I
heard in the air a beating of wings, a beating of giant wings. I
cannot tell what they mean ... I am sad to-night. Therefore dance
for me. Dance for me, Salomé, I beseech you. If you dance for me
you may ask of me what you will, and I will give it you, even
unto the half of my kingdom.

[Illustration: THE TOILETTE OF SALOMÉ--I]

SALOMÉ

[_Rising._] Will you indeed give me whatsoever I shall ask,
Tetrarch?

HERODIAS

Do not dance, my daughter.

HEROD

Everything, even the half of my kingdom.

SALOMÉ

You swear it, Tetrarch?

HEROD

I swear it, Salomé.

HERODIAS

Do not dance, my daughter.

SALOMÉ

By what will you swear, Tetrarch?

HEROD

By my life, by my crown, by my gods. Whatsoever you desire I will
give it you, even to the half of my kingdom, if you will but
dance for me. O, Salomé, Salomé, dance for me!

SALOMÉ

You have sworn, Tetrarch.

HEROD

I have sworn, Salomé.

SALOMÉ

All this I ask, even the half of your kingdom.

HERODIAS

My daughter, do not dance.

HEROD

Even to the half of my kingdom. Thou wilt be passing fair as a
queen, Salomé, if it please thee to ask for the half of my
kingdom. Will she not be fair as a queen? Ah! it is cold here!
There is an icy wind, and I hear ... wherefore do I hear in the
air this beating of wings? Ah! one might fancy a bird, a huge
black bird that hovers over the terrace. Why can I not see it,
this bird? The beat of its wings is terrible. The breath of the
wind of its wings is terrible. It is a chill wind. Nay, but it is
not cold, it is hot. I am choking. Pour water on my hands. Give
me snow to eat. Loosen my mantle. Quick! quick! loosen my mantle.
Nay, but leave it. It is my garland that hurts me, my garland of
roses. The flowers are like fire. They have burned my forehead.
[_He tears the wreath from his head and throws it on the table._]
Ah! I can breathe now. How red those petals are! They are like
stains of blood on the cloth. That does not matter. You must not
find symbols in everything you see. It makes life impossible. It
were better to say that stains of blood are as lovely as rose
petals. It were better far to say that.... But we will not speak
of this. Now I am happy, I am passing happy. Have I not the
right to be happy? Your daughter is going to dance for me. Will
you not dance for me, Salomé? You have promised to dance for me.

[Illustration: THE TOILETTE OF SALOMÉ--II]

HERODIAS

I will not have her dance.

SALOMÉ

I will dance for you, Tetrarch.

HEROD

You hear what your daughter says. She is going to dance for me.
You do well to dance for me, Salomé. And when you have danced for
me, forget not to ask of me whatsoever you wish. Whatsoever you
wish I will give it you, even to the half of my kingdom. I have
sworn it, have I not?

SALOMÉ

You have sworn it, Tetrarch.

HEROD

And I have never broken my word. I am not of those who break
their oaths. I know not how to lie. I am the slave of my word,
and my word is the word of a king. The King of Cappadocia always
lies, but he is no true king. He is a coward. Also he owes me
money that he will not repay. He has even insulted my
ambassadors. He has spoken words that were wounding. But Cæsar
will crucify him when he comes to Rome. I am sure that Cæsar will
crucify him. And if not, yet will he die, being eaten of worms.
The prophet has prophesied it. Well! wherefore dost thou tarry,
Salomé?

SALOMÉ

I am awaiting until my slaves bring perfumes to me and the seven
veils, and take off my sandals. [_Slaves bring perfumes and the
seven veils, and take off the sandals of Salomé._]

HEROD

Ah, you are going to dance with naked feet. 'Tis well!--'Tis
well. Your little feet will be like white doves. They will be
like little white flowers that dance upon the trees.... No, no,
she is going to dance on blood. There is blood spilt on the
ground. She must not dance on blood. It were an evil omen.

HERODIAS

What is it to you if she dance on blood? Thou hast waded deep
enough therein....

HEROD

What is it to me? Ah! look at the moon! She has become red. She
has become red as blood. Ah! the prophet prophesied truly. He
prophesied that the moon would become red as blood. Did he not
prophesy it? All of you heard him. And now the moon has become
red as blood. Do ye not see it?

HERODIAS

Oh, yes, I see it well, and the stars are falling like ripe figs,
are they not? and the sun is becoming black like sackcloth of
hair, and the kings of the earth are afraid. That at least one
can see. The prophet, for once in his life, was right, the kings
of the earth are afraid.... Let us go within. You are sick. They
will say at Rome that you are mad. Let us go within, I tell you.

THE VOICE OF JOKANAAN

Who is this who cometh from Edom, who is this who cometh from
Bozra, whose raiment is dyed with purple, who shineth in the
beauty of his garments, who walketh mighty in his greatness?
Wherefore is thy raiment stained with scarlet?

HERODIAS

Let us go within. The voice of that man maddens me. I will not
have my daughter dance while he is continually crying out. I will
not have her dance while you look at her in this fashion. In a
word, I will not have her dance.

HEROD

Do not rise, my wife, my queen, it will avail thee nothing. I
will not go within till she hath danced. Dance, Salomé, dance for
me.

HERODIAS

Do not dance, my daughter.

SALOMÉ

I am ready, Tetrarch.

[_Salomé dances the dance of the seven veils._]

HEROD

Ah! wonderful! wonderful! You see that she has danced for me,
your daughter. Come near, Salomé, come near, that I may give you
your reward. Ah! I pay the dancers well. I will pay thee royally.
I will give thee whatsoever thy soul desireth. What wouldst thou
have? Speak.

SALOMÉ

[_Kneeling_].

I would that they presently bring me in a silver charger....

HEROD

[Laughing.]

In a silver charger? Surely yes, in a silver charger. She is
charming, is she not? What is it you would have in a silver
charger, O sweet and fair Salomé, you who are fairer than all the
daughters of Judæa? What would you have them bring thee in a
silver charger? Tell me. Whatsoever it may be, they shall give it
you. My treasures belong to thee. What is it, Salomé?

SALOMÉ

[_Rising_].

The head of Jokanaan.

HERODIAS

Ah! that is well said, my daughter.

HEROD

No, no!

HERODIAS

That is well said, my daughter.

HEROD

No, no, Salomé. You do not ask me that. Do not listen to your
mother's voice. She is ever giving you evil counsel. Do not heed
her.

SALOMÉ

I do not heed my mother. It is for mine own pleasure that I ask
the head of Jokanaan in a silver charger. You hath sworn, Herod.
Forget not that you have sworn an oath.

HEROD

I know it. I have sworn by my gods. I know it well. But I pray
you, Salomé, ask of me something else. Ask of me the half of my
kingdom, and I will give it you. But ask not of me what you have
asked.

SALOMÉ

I ask of you the head of Jokanaan.

HEROD

No, no, I do not wish it.

SALOMÉ

You have sworn, Herod.

HERODIAS

Yes, you have sworn. Everybody heard you. You swore it before
everybody.

HEROD

Be silent! It is not to you I speak.

HERODIAS

My daughter has done well to ask the head of Jokanaan. He has
covered me with insults. He has said monstrous things against me.
One can see that she loves her mother well. Do not yield, my
daughter. He has sworn, he has sworn.

HEROD

Be silent, speak not to me!... Come, Salomé, be reasonable. I
have never been hard to you. I have ever loved you.... It may be
that I have loved you too much. Therefore ask not this thing of
me. This is a terrible thing, an awful thing to ask of me.
Surely, I think thou art jesting. The head of a man that is cut
from his body is ill to look upon, is it not? It is not meet
that the eyes of a virgin should look upon such a thing. What
pleasure could you have in it? None. No, no, it is not what you
desire. Hearken to me. I have an emerald, a great round emerald,
which Cæsar's minion sent me. If you look through this emerald
you can see things which happen at a great distance. Cæsar
himself carries such an emerald when he goes to the circus. But
my emerald is larger. I know well that it is larger. It is the
largest emerald in the whole world. You would like that, would
you not? Ask it of me and I will give it you.

[Illustration: THE DANCER'S REWARD]

SALOMÉ

I demand the head of Jokanaan.

HEROD

You are not listening. You are not listening. Suffer me to speak,
Salomé.

SALOMÉ

The head of Jokanaan.

HEROD

No, no, you would not have that. You say that to trouble me,
because I have looked at you all this evening. It is true, I have
looked at you all this evening. Your beauty troubled me. Your
beauty has grievously troubled me, and I have looked at you too
much. But I will look at you no more. Neither at things, nor at
people should one look. Only in mirrors should one look, for
mirrors do but show us masks. Oh! oh! bring wine! I thirst....
Salomé, Salomé, let us be friends. Come now!... Ah! what would I
say? What was't? Ah! I remember!... Salomé--nay, but come nearer
to me; I fear you will not hear me--Salomé, you know my white
peacocks, my beautiful white peacocks, that walk in the garden
between the myrtles and the tall cypress trees. Their beaks are
gilded with gold, and the grains that they eat are gilded with
gold also, and their feet are stained with purple. When they cry
out the rain comes, and the moon shows herself in the heavens
when they spread their tails. Two by two they walk between the
cypress trees and the black myrtles, and each has a slave to tend
it. Sometimes they fly across the trees, and anon they crouch in
the grass, and round the lake. There are not in all the world
birds so wonderful. There is no king in all the world who
possesses such wonderful birds. I am sure that Cæsar himself has
no birds so fair as my birds. I will give you fifty of my
peacocks. They will follow you whithersoever you go, and in the
midst of them you will be like the moon in the midst of a great
white cloud.... I will give them all to you. I have but a
hundred, and in the whole world there is no king who has peacocks
like unto my peacocks. But I will give them all to you. Only you
must loose me from my oath, and must not ask of me that which you
have asked of me.

                        [_He empties the cup of wine._]

SALOMÉ

Give me the head of Jokanaan.

HERODIAS

Well said, my daughter! As for you, you are ridiculous with your
peacocks.

HEROD

Be silent! You cry out always; you cry out like a beast of prey.
You must not. Your voice wearies me. Be silent, I say Salomé,
think of what you are doing. This man comes perchance from God.
He is a holy man. The finger of God has touched him. God has put
into his mouth terrible words. In the palace as in the desert God
is always with him.... At least it is possible. One does not
know. It is possible that God is for him and with him.
Furthermore, if he died some misfortune might happen to me. In
any case, he said that the day he dies a misfortune will happen
to some one. That could only be to me. Remember, I slipped in
blood when I entered. Also, I heard a beating of wings in the
air, a beating of mighty wings. These are very evil omens, and
there were others. I am sure there were others though I did not
see them. Well, Salomé, you do not wish a misfortune to happen to
me? You do not wish that. Listen to me, then.

SALOMÉ

Give me the head of Jokanaan.

HEROD

Ah! you are not listening to me. Be calm. I--I am calm. I am
quite calm. Listen. I have jewels hidden in this place--jewels
that your mother even has never seen; jewels that are marvellous.
I have a collar of pearls, set in four rows. They are like unto
moons chained with rays of silver. They are like fifty moons
caught in a golden net. On the ivory of her breast a queen has
worn it. Thou shalt be as fair as a queen when thou wearest it. I
have amethysts of two kinds, one that is black like wine, and one
that is red like wine which has been coloured with water. I have
topazes, yellow as are the eyes of tigers, and topazes that are
pink as the eyes of a wood-pigeon, and green topazes that are as
the eyes of cats. I have opals that burn always, with an icelike
flame, opals that make sad men's minds, and are fearful of the
shadows. I have onyxes like the eyeballs of a dead woman. I have
moonstones that change when the moon changes, and are wan when
they see the sun. I have sapphires big like eggs, and as blue as
blue flowers. The sea wanders within them and the moon comes
never to trouble the blue of their waves. I have chrysolites and
beryls and chrysoprases and rubies. I have sardonyx and hyacinth
stones, and stones of chalcedony, and I will give them all to
you, all, and other things will I add to them. The King of the
Indies has but even now sent me four fans fashioned from the
feathers of parrots, and the King of Numidia a garment of ostrich
feathers. I have a crystal, into which it is not lawful for a
woman to look, nor may young men behold it until they have been
beaten with rods. In a coffer of nacre I have three wondrous
turquoises. He who wears them on his forehead can imagine things
which are not, and he who carries them in his hand can make women
sterile. These are great treasures above all price. They are
treasures without price. But this is not all. In an ebony coffer
I have two cups of amber, that are like apples of gold. If an
enemy pour poison into these cups, they become like an apple of
silver. In a coffer incrusted with amber I have sandals incrusted
with glass. I have mantles that have been brought from the land
of the Seres, and bracelets decked about with carbuncles and with
jade that come from the city of Euphrates.... What desirest thou
more than this, Salomé? Tell me the thing that thou desirest, and
I will give it thee. All that thou askest I will give thee, save
one thing. I will give thee all that is mine, save one life. I
will give thee the mantle of the high priest. I will give thee
the veil of the sanctuary.

THE JEWS

Oh! oh!

SALOMÉ

Give me the head of Jokanaan.

HEROD

[_Sinking back in his seat_]. Let her be given what she asks! Of
a truth she is her mother's child! [_The first Soldier
approaches. Herodias draws from the hand of the Tetrarch the ring
of death and gives it to the Soldier, who straightway bears it to
the Executioner. The Executioner looks scared._] Who has taken my
ring? There was a ring on my right hand. Who has drunk my wine?
There was wine in my cup. It was full of wine. Someone has drunk
it! Oh! surely some evil will befall some one. [_The Executioner
goes down into the cistern._] Ah! Wherefore did I give my oath?
Kings ought never to pledge their word. If they keep it not, it
is terrible, and if they keep it, it is terrible also.

HERODIAS

My daughter has done well.

HEROD

I am sure that some misfortune will happen.

SALOMÉ

[_She leans over the cistern and listens._]

There is no sound. I hear nothing. Why does he not cry out, this
man? Ah! if any man sought to kill me, I would cry out, I would
struggle, I would not suffer.... Strike, strike, Naaman, strike,
I tell you.... No, I hear nothing. There is a silence, a terrible
silence. Ah! something has fallen upon the ground. I heard
something fall. It is the sword of the headsman. He is afraid,
this slave. He has let his sword fall. He dare not kill him. He
is a coward, this slave! Let soldiers be sent. [_She sees the
Page of Herodias and addresses him._] Come hither, thou wert the
friend of him who is dead, is it not so? Well, I tell thee, there
are not dead men enough. Go to the soldiers and bid them go down
and bring me the thing I ask, the thing the Tetrarch has promised
me, the thing that is mine. [_The Page recoils. She turns to the
soldiers._] Hither, ye soldiers. Get ye down into this cistern
and bring me the head of this man. [_The Soldiers recoil._]
Tetrarch, Tetrarch, command your soldiers that they bring me the
head of Jokanaan.

[_A huge black arm, the arm of the Executioner, comes forth from
the cistern, bearing on a silver shield the head of Jokanaan.
Salomé seizes it. Herod hides his face with his cloak. Herodias
smiles and fans herself. The Nazarenes fall on their knees and
begin to pray._]

Ah! thou wouldst not suffer me to kiss thy mouth, Jokanaan. Well!
I will kiss it now. I will bite it with my teeth as one bites a
ripe fruit. Yes, I will kiss thy mouth, Jokanaan. I said it; did
I not say it? I said it. Ah! I will kiss it now.... But,
wherefore dost thou not look at me, Jokanaan? Thine eyes that
were so terrible, so full of rage and scorn, are shut now.
Wherefore are they shut? Open thine eyes! Lift up thine eyelids,
Jokanaan! Wherefore dost thou not look at me? Art thou afraid of
me, Jokanaan, that thou wilt not look at me?... And thy tongue,
that was like a red snake darting poison, it moves no more, it
says nothing now, Jokanaan, that scarlet viper that spat its
venom upon me. It is strange, is it not? How is it that the red
viper stirs no longer?... Thou wouldst have none of me, Jokanaan.
Thou didst reject me. Thou didst speak evil words against me.
Thou didst treat me as a harlot, as a wanton, me, Salomé,
daughter of Herodias, Princess of Judæa! Well, Jokanaan, I still
live, but thou, thou art dead, and thy head belongs to me. I can
do with it what I will. I can throw it to the dogs and to the
birds of the air. That which the dogs leave, the birds of the air
shall devour.... Ah, Jokanaan, Jokanaan, thou wert the only man
that I have loved. All other men are hateful to me. But thou,
thou wert beautiful! Thy body was a column of ivory set on a
silver socket. It was a garden full of doves and of silver
lilies. It was a tower of silver decked with shields of ivory.
There was nothing in the world so white as thy body. There was
nothing in the world so black as thy hair. In the whole world
there was nothing so red as thy mouth. Thy voice was a censer
that scattered strange perfumes, and when I looked on thee I
heard a strange music. Ah! wherefore didst thou not look at me,
Jokanaan? Behind thine hands and thy curses thou didst hide thy
face. Thou didst put upon thine eyes the covering of him who
would see his God. Well, thou hast seen thy God, Jokanaan, but
me, me, thou didst never see. If thou hadst seen me thou wouldst
have loved me. I, I saw thee, Jokanaan, and I loved thee. Oh, how
I loved thee! I love thee yet, Jokanaan, I love thee only.... I
am athirst for thy beauty; I am hungry for thy body; and neither
wine nor fruits can appease my desire. What shall I do now,
Jokanaan? Neither the floods nor the great waters can quench my
passion. I was a princess, and thou didst scorn me. I was a
virgin, and thou didst take my virginity from me. I was chaste,
and thou didst fill my veins with fire.... Ah! ah! wherefore
didst thou not look at me, Jokanaan? If thou hadst looked at me
thou hadst loved me. Well I know that thou wouldst have loved me,
and the mystery of love is greater than the mystery of death.
Love only should one consider.

[Illustration: THE CLIMAX]

HEROD

She is monstrous, thy daughter, she is altogether monstrous. In
truth, what she has done is a great crime. I am sure that it was
a crime against an unknown God.

HERODIAS

I approve of what my daughter has done. And I will stay here now.

HEROD

[_Rising_].

Ah! There speaks the incestuous wife! Come! I will not stay here.
Come, I tell thee. Surely some terrible thing will befall.
Manasseh, Issachar, Ozias, put out the torches. I will not look
at things, I will not suffer things to look at me. Put out the
torches! Hide the moon! Hide the stars! Let us hide ourselves in
our palace, Herodias. I begin to be afraid.

[_The slaves put out the torches. The stars disappear. A great
black cloud crosses the moon and conceals it completely. The
stage becomes very dark. The Tetrarch begins to climb the
staircase._]

THE VOICE OF SALOMÉ

Ah! I have kissed thy mouth, Jokanaan, I have kissed thy mouth.
There was a bitter taste on thy lips. Was it the taste of
blood?... But perchance it is the taste of love.... They say that
love hath a bitter taste.... But what of that? what of that? I
have kissed thy mouth, Jokanaan.

[_A moonbeam falls on Salomé covering her with light._]

HEROD

[_Turning round and seeing Salomé_.]

Kill that woman!

[_The soldiers rush forward and crush beneath their shields
Salomé, daughter of Herodias, Princess of Judæa._]

CURTAIN.


[Illustration: CUL DE LAMPE]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Salomé, by Oscar Wilde

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SALOMÉ ***

***** This file should be named 42704-8.txt or 42704-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/2/7/0/42704/

Produced by Marc D'Hooghe at http://www.freeliterature.org
(Images generously made available by the Internet Archive.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook, A Woman of No Importance, by Oscar Wilde


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: A Woman of No Importance
       A Play


Author: Oscar Wilde



Release Date: September 16, 2014  [eBook #854]
[This file was first posted on 20 March 1997]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A WOMAN OF NO IMPORTANCE***


Transcribed from the 1919 Methuen & Co. Ltd. edition by David Price,
email ccx074@pglaf.org





                                A WOMAN OF
                              NO IMPORTANCE


                                  A PLAY

                                    BY
                               OSCAR WILDE

                                * * * * *

                           METHUEN & CO., LTD.
                           36 ESSEX STREET W.C.
                                  LONDON

                             _Eighth Edition_

                                * * * * *

_First Printed_                                                 _1894_
_First Issued by Methuen and Co._ (_Limited    _February_       _1908_
Editions on Handmade Paper and Japanese
Vellum_)
_Third Edition_                                _September_      _1909_
_Fourth Edition_                               _May_            _1910_
_Fifth Edition_                                _December_       _1911_
_Sixth Edition_                                _March_          _1913_
_Seventh Edition_ (_Cheap Form_)               _October_        _1916_
_Eighth Edition_                                       _1919_

_The dramatic rights of_ ‘_A Woman of No Importance_’ _belong to Sir
Herbert Beerbohm Tree and to Robert Ross_, _executor and administrator of
Oscar Wilde’s estate_.

                                * * * * *

                                    TO
                                  GLADYS
                             COUNTESS DE GREY

                          [MARCHIONESS OF RIPON]

                                * * * * *




THE PERSONS OF THE PLAY


LORD ILLINGWORTH

SIR JOHN PONTEFRACT

LORD ALFRED RUFFORD

MR. KELVIL, M.P.

THE VEN. ARCHDEACON DAUBENY, D.D.

GERALD ARBUTHNOT

FARQUHAR, Butler

FRANCIS, Footman

                                * * * * *

LADY HUNSTANTON

LADY CAROLINE PONTEFRACT

LADY STUTFIELD

MRS. ALLONBY

MISS HESTER WORSLEY

ALICE, Maid

MRS. ARBUTHNOT




THE SCENES OF THE PLAY


ACT I.  _The Terrace at Hunstanton Chase_.

ACT II.  _The Drawing-room at Hunstanton Chase_.

ACT III.  _The Hall at Hunstanton Chase_.

ACT IV.  _Sitting-room in Mrs. Arbuthnot’s House at Wrockley_.

TIME:  _The Present_.

PLACE:  _The Shires_.

      _The action of the play takes place within twenty-four hours_.




LONDON: HAYMARKET THEATRE


               _Lessee and Manager_: _Mr. H Beerbohm Tree_
                           _April_ 19_th_, 1893

LORD ILLINGWORTH                    _Mr. Tree_.
SIR JOHN PONTEFRACT                 _Mr. E. Holman Clark_.
LORD ALFRED RUFFORD                 _Mr. Ernest Lawford_.
MR. KELVIL, M.P.                    _Mr. Charles Allan_.
THE VEN. ARCHDEACON DAUBENY, D.D.   _Mr. Kemble_.
GERALD ARBUTHNOT                    _Mr. Terry_.
FARQUHAR (_Butler_)                 _Mr. Hay_.
FRANCIS (_Footman_)                 _Mr. Montague_.
LADY HUNSTANTON                     _Miss Rose Leclercq_.
LADY CAROLINE PONTEFRACT            _Miss Le Thière_.
LADY STUTFIELD                      _Miss Blanche Horlock_.
MRS. ALLONBY                        _Mrs. Tree_.
MISS HESTER WORSLEY                 _Miss Julia Neilson_.
ALICE (_Maid_)                      _Miss Kelly_.
MRS. ARBUTHNOT                      _Mrs. Bernard-Beere_.

FIRST ACT


                                  SCENE

              _Lawn in front of the terrace at Hunstanton_.

[SIR JOHN _and_ LADY CAROLINE PONTEFRACT, MISS WORSLEY, _on chairs under
large yew tree_.]

LADY CAROLINE.  I believe this is the first English country house you
have stayed at, Miss Worsley?

HESTER.  Yes, Lady Caroline.

LADY CAROLINE.  You have no country houses, I am told, in America?

HESTER.  We have not many.

LADY CAROLINE.  Have you any country?  What we should call country?

HESTER.  [_Smiling_.]  We have the largest country in the world, Lady
Caroline.  They used to tell us at school that some of our states are as
big as France and England put together.

LADY CAROLINE.  Ah! you must find it very draughty, I should fancy.
[_To_ SIR JOHN.]  John, you should have your muffler.  What is the use of
my always knitting mufflers for you if you won’t wear them?

SIR JOHN.  I am quite warm, Caroline, I assure you.

LADY CAROLINE.  I think not, John.  Well, you couldn’t come to a more
charming place than this, Miss Worsley, though the house is excessively
damp, quite unpardonably damp, and dear Lady Hunstanton is sometimes a
little lax about the people she asks down here.  [_To_ SIR JOHN.]  Jane
mixes too much.  Lord Illingworth, of course, is a man of high
distinction.  It is a privilege to meet him.  And that member of
Parliament, Mr. Kettle—

SIR JOHN.  Kelvil, my love, Kelvil.

LADY CAROLINE.  He must be quite respectable.  One has never heard his
name before in the whole course of one’s life, which speaks volumes for a
man, nowadays.  But Mrs. Allonby is hardly a very suitable person.

HESTER.  I dislike Mrs. Allonby.  I dislike her more than I can say.

LADY CAROLINE.  I am not sure, Miss Worsley, that foreigners like
yourself should cultivate likes or dislikes about the people they are
invited to meet.  Mrs. Allonby is very well born.  She is a niece of Lord
Brancaster’s.  It is said, of course, that she ran away twice before she
was married.  But you know how unfair people often are.  I myself don’t
believe she ran away more than once.

HESTER.  Mr. Arbuthnot is very charming.

LADY CAROLINE.  Ah, yes! the young man who has a post in a bank.  Lady
Hunstanton is most kind in asking him here, and Lord Illingworth seems to
have taken quite a fancy to him.  I am not sure, however, that Jane is
right in taking him out of his position.  In my young days, Miss Worsley,
one never met any one in society who worked for their living.  It was not
considered the thing.

HESTER.  In America those are the people we respect most.

LADY CAROLINE.  I have no doubt of it.

HESTER.  Mr. Arbuthnot has a beautiful nature!  He is so simple, so
sincere.  He has one of the most beautiful natures I have ever come
across.  It is a privilege to meet _him_.

LADY CAROLINE.  It is not customary in England, Miss Worsley, for a young
lady to speak with such enthusiasm of any person of the opposite sex.
English women conceal their feelings till after they are married.  They
show them then.

HESTER.  Do you, in England, allow no friendship to exist between a young
man and a young girl?

[_Enter_ LADY HUNSTANTON, _followed by Footman with shawls and a
cushion_.]

LADY CAROLINE.  We think it very inadvisable.  Jane, I was just saying
what a pleasant party you have asked us to meet.  You have a wonderful
power of selection.  It is quite a gift.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Dear Caroline, how kind of you!  I think we all do fit
in very nicely together.  And I hope our charming American visitor will
carry back pleasant recollections of our English country life.  [_To
Footman_.]  The cushion, there, Francis.  And my shawl.  The Shetland.
Get the Shetland.  [_Exit Footman for shawl_.]

[_Enter_ GERALD ARBUTHNOT.]

GERALD.  Lady Hunstanton, I have such good news to tell you.  Lord
Illingworth has just offered to make me his secretary.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  His secretary?  That is good news indeed, Gerald.  It
means a very brilliant future in store for you.  Your dear mother will be
delighted.  I really must try and induce her to come up here to-night.
Do you think she would, Gerald?  I know how difficult it is to get her to
go anywhere.

GERALD.  Oh!  I am sure she would, Lady Hunstanton, if she knew Lord
Illingworth had made me such an offer.

[_Enter Footman with shawl_.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  I will write and tell her about it, and ask her to come
up and meet him.  [_To Footman_.]  Just wait, Francis.  [_Writes
letter_.]

LADY CAROLINE.  That is a very wonderful opening for so young a man as
you are, Mr. Arbuthnot.

GERALD.  It is indeed, Lady Caroline.  I trust I shall be able to show
myself worthy of it.

LADY CAROLINE.  I trust so.

GERALD.  [_To_ HESTER.]  _You_ have not congratulated me yet, Miss
Worsley.

HESTER.  Are you very pleased about it?

GERALD.  Of course I am.  It means everything to me—things that were out
of the reach of hope before may be within hope’s reach now.

HESTER.  Nothing should be out of the reach of hope.  Life is a hope.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  I fancy, Caroline, that Diplomacy is what Lord
Illingworth is aiming at.  I heard that he was offered Vienna.  But that
may not be true.

LADY CAROLINE.  I don’t think that England should be represented abroad
by an unmarried man, Jane.  It might lead to complications.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  You are too nervous, Caroline.  Believe me, you are too
nervous.  Besides, Lord Illingworth may marry any day.  I was in hopes he
would have married lady Kelso.  But I believe he said her family was too
large.  Or was it her feet?  I forget which.  I regret it very much.  She
was made to be an ambassador’s wife.

LADY CAROLINE.  She certainly has a wonderful faculty of remembering
people’s names, and forgetting their faces.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Well, that is very natural, Caroline, is it not?  [_To
Footman_.]  Tell Henry to wait for an answer.  I have written a line to
your dear mother, Gerald, to tell her your good news, and to say she
really must come to dinner.

[_Exit Footman_.]

GERALD.  That is awfully kind of you, Lady Hunstanton.  [_To_ HESTER.]
Will you come for a stroll, Miss Worsley?

HESTER.  With pleasure.  [_Exit with_ GERALD.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  I am very much gratified at Gerald Arbuthnot’s good
fortune.  He is quite a _protégé_ of mine.  And I am particularly pleased
that Lord Illingworth should have made the offer of his own accord
without my suggesting anything.  Nobody likes to be asked favours.  I
remember poor Charlotte Pagden making herself quite unpopular one season,
because she had a French governess she wanted to recommend to every one.

LADY CAROLINE.  I saw the governess, Jane.  Lady Pagden sent her to me.
It was before Eleanor came out.  She was far too good-looking to be in
any respectable household.  I don’t wonder Lady Pagden was so anxious to
get rid of her.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah, that explains it.

LADY CAROLINE.  John, the grass is too damp for you.  You had better go
and put on your overshoes at once.

SIR JOHN.  I am quite comfortable, Caroline, I assure you.

LADY CAROLINE.  You must allow me to be the best judge of that, John.
Pray do as I tell you.

[SIR JOHN _gets up and goes off_.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  You spoil him, Caroline, you do indeed!

[_Enter_ MRS. ALLONBY _and_ LADY STUTFIELD.]

[_To_ MRS. ALLONBY.]  Well, dear, I hope you like the park.  It is said
to be well timbered.

MRS. ALLONBY.  The trees are wonderful, Lady Hunstanton.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Quite, quite wonderful.

MRS. ALLONBY.  But somehow, I feel sure that if I lived in the country
for six months, I should become so unsophisticated that no one would take
the slightest notice of me.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  I assure you, dear, that the country has not that
effect at all.  Why, it was from Melthorpe, which is only two miles from
here, that Lady Belton eloped with Lord Fethersdale.  I remember the
occurrence perfectly.  Poor Lord Belton died three days afterwards of
joy, or gout.  I forget which.  We had a large party staying here at the
time, so we were all very much interested in the whole affair.

MRS. ALLONBY.  I think to elope is cowardly.  It’s running away from
danger.  And danger has become so rare in modern life.

LADY CAROLINE.  As far as I can make out, the young women of the present
day seem to make it the sole object of their lives to be always playing
with fire.

MRS. ALLONBY.  The one advantage of playing with fire, Lady Caroline, is
that one never gets even singed.  It is the people who don’t know how to
play with it who get burned up.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Yes; I see that.  It is very, very helpful.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  I don’t know how the world would get on with such a
theory as that, dear Mrs. Allonby.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Ah!  The world was made for men and not for women.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Oh, don’t say that, Lady Stutfield.  We have a much better
time than they have.  There are far more things forbidden to us than are
forbidden to them.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Yes; that is quite, quite true.  I had not thought of
that.

[_Enter_ SIR JOHN _and_ MR. KELVIL.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Well, Mr. Kelvil, have you got through your work?

KELVIL.  I have finished my writing for the day, Lady Hunstanton.  It has
been an arduous task.  The demands on the time of a public man are very
heavy nowadays, very heavy indeed.  And I don’t think they meet with
adequate recognition.

LADY CAROLINE.  John, have you got your overshoes on?

SIR JOHN.  Yes, my love.

LADY CAROLINE.  I think you had better come over here, John.  It is more
sheltered.

SIR JOHN.  I am quite comfortable, Caroline.

LADY CAROLINE.  I think not, John.  You had better sit beside me.  [SIR
JOHN _rises and goes across_.]

LADY STUTFIELD.  And what have you been writing about this morning, Mr.
Kelvil?

KELVIL.  On the usual subject, Lady Stutfield.  On Purity.

LADY STUTFIELD.  That must be such a very, very interesting thing to
write about.

KELVIL.  It is the one subject of really national importance, nowadays,
Lady Stutfield.  I purpose addressing my constituents on the question
before Parliament meets.  I find that the poorer classes of this country
display a marked desire for a higher ethical standard.

LADY STUTFIELD.  How quite, quite nice of them.

LADY CAROLINE.  Are you in favour of women taking part in politics, Mr.
Kettle?

SIR JOHN.  Kelvil, my love, Kelvil.

KELVIL.  The growing influence of women is the one reassuring thing in
our political life, Lady Caroline.  Women are always on the side of
morality, public and private.

LADY STUTFIELD.  It is so very, very gratifying to hear you say that.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah, yes!—the moral qualities in women—that is the
important thing.  I am afraid, Caroline, that dear Lord Illingworth
doesn’t value the moral qualities in women as much as he should.

[_Enter_ LORD ILLINGWORTH.]

LADY STUTFIELD.  The world says that Lord Illingworth is very, very
wicked.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  But what world says that, Lady Stutfield?  It must be
the next world.  This world and I are on excellent terms.  [_Sits down
beside_ MRS. ALLONBY.]

LADY STUTFIELD.  Every one _I_ know says you are very, very wicked.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  It is perfectly monstrous the way people go about,
nowadays, saying things against one behind one’s back that are absolutely
and entirely true.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Dear Lord Illingworth is quite hopeless, Lady
Stutfield.  I have given up trying to reform him.  It would take a Public
Company with a Board of Directors and a paid Secretary to do that.  But
you have the secretary already, Lord Illingworth, haven’t you?  Gerald
Arbuthnot has told us of his good fortune; it is really most kind of you.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Oh, don’t say that, Lady Hunstanton.  Kind is a
dreadful word.  I took a great fancy to young Arbuthnot the moment I met
him, and he’ll be of considerable use to me in something I am foolish
enough to think of doing.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  He is an admirable young man.  And his mother is one of
my dearest friends.  He has just gone for a walk with our pretty
American.  She is very pretty, is she not?

LADY CAROLINE.  Far too pretty.  These American girls carry off all the
good matches.  Why can’t they stay in their own country?  They are always
telling us it is the Paradise of women.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  It is, Lady Caroline.  That is why, like Eve, they are
so extremely anxious to get out of it.

LADY CAROLINE.  Who are Miss Worsley’s parents?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  American women are wonderfully clever in concealing
their parents.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  My dear Lord Illingworth, what do you mean?  Miss
Worsley, Caroline, is an orphan.  Her father was a very wealthy
millionaire or philanthropist, or both, I believe, who entertained my son
quite hospitably, when he visited Boston.  I don’t know how he made his
money, originally.

KELVIL.  I fancy in American dry goods.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  What are American dry goods?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  American novels.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  How very singular! . . . Well, from whatever source her
large fortune came, I have a great esteem for Miss Worsley.  She dresses
exceedingly well.  All Americans do dress well.  They get their clothes
in Paris.

MRS. ALLONBY.  They say, Lady Hunstanton, that when good Americans die
they go to Paris.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Indeed?  And when bad Americans die, where do they go
to?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Oh, they go to America.

KELVIL.  I am afraid you don’t appreciate America, Lord Illingworth.  It
is a very remarkable country, especially considering its youth.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  The youth of America is their oldest tradition.  It
has been going on now for three hundred years.  To hear them talk one
would imagine they were in their first childhood.  As far as civilisation
goes they are in their second.

KELVIL.  There is undoubtedly a great deal of corruption in American
politics.  I suppose you allude to that?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I wonder.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Politics are in a sad way everywhere, I am told.  They
certainly are in England.  Dear Mr. Cardew is ruining the country.  I
wonder Mrs. Cardew allows him.  I am sure, Lord Illingworth, you don’t
think that uneducated people should be allowed to have votes?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I think they are the only people who should.

KELVIL.  Do you take no side then in modern politics, Lord Illingworth?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  One should never take sides in anything, Mr. Kelvil.
Taking sides is the beginning of sincerity, and earnestness follows
shortly afterwards, and the human being becomes a bore.  However, the
House of Commons really does very little harm.  You can’t make people
good by Act of Parliament,—that is something.

KELVIL.  You cannot deny that the House of Commons has always shown great
sympathy with the sufferings of the poor.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  That is its special vice.  That is the special vice of
the age.  One should sympathise with the joy, the beauty, the colour of
life.  The less said about life’s sores the better, Mr. Kelvil.

KELVIL.  Still our East End is a very important problem.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Quite so.  It is the problem of slavery.  And we are
trying to solve it by amusing the slaves.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Certainly, a great deal may be done by means of cheap
entertainments, as you say, Lord Illingworth.  Dear Dr. Daubeny, our
rector here, provides, with the assistance of his curates, really
admirable recreations for the poor during the winter.  And much good may
be done by means of a magic lantern, or a missionary, or some popular
amusement of that kind.

LADY CAROLINE.  I am not at all in favour of amusements for the poor,
Jane.  Blankets and coals are sufficient.  There is too much love of
pleasure amongst the upper classes as it is.  Health is what we want in
modern life.  The tone is not healthy, not healthy at all.

KELVIL.  You are quite right, Lady Caroline.

LADY CAROLINE.  I believe I am usually right.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Horrid word ‘health.’

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Silliest word in our language, and one knows so well
the popular idea of health.  The English country gentleman galloping
after a fox—the unspeakable in full pursuit of the uneatable.

KELVIL.  May I ask, Lord Illingworth, if you regard the House of Lords as
a better institution than the House of Commons?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  A much better institution, of course.  We in the House
of Lords are never in touch with public opinion.  That makes us a
civilised body.

KELVIL.  Are you serious in putting forward such a view?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Quite serious, Mr. Kelvil.  [_To_ MRS. ALLONBY.]
Vulgar habit that is people have nowadays of asking one, after one has
given them an idea, whether one is serious or not.  Nothing is serious
except passion.  The intellect is not a serious thing, and never has
been.  It is an instrument on which one plays, that is all.  The only
serious form of intellect I know is the British intellect.  And on the
British intellect the illiterates play the drum.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  What are you saying, Lord Illingworth, about the drum?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I was merely talking to Mrs. Allonby about the leading
articles in the London newspapers.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  But do you believe all that is written in the
newspapers?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I do.  Nowadays it is only the unreadable that occurs.
[_Rises with_ MRS. ALLONBY.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Are you going, Mrs. Allonby?

MRS. ALLONBY.  Just as far as the conservatory.  Lord Illingworth told me
this morning that there was an orchid there as beautiful as the seven
deadly sins.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  My dear, I hope there is nothing of the kind.  I will
certainly speak to the gardener.

[_Exit_ MRS. ALLONBY _and_ LORD ILLINGWORTH.]

LADY CAROLINE.  Remarkable type, Mrs. Allonby.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  She lets her clever tongue run away with her sometimes.

LADY CAROLINE.  Is that the only thing, Jane, Mrs. Allonby allows to run
away with her?

LADY HUNSTANTON.  I hope so, Caroline, I am sure.

[_Enter_ LORD ALFRED.]

Dear Lord Alfred, do join us.  [LORD ALFRED _sits down beside_ LADY
STUTFIELD.]

LADY CAROLINE.  You believe good of every one, Jane.  It is a great
fault.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Do you really, really think, Lady Caroline, that one
should believe evil of every one?

LADY CAROLINE.  I think it is much safer to do so, Lady Stutfield.
Until, of course, people are found out to be good.  But that requires a
great deal of investigation nowadays.

LADY STUTFIELD.  But there is so much unkind scandal in modern life.

LADY CAROLINE.  Lord Illingworth remarked to me last night at dinner that
the basis of every scandal is an absolutely immoral certainty.

KELVIL.  Lord Illingworth is, of course, a very brilliant man, but he
seems to me to be lacking in that fine faith in the nobility and purity
of life which is so important in this century.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Yes, quite, quite important, is it not?

KELVIL.  He gives me the impression of a man who does not appreciate the
beauty of our English home-life.  I would say that he was tainted with
foreign ideas on the subject.

LADY STUTFIELD.  There is nothing, nothing like the beauty of home-life,
is there?

KELVIL.  It is the mainstay of our moral system in England, Lady
Stutfield.  Without it we would become like our neighbours.

LADY STUTFIELD.  That would be so, so sad, would it not?

KELVIL.  I am afraid, too, that Lord Illingworth regards woman simply as
a toy.  Now, I have never regarded woman as a toy.  Woman is the
intellectual helpmeet of man in public as in private life.  Without her
we should forget the true ideals.  [_Sits down beside_ LADY STUTFIELD.]

LADY STUTFIELD.  I am so very, very glad to hear you say that.

LADY CAROLINE.  You a married man, Mr. Kettle?

SIR JOHN.  Kelvil, dear, Kelvil.

KELVIL.  I am married, Lady Caroline.

LADY CAROLINE.  Family?

KELVIL.  Yes.

LADY CAROLINE.  How many?

KELVIL.  Eight.

[LADY STUTFIELD _turns her attention to_ LORD ALFRED.]

LADY CAROLINE.  Mrs. Kettle and the children are, I suppose, at the
seaside?  [SIR JOHN _shrugs his shoulders_.]

KELVIL.  My wife is at the seaside with the children, Lady Caroline.

LADY CAROLINE.  You will join them later on, no doubt?

KELVIL.  If my public engagements permit me.

LADY CAROLINE.  Your public life must be a great source of gratification
to Mrs. Kettle.

SIR JOHN.  Kelvil, my love, Kelvil.

LADY STUTFIELD.  [_To_ LORD ALFRED.]  How very, very charming those
gold-tipped cigarettes of yours are, Lord Alfred.

LORD ALFRED.  They are awfully expensive.  I can only afford them when
I’m in debt.

LADY STUTFIELD.  It must be terribly, terribly distressing to be in debt.

LORD ALFRED.  One must have some occupation nowadays.  If I hadn’t my
debts I shouldn’t have anything to think about.  All the chaps I know are
in debt.

LADY STUTFIELD.  But don’t the people to whom you owe the money give you
a great, great deal of annoyance?

[_Enter Footman_.]

LORD ALFRED.  Oh, no, they write; I don’t.

LADY STUTFIELD.  How very, very strange.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah, here is a letter, Caroline, from dear Mrs.
Arbuthnot.  She won’t dine.  I am so sorry.  But she will come in the
evening.  I am very pleased indeed.  She is one of the sweetest of women.
Writes a beautiful hand, too, so large, so firm.  [_Hands letter to_ LADY
CAROLINE.]

LADY CAROLINE.  [_Looking at it_.]  A little lacking in femininity, Jane.
Femininity is the quality I admire most in women.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  [_Taking back letter and leaving it on table_.]  Oh!
she is very feminine, Caroline, and so good too.  You should hear what
the Archdeacon says of her.  He regards her as his right hand in the
parish.  [_Footman speaks to her_.]  In the Yellow Drawing-room.  Shall
we all go in?  Lady Stutfield, shall we go in to tea?

LADY STUTFIELD.  With pleasure, Lady Hunstanton.  [_They rise and proceed
to go off_.  SIR JOHN offers to carry LADY STUTFIELD’S cloak.]

LADY CAROLINE.  John!  If you would allow your nephew to look after Lady
Stutfield’s cloak, you might help me with my workbasket.

[_Enter_ LORD ILLINGWORTH _and_ MRS. ALLONBY.]

SIR JOHN.  Certainly, my love.  [_Exeunt_.]

MRS. ALLONBY.  Curious thing, plain women are always jealous of their
husbands, beautiful women never are!

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Beautiful women never have time.  They are always so
occupied in being jealous of other people’s husbands.

MRS. ALLONBY.  I should have thought Lady Caroline would have grown tired
of conjugal anxiety by this time!  Sir John is her fourth!

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  So much marriage is certainly not becoming.  Twenty
years of romance make a woman look like a ruin; but twenty years of
marriage make her something like a public building.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Twenty years of romance!  Is there such a thing?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Not in our day.  Women have become too brilliant.
Nothing spoils a romance so much as a sense of humour in the woman.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Or the want of it in the man.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  You are quite right.  In a Temple every one should be
serious, except the thing that is worshipped.

MRS. ALLONBY.  And that should be man?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Women kneel so gracefully; men don’t.

MRS. ALLONBY.  You are thinking of Lady Stutfield!

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I assure you I have not thought of Lady Stutfield for
the last quarter of an hour.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Is she such a mystery?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  She is more than a mystery—she is a mood.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Moods don’t last.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  It is their chief charm.

[_Enter_ HESTER _and_ GERALD.]

GERALD.  Lord Illingworth, every one has been congratulating me, Lady
Hunstanton and Lady Caroline, and . . . every one.  I hope I shall make a
good secretary.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  You will be the pattern secretary, Gerald.  [_Talks to
him_.]

MRS. ALLONBY.  You enjoy country life, Miss Worsley?

HESTER.  Very much indeed.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Don’t find yourself longing for a London dinner-party?

HESTER.  I dislike London dinner-parties.

MRS. ALLONBY.  I adore them.  The clever people never listen, and the
stupid people never talk.

HESTER.  I think the stupid people talk a great deal.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Ah, I never listen!

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  My dear boy, if I didn’t like you I wouldn’t have made
you the offer.  It is because I like you so much that I want to have you
with me.

[_Exit_ HESTER _with_ GERALD.]

Charming fellow, Gerald Arbuthnot!

MRS. ALLONBY.  He is very nice; very nice indeed.  But I can’t stand the
American young lady.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Why?

MRS. ALLONBY.  She told me yesterday, and in quite a loud voice too, that
she was only eighteen.  It was most annoying.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  One should never trust a woman who tells one her real
age.  A woman who would tell one that, would tell one anything.

MRS. ALLONBY.  She is a Puritan besides—

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Ah, that is inexcusable.  I don’t mind plain women
being Puritans.  It is the only excuse they have for being plain.  But
she is decidedly pretty.  I admire her immensely.  [_Looks steadfastly
at_ MRS. ALLONBY.]

MRS. ALLONBY.  What a thoroughly bad man you must be!

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  What do you call a bad man?

MRS. ALLONBY.  The sort of man who admires innocence.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  And a bad woman?

MRS. ALLONBY.  Oh! the sort of woman a man never gets tired of.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  You are severe—on yourself.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Define us as a sex.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Sphinxes without secrets.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Does that include the Puritan women?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Do you know, I don’t believe in the existence of
Puritan women?  I don’t think there is a woman in the world who would not
be a little flattered if one made love to her.  It is that which makes
women so irresistibly adorable.

MRS. ALLONBY.  You think there is no woman in the world who would object
to being kissed?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Very few.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Miss Worsley would not let you kiss her.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Are you sure?

MRS. ALLONBY.  Quite.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  What do you think she’d do if I kissed her?

MRS. ALLONBY.  Either marry you, or strike you across the face with her
glove.  What would you do if she struck you across the face with her
glove?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Fall in love with her, probably.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Then it is lucky you are not going to kiss her!

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Is that a challenge?

MRS. ALLONBY.  It is an arrow shot into the air.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Don’t you know that I always succeed in whatever I
try?

MRS. ALLONBY.  I am sorry to hear it.  We women adore failures.  They
lean on us.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  You worship successes.  You cling to them.

MRS. ALLONBY.  We are the laurels to hide their baldness.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  And they need you always, except at the moment of
triumph.

MRS. ALLONBY.  They are uninteresting then.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  How tantalising you are!  [_A pause_.]

MRS. ALLONBY.  Lord Illingworth, there is one thing I shall always like
you for.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Only one thing?  And I have so many bad qualities.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Ah, don’t be too conceited about them.  You may lose them
as you grow old.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I never intend to grow old.  The soul is born old but
grows young.  That is the comedy of life.

MRS. ALLONBY.  And the body is born young and grows old.  That is life’s
tragedy.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Its comedy also, sometimes.  But what is the
mysterious reason why you will always like me?

MRS. ALLONBY.  It is that you have never made love to me.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I have never done anything else.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Really?  I have not noticed it.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  How fortunate!  It might have been a tragedy for both
of us.

MRS. ALLONBY.  We should each have survived.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  One can survive everything nowadays, except death, and
live down anything except a good reputation.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Have you tried a good reputation?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  It is one of the many annoyances to which I have never
been subjected.

MRS. ALLONBY.  It may come.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Why do you threaten me?

MRS. ALLONBY.  I will tell you when you have kissed the Puritan.

[_Enter Footman_.]

FRANCIS.  Tea is served in the Yellow Drawing-room, my lord.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Tell her ladyship we are coming in.

FRANCIS.  Yes, my lord.

[_Exit_.]

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Shall we go in to tea?

MRS. ALLONBY.  Do you like such simple pleasures?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I adore simple pleasures.  They are the last refuge of
the complex.  But, if you wish, let us stay here.  Yes, let us stay here.
The Book of Life begins with a man and a woman in a garden.

MRS. ALLONBY.  It ends with Revelations.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  You fence divinely.  But the button has come of your
foil.

MRS. ALLONBY.  I have still the mask.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  It makes your eyes lovelier.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Thank you.  Come.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  [_Sees_ MRS. ARBUTHNOT’S _letter on table_, _and takes
it up and looks at envelope_.]  What a curious handwriting!  It reminds
me of the handwriting of a woman I used to know years ago.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Who?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Oh! no one.  No one in particular.  A woman of no
importance.  [_Throws letter down_, _and passes up the steps of the
terrace with_ MRS. ALLONBY.  _They smile at each other_.]

                                ACT DROP.




SECOND ACT


                                  SCENE

 _Drawing-room at Hunstanton_, _after dinner_, _lamps lit_.  _Door_ L.C.
                               _Door_ R.C.

[_Ladies seated on sofas_.]

MRS. ALLONBY.  What a comfort it is to have got rid of the men for a
little!

LADY STUTFIELD.  Yes; men persecute us dreadfully, don’t they?

MRS. ALLONBY.  Persecute us?  I wish they did.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  My dear!

MRS. ALLONBY.  The annoying thing is that the wretches can be perfectly
happy without us.  That is why I think it is every woman’s duty never to
leave them alone for a single moment, except during this short breathing
space after dinner; without which I believe we poor women would be
absolutely worn to shadows.

[_Enter Servants with coffee_.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Worn to shadows, dear?

MRS. ALLONBY.  Yes, Lady Hunstanton.  It is such a strain keeping men up
to the mark.  They are always trying to escape from us.

LADY STUTFIELD.  It seems to me that it is we who are always trying to
escape from them.  Men are so very, very heartless.  They know their
power and use it.

LADY CAROLINE.  [_Takes coffee from Servant_.]  What stuff and nonsense
all this about men is!  The thing to do is to keep men in their proper
place.

MRS. ALLONBY.  But what is their proper place, Lady Caroline?

LADY CAROLINE.  Looking after their wives, Mrs. Allonby.

MRS. ALLONBY.  [_Takes coffee from Servant_.]  Really?  And if they’re
not married?

LADY CAROLINE.  If they are not married, they should be looking after a
wife.  It’s perfectly scandalous the amount of bachelors who are going
about society.  There should be a law passed to compel them all to marry
within twelve months.

LADY STUTFIELD.  [_Refuses coffee_.]  But if they’re in love with some
one who, perhaps, is tied to another?

LADY CAROLINE.  In that case, Lady Stutfield, they should be married off
in a week to some plain respectable girl, in order to teach them not to
meddle with other people’s property.

MRS. ALLONBY.  I don’t think that we should ever be spoken of as other
people’s property.  All men are married women’s property.  That is the
only true definition of what married women’s property really is.  But we
don’t belong to any one.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Oh, I am so very, very glad to hear you say so.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  But do you really think, dear Caroline, that
legislation would improve matters in any way?  I am told that, nowadays,
all the married men live like bachelors, and all the bachelors like
married men.

MRS. ALLONBY.  I certainly never know one from the other.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Oh, I think one can always know at once whether a man
has home claims upon his life or not.  I have noticed a very, very sad
expression in the eyes of so many married men.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Ah, all that I have noticed is that they are horribly
tedious when they are good husbands, and abominably conceited when they
are not.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Well, I suppose the type of husband has completely
changed since my young days, but I’m bound to state that poor dear
Hunstanton was the most delightful of creatures, and as good as gold.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Ah, my husband is a sort of promissory note; I’m tired of
meeting him.

LADY CAROLINE.  But you renew him from time to time, don’t you?

MRS. ALLONBY.  Oh no, Lady Caroline.  I have only had one husband as yet.
I suppose you look upon me as quite an amateur.

LADY CAROLINE.  With your views on life I wonder you married at all.

MRS. ALLONBY.  So do I.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  My dear child, I believe you are really very happy in
your married life, but that you like to hide your happiness from others.

MRS. ALLONBY.  I assure you I was horribly deceived in Ernest.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Oh, I hope not, dear.  I knew his mother quite well.
She was a Stratton, Caroline, one of Lord Crowland’s daughters.

LADY CAROLINE.  Victoria Stratton?  I remember her perfectly.  A silly
fair-haired woman with no chin.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Ah, Ernest has a chin.  He has a very strong chin, a
square chin.  Ernest’s chin is far too square.

LADY STUTFIELD.  But do you really think a man’s chin can be too square?
I think a man should look very, very strong, and that his chin should be
quite, quite square.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Then you should certainly know Ernest, Lady Stutfield.  It
is only fair to tell you beforehand he has got no conversation at all.

LADY STUTFIELD.  I adore silent men.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Oh, Ernest isn’t silent.  He talks the whole time.  But he
has got no conversation.  What he talks about I don’t know.  I haven’t
listened to him for years.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Have you never forgiven him then?  How sad that seems!
But all life is very, very sad, is it not?

MRS. ALLONBY.  Life, Lady Stutfield, is simply a _mauvais quart d’heure_
made up of exquisite moments.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Yes, there are moments, certainly.  But was it something
very, very wrong that Mr. Allonby did?  Did he become angry with you, and
say anything that was unkind or true?

MRS. ALLONBY.  Oh dear, no.  Ernest is invariably calm.  That is one of
the reasons he always gets on my nerves.  Nothing is so aggravating as
calmness.  There is something positively brutal about the good temper of
most modern men.  I wonder we women stand it as well as we do.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Yes; men’s good temper shows they are not so sensitive
as we are, not so finely strung.  It makes a great barrier often between
husband and wife, does it not?  But I would so much like to know what was
the wrong thing Mr. Allonby did.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Well, I will tell you, if you solemnly promise to tell
everybody else.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Thank you, thank you.  I will make a point of repeating
it.

MRS. ALLONBY.  When Ernest and I were engaged, he swore to me positively
on his knees that he had never loved any one before in the whole course
of his life.  I was very young at the time, so I didn’t believe him, I
needn’t tell you.  Unfortunately, however, I made no enquiries of any
kind till after I had been actually married four or five months.  I found
out then that what he had told me was perfectly true.  And that sort of
thing makes a man so absolutely uninteresting.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  My dear!

MRS. ALLONBY.  Men always want to be a woman’s first love.  That is their
clumsy vanity.  We women have a more subtle instinct about things.  What
we like is to be a man’s last romance.

LADY STUTFIELD.  I see what you mean.  It’s very, very beautiful.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  My dear child, you don’t mean to tell me that you won’t
forgive your husband because he never loved any one else?  Did you ever
hear such a thing, Caroline?  I am quite surprised.

LADY CAROLINE.  Oh, women have become so highly educated, Jane, that
nothing should surprise us nowadays, except happy marriages.  They
apparently are getting remarkably rare.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Oh, they’re quite out of date.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Except amongst the middle classes, I have been told.

MRS. ALLONBY.  How like the middle classes!

LADY STUTFIELD.  Yes—is it not?—very, very like them.

LADY CAROLINE.  If what you tell us about the middle classes is true,
Lady Stutfield, it redounds greatly to their credit.  It is much to be
regretted that in our rank of life the wife should be so persistently
frivolous, under the impression apparently that it is the proper thing to
be.  It is to that I attribute the unhappiness of so many marriages we
all know of in society.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Do you know, Lady Caroline, I don’t think the frivolity of
the wife has ever anything to do with it. More marriages are ruined
nowadays by the common sense of the husband than by anything else.  How
can a woman be expected to be happy with a man who insists on treating
her as if she were a perfectly rational being?

LADY HUNSTANTON.  My dear!

MRS. ALLONBY.  Man, poor, awkward, reliable, necessary man belongs to a
sex that has been rational for millions and millions of years.  He can’t
help himself.  It is in his race.  The History of Woman is very
different.  We have always been picturesque protests against the mere
existence of common sense.  We saw its dangers from the first.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Yes, the common sense of husbands is certainly most,
most trying.  Do tell me your conception of the Ideal Husband.  I think
it would be so very, very helpful.

MRS. ALLONBY.  The Ideal Husband?  There couldn’t be such a thing.  The
institution is wrong.

LADY STUTFIELD.  The Ideal Man, then, in his relations to _us_.

LADY CAROLINE.  He would probably be extremely realistic.

MRS. CAROLINE.  The Ideal Man!  Oh, the Ideal Man should talk to us as if
we were goddesses, and treat us as if we were children.  He should refuse
all our serious requests, and gratify every one of our whims.  He should
encourage us to have caprices, and forbid us to have missions.  He should
always say much more than he means, and always mean much more than he
says.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  But how could he do both, dear?

MRS. ALLONBY.  He should never run down other pretty women.  That would
show he had no taste, or make one suspect that he had too much.  No; he
should be nice about them all, but say that somehow they don’t attract
him.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Yes, that is always very, very pleasant to hear about
other women.

MRS. ALLONBY.  If we ask him a question about anything, he should give us
an answer all about ourselves.  He should invariably praise us for
whatever qualities he knows we haven’t got.  But he should be pitiless,
quite pitiless, in reproaching us for the virtues that we have never
dreamed of possessing.  He should never believe that we know the use of
useful things.  That would be unforgiveable.  But he should shower on us
everything we don’t want.

LADY CAROLINE.  As far as I can see, he is to do nothing but pay bills
and compliments.

MRS. ALLONBY.  He should persistently compromise us in public, and treat
us with absolute respect when we are alone.  And yet he should be always
ready to have a perfectly terrible scene, whenever we want one, and to
become miserable, absolutely miserable, at a moment’s notice, and to
overwhelm us with just reproaches in less than twenty minutes, and to be
positively violent at the end of half an hour, and to leave us for ever
at a quarter to eight, when we have to go and dress for dinner.  And
when, after that, one has seen him for really the last time, and he has
refused to take back the little things he has given one, and promised
never to communicate with one again, or to write one any foolish letters,
he should be perfectly broken-hearted, and telegraph to one all day long,
and send one little notes every half-hour by a private hansom, and dine
quite alone at the club, so that every one should know how unhappy he
was.  And after a whole dreadful week, during which one has gone about
everywhere with one’s husband, just to show how absolutely lonely one
was, he may be given a third last parting, in the evening, and then, if
his conduct has been quite irreproachable, and one has behaved really
badly to him, he should be allowed to admit that he has been entirely in
the wrong, and when he has admitted that, it becomes a woman’s duty to
forgive, and one can do it all over again from the beginning, with
variations.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  How clever you are, my dear!  You never mean a single
word you say.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Thank you, thank you.  It has been quite, quite
entrancing.  I must try and remember it all.  There are such a number of
details that are so very, very important.

LADY CAROLINE.  But you have not told us yet what the reward of the Ideal
Man is to be.

MRS. ALLONBY.  His reward?  Oh, infinite expectation.  That is quite
enough for him.

LADY STUTFIELD.  But men are so terribly, terribly exacting, are they
not?

MRS. ALLONBY.  That makes no matter.  One should never surrender.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Not even to the Ideal Man?

MRS. ALLONBY.  Certainly not to him.  Unless, of course, one wants to
grow tired of him.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Oh! . . . yes.  I see that.  It is very, very helpful.
Do you think, Mrs. Allonby, I shall ever meet the Ideal Man?  Or are
there more than one?

MRS. ALLONBY.  There are just four in London, Lady Stutfield.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Oh, my dear!

MRS. ALLONBY.  [_Going over to her_.]  What has happened?  Do tell me.

LADY HUNSTANTON [_in a low voice_]  I had completely forgotten that the
American young lady has been in the room all the time.  I am afraid some
of this clever talk may have shocked her a little.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Ah, that will do her so much good!

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Let us hope she didn’t understand much.  I think I had
better go over and talk to her.  [_Rises and goes across to_ HESTER
WORSLEY.]  Well, dear Miss Worsley. [_Sitting down beside her_.]  How
quiet you have been in your nice little corner all this time!  I suppose
you have been reading a book?  There are so many books here in the
library.

HESTER.  No, I have been listening to the conversation.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  You mustn’t believe everything that was said, you know,
dear.

HESTER.  I didn’t believe any of it

LADY HUNSTANTON.  That is quite right, dear.

HESTER.  [_Continuing_.]  I couldn’t believe that any women could really
hold such views of life as I have heard to-night from some of your
guests.  [_An awkward pause_.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  I hear you have such pleasant society in America.
Quite like our own in places, my son wrote to me.

HESTER.  There are cliques in America as elsewhere, Lady Hunstanton.  But
true American society consists simply of all the good women and good men
we have in our country.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  What a sensible system, and I dare say quite pleasant
too.  I am afraid in England we have too many artificial social barriers.
We don’t see as much as we should of the middle and lower classes.

HESTER.  In America we have no lower classes.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Really?  What a very strange arrangement!

MRS. ALLONBY.  What is that dreadful girl talking about?

LADY STUTFIELD.  She is painfully natural, is she not?

LADY CAROLINE.  There are a great many things you haven’t got in America,
I am told, Miss Worsley.  They say you have no ruins, and no curiosities.

MRS. ALLONBY.  [_To_ LADY STUTFIELD.]  What nonsense!  They have their
mothers and their manners.

HESTER.  The English aristocracy supply us with our curiosities, Lady
Caroline.  They are sent over to us every summer, regularly, in the
steamers, and propose to us the day after they land.  As for ruins, we
are trying to build up something that will last longer than brick or
stone.  [_Gets up to take her fan from table_.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  What is that, dear?  Ah, yes, an iron Exhibition, is it
not, at that place that has the curious name?

HESTER.  [_Standing by table_.]  We are trying to build up life, Lady
Hunstanton, on a better, truer, purer basis than life rests on here.
This sounds strange to you all, no doubt.  How could it sound other than
strange?  You rich people in England, you don’t know how you are living.
How could you know?  You shut out from your society the gentle and the
good.  You laugh at the simple and the pure.  Living, as you all do, on
others and by them, you sneer at self-sacrifice, and if you throw bread
to the poor, it is merely to keep them quiet for a season.  With all your
pomp and wealth and art you don’t know how to live—you don’t even know
that.  You love the beauty that you can see and touch and handle, the
beauty that you can destroy, and do destroy, but of the unseen beauty of
life, of the unseen beauty of a higher life, you know nothing.  You have
lost life’s secret.  Oh, your English society seems to me shallow,
selfish, foolish.  It has blinded its eyes, and stopped its ears.  It
lies like a leper in purple.  It sits like a dead thing smeared with
gold.  It is all wrong, all wrong.

LADY STUTFIELD.  I don’t think one should know of these things.  It is
not very, very nice, is it?

LADY HUNSTANTON.  My dear Miss Worsley, I thought you liked English
society so much.  You were such a success in it.  And you were so much
admired by the best people.  I quite forget what Lord Henry Weston said
of you—but it was most complimentary, and you know what an authority he
is on beauty.

HESTER.  Lord Henry Weston!  I remember him, Lady Hunstanton.  A man with
a hideous smile and a hideous past.  He is asked everywhere.  No
dinner-party is complete without him.  What of those whose ruin is due to
him?  They are outcasts.  They are nameless.  If you met them in the
street you would turn your head away.  I don’t complain of their
punishment.  Let all women who have sinned be punished.

[MRS. ARBUTHNOT _enters from terrace behind in a cloak with a lace veil
over her head_.  _She hears the last words and starts_.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  My dear young lady!

HESTER.  It is right that they should be punished, but don’t let them be
the only ones to suffer.  If a man and woman have sinned, let them both
go forth into the desert to love or loathe each other there.  Let them
both be branded.  Set a mark, if you wish, on each, but don’t punish the
one and let the other go free.  Don’t have one law for men and another
for women.  You are unjust to women in England.  And till you count what
is a shame in a woman to be an infamy in a man, you will always be
unjust, and Right, that pillar of fire, and Wrong, that pillar of cloud,
will be made dim to your eyes, or be not seen at all, or if seen, not
regarded.

LADY CAROLINE.  Might I, dear Miss Worsley, as you are standing up, ask
you for my cotton that is just behind you?  Thank you.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  My dear Mrs. Arbuthnot!  I am so pleased you have come
up.  But I didn’t hear you announced.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Oh, I came straight in from the terrace, Lady Hunstanton,
just as I was.  You didn’t tell me you had a party.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Not a party.  Only a few guests who are staying in the
house, and whom you must know.  Allow me.  [_Tries to help her_.  _Rings
bell_.]  Caroline, this is Mrs. Arbuthnot, one of my sweetest friends.
Lady Caroline Pontefract, Lady Stutfield, Mrs. Allonby, and my young
American friend, Miss Worsley, who has just been telling us all how
wicked we are.

HESTER.  I am afraid you think I spoke too strongly, Lady Hunstanton.
But there are some things in England—

LADY HUNSTANTON.  My dear young lady, there was a great deal of truth, I
dare say, in what you said, and you looked very pretty while you said it,
which is much more important, Lord Illingworth would tell us.  The only
point where I thought you were a little hard was about Lady Caroline’s
brother, about poor Lord Henry.  He is really such good company.

[_Enter Footman_.]

Take Mrs. Arbuthnot’s things.

[_Exit Footman with wraps_.]

HESTER.  Lady Caroline, I had no idea it was your brother.  I am sorry
for the pain I must have caused you—I—

LADY CAROLINE.  My dear Miss Worsley, the only part of your little
speech, if I may so term it, with which I thoroughly agreed, was the part
about my brother.  Nothing that you could possibly say could be too bad
for him.  I regard Henry as infamous, absolutely infamous.  But I am
bound to state, as you were remarking, Jane, that he is excellent
company, and he has one of the best cooks in London, and after a good
dinner one can forgive anybody, even one’s own relations.

LADY HUNSTANTON [_to_ MISS WORSLEY]  Now, do come, dear, and make friends
with Mrs. Arbuthnot.  She is one of the good, sweet, simple people you
told us we never admitted into society.  I am sorry to say Mrs. Arbuthnot
comes very rarely to me.  But that is not my fault.

MRS. ALLONBY.  What a bore it is the men staying so long after dinner!  I
expect they are saying the most dreadful things about us.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Do you really think so?

MRS. ALLONBY.  I was sure of it.

LADY STUTFIELD.  How very, very horrid of them!  Shall we go onto the
terrace?

MRS. ALLONBY.  Oh, anything to get away from the dowagers and the
dowdies.  [_Rises and goes with_ LADY STUTFIELD _to door_ L.C.]  We are
only going to look at the stars, Lady Hunstanton.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  You will find a great many, dear, a great many.  But
don’t catch cold.  [_To_ MRS. ARBUTHNOT.]  We shall all miss Gerald so
much, dear Mrs. Arbuthnot.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  But has Lord Illingworth really offered to make Gerald
his secretary?

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Oh, yes!  He has been most charming about it.  He has
the highest possible opinion of your boy.  You don’t know Lord
Illingworth, I believe, dear.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I have never met him.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  You know him by name, no doubt?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I am afraid I don’t.  I live so much out of the world,
and see so few people.  I remember hearing years ago of an old Lord
Illingworth who lived in Yorkshire, I think.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah, yes.  That would be the last Earl but one.  He was
a very curious man.  He wanted to marry beneath him.  Or wouldn’t, I
believe.  There was some scandal about it.  The present Lord Illingworth
is quite different.  He is very distinguished.  He does—well, he does
nothing, which I am afraid our pretty American visitor here thinks very
wrong of anybody, and I don’t know that he cares much for the subjects in
which you are so interested, dear Mrs. Arbuthnot.  Do you think,
Caroline, that Lord Illingworth is interested in the Housing of the Poor?

LADY CAROLINE.  I should fancy not at all, Jane.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  We all have our different tastes, have we not?  But
Lord Illingworth has a very high position, and there is nothing he
couldn’t get if he chose to ask for it.  Of course, he is comparatively a
young man still, and he has only come to his title within—how long
exactly is it, Caroline, since Lord Illingworth succeeded?

LADY CAROLINE.  About four years, I think, Jane.  I know it was the same
year in which my brother had his last exposure in the evening newspapers.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah, I remember.  That would be about four years ago.
Of course, there were a great many people between the present Lord
Illingworth and the title, Mrs. Arbuthnot.  There was—who was there,
Caroline?

LADY CAROLINE.  There was poor Margaret’s baby.  You remember how anxious
she was to have a boy, and it was a boy, but it died, and her husband
died shortly afterwards, and she married almost immediately one of Lord
Ascot’s sons, who, I am told, beats her.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah, that is in the family, dear, that is in the family.
And there was also, I remember, a clergyman who wanted to be a lunatic,
or a lunatic who wanted to be a clergyman, I forget which, but I know the
Court of Chancery investigated the matter, and decided that he was quite
sane.  And I saw him afterwards at poor Lord Plumstead’s with straws in
his hair, or something very odd about him.  I can’t recall what.  I often
regret, Lady Caroline, that dear Lady Cecilia never lived to see her son
get the title.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Lady Cecilia?

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Lord Illingworth’s mother, dear Mrs. Arbuthnot, was one
of the Duchess of Jerningham’s pretty daughters, and she married Sir
Thomas Harford, who wasn’t considered a very good match for her at the
time, though he was said to be the handsomest man in London.  I knew them
all quite intimately, and both the sons, Arthur and George.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  It was the eldest son who succeeded, of course, Lady
Hunstanton?

LADY HUNSTANTON.  No, dear, he was killed in the hunting field.  Or was
it fishing, Caroline?  I forget.  But George came in for everything.  I
always tell him that no younger son has ever had such good luck as he has
had.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Lady Hunstanton, I want to speak to Gerald at once.
Might I see him?  Can he be sent for?

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Certainly, dear.  I will send one of the servants into
the dining-room to fetch him.  I don’t know what keeps the gentlemen so
long.  [_Rings bell_.]  When I knew Lord Illingworth first as plain
George Harford, he was simply a very brilliant young man about town, with
not a penny of money except what poor dear Lady Cecilia gave him.  She
was quite devoted to him.  Chiefly, I fancy, because he was on bad terms
with his father.  Oh, here is the dear Archdeacon.  [_To Servant_.]  It
doesn’t matter.

[_Enter_ SIR JOHN _and_ DOCTOR DAUBENY.  SIR JOHN _goes over to_ LADY
STUTFIELD, DOCTOR DAUBENY _to_ LADY HUNSTANTON.]

THE ARCHDEACON.  Lord Illingworth has been most entertaining.  I have
never enjoyed myself more.  [_Sees_ MRS. ARBUTHNOT.]  Ah, Mrs. Arbuthnot.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  [_To_ DOCTOR BAUBENY.]  You see I have got Mrs.
Arbuthnot to come to me at last.

THE ARCHDEACON.  That is a great honour, Lady Hunstanton.  Mrs. Daubeny
will be quite jealous of you.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah, I am so sorry Mrs. Daubeny could not come with you
to-night.  Headache as usual, I suppose.

THE ARCHDEACON.  Yes, Lady Hunstanton; a perfect martyr.  But she is
happiest alone.  She is happiest alone.

LADY CAROLINE.  [_To her husband_.]  John!  [SIR JOHN _goes over to his
wife_.  DOCTOR BAUBENY _talks to_ LADY HUNSTANTON _and_ MRS. ARBUTHNOT.]

[MRS. ARBUTHNOT watches LORD ILLINGWORTH the whole time.  He has passed
across the room without noticing her, and approaches MRS. ALLONBY, who
with LADY STUTFIELD is standing by the door looking on to the terrace.]

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  How is the most charming woman in the world?

MRS. ALLONBY.  [Taking LADY STUTFIELD by the hand.]  We are both quite
well, thank you, Lord Illingworth.  But what a short time you have been
in the dining-room!  It seems as if we had only just left.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I was bored to death.  Never opened my lips the whole
time.  Absolutely longing to come in to you.

MRS. ALLONBY.  You should have.  The American girl has been giving us a
lecture.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Really?  All Americans lecture, I believe.  I suppose
it is something in their climate.  What did she lecture about?

MRS. ALLONBY.  Oh, Puritanism, of course.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I am going to convert her, am I not?  How long do you
give me?

MRS. ALLONBY.  A week.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  A week is more than enough.

[_Enter_ GERALD _and_ LORD ALFRED.]

GERALD.  [_Going to_ MRS. ARBUTHNOT.]  Dear mother!

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Gerald, I don’t feel at all well.  See me home, Gerald.
I shouldn’t have come.

GERALD.  I am so sorry, mother.  Certainly.  But you must know Lord
Illingworth first.  [_Goes across room_.]

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Not to-night, Gerald.

GERALD.  Lord Illingworth, I want you so much to know my mother.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  With the greatest pleasure.  [_To_ MRS. ALLONBY.]
I’ll be back in a moment.  People’s mothers always bore me to death.  All
women become like their mothers.  That is their tragedy.

MRS. ALLONBY.  No man does.  That is his.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  What a delightful mood you are in to-night!  [_Turns
round and goes across with_ GERALD _to_ MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  _When he sees
her_, _he starts back in wonder_.  _Then slowly his eyes turn towards_
GERALD.]

GERALD.  Mother, this is Lord Illingworth, who has offered to take me as
his private secretary.  [MRS. ARBUTHNOT _bows coldly_.]  It is a
wonderful opening for me, isn’t it?  I hope he won’t be disappointed in
me, that is all.  You’ll thank Lord Illingworth, mother, won’t you?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Lord Illingworth in very good, I am sure, to interest
himself in you for the moment.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  [_Putting his hand on_ GERALD’S _shoulder_.]  Oh,
Gerald and I are great friends already, Mrs . . . Arbuthnot.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  There can be nothing in common between you and my son,
Lord Illingworth.

GERALD.  Dear mother, how can you say so?  Of course Lord Illingworth is
awfully clever and that sort of thing.  There is nothing Lord Illingworth
doesn’t know.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  My dear boy!

GERALD.  He knows more about life than any one I have ever met.  I feel
an awful duffer when I am with you, Lord Illingworth.  Of course, I have
had so few advantages.  I have not been to Eton or Oxford like other
chaps.  But Lord Illingworth doesn’t seem to mind that.  He has been
awfully good to me, mother.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Lord Illingworth may change his mind.  He may not really
want you as his secretary.

GERALD.  Mother!

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  You must remember, as you said yourself, you have had so
few advantages.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Lord Illingworth, I want to speak to you for a moment.  Do
come over.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Will you excuse me, Mrs. Arbuthnot?  Now, don’t let
your charming mother make any more difficulties, Gerald.  The thing is
quite settled, isn’t it?

GERALD.  I hope so.  [LORD ILLINGWORTH _goes across to_ MRS. ARBUTHNOT.]

MRS. ALLONBY.  I thought you were never going to leave the lady in black
velvet.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  She is excessively handsome.  [_Looks at_ MRS.
ARBUTHNOT.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Caroline, shall we all make a move to the music-room?
Miss Worsley is going to play.  You’ll come too, dear Mrs. Arbuthnot,
won’t you?  You don’t know what a treat is in store for you.  [_To_
DOCTOR BAUBENY.]  I must really take Miss Worsley down some afternoon to
the rectory.  I should so much like dear Mrs. Daubeny to hear her on the
violin.  Ah, I forgot.  Dear Mrs. Daubeny’s hearing is a little
defective, is it not?

THE ARCHDEACON.  Her deafness is a great privation to her.  She can’t
even hear my sermons now.  She reads them at home.  But she has many
resources in herself, many resources.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  She reads a good deal, I suppose?

THE ARCHDEACON.  Just the very largest print.  The eyesight is rapidly
going.  But she’s never morbid, never morbid.

GERALD.  [_To_ LORD ILLINGWORTH.]  Do speak to my mother, Lord
Illingworth, before you go into the music-room.  She seems to think,
somehow, you don’t mean what you said to me.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Aren’t you coming?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  In a few moments.  Lady Hunstanton, if Mrs. Arbuthnot
would allow me, I would like to say a few words to her, and we will join
you later on.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah, of course.  You will have a great deal to say to
her, and she will have a great deal to thank you for.  It is not every
son who gets such an offer, Mrs. Arbuthnot.  But I know you appreciate
that, dear.

LADY CAROLINE.  John!

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Now, don’t keep Mrs. Arbuthnot too long, Lord
Illingworth.  We can’t spare her.

[_Exit following the other guests_.  _Sound of violin heard from
music-room_.]

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  So that is our son, Rachel!  Well, I am very proud of
him.  He in a Harford, every inch of him.  By the way, why Arbuthnot,
Rachel?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  One name is as good as another, when one has no right to
any name.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I suppose so—but why Gerald?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  After a man whose heart I broke—after my father.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Well, Rachel, what in over is over.  All I have got to
say now in that I am very, very much pleased with our boy.  The world
will know him merely as my private secretary, but to me he will be
something very near, and very dear.  It is a curious thing, Rachel; my
life seemed to be quite complete.  It was not so.  It lacked something,
it lacked a son.  I have found my son now, I am glad I have found him.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  You have no right to claim him, or the smallest part of
him.  The boy is entirely mine, and shall remain mine.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  My dear Rachel, you have had him to yourself for over
twenty years.  Why not let me have him for a little now?  He is quite as
much mine as yours.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Are you talking of the child you abandoned?  Of the
child who, as far as you are concerned, might have died of hunger and of
want?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  You forget, Rachel, it was you who left me.  It was
not I who left you.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I left you because you refused to give the child a name.
Before my son was born, I implored you to marry me.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I had no expectations then.  And besides, Rachel, I
wasn’t much older than you were.  I was only twenty-two.  I was
twenty-one, I believe, when the whole thing began in your father’s
garden.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  When a man is old enough to do wrong he should be old
enough to do right also.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  My dear Rachel, intellectual generalities are always
interesting, but generalities in morals mean absolutely nothing.  As for
saying I left our child to starve, that, of course, is untrue and silly.
My mother offered you six hundred a year.  But you wouldn’t take
anything.  You simply disappeared, and carried the child away with you.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I wouldn’t have accepted a penny from her.  Your father
was different.  He told you, in my presence, when we were in Paris, that
it was your duty to marry me.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Oh, duty is what one expects from others, it is not
what one does oneself.  Of course, I was influenced by my mother.  Every
man is when he is young.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I am glad to hear you say so.  Gerald shall certainly
not go away with you.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  What nonsense, Rachel!

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Do you think I would allow my son—

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  _Our_ son.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  My son [LORD ILLINGWORTH _shrugs his shoulders_]—to go
away with the man who spoiled my youth, who ruined my life, who has
tainted every moment of my days?  You don’t realise what my past has been
in suffering and in shame.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  My dear Rachel, I must candidly say that I think
Gerald’s future considerably more important than your past.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Gerald cannot separate his future from my past.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  That is exactly what he should do.  That is exactly
what you should help him to do.  What a typical woman you are!  You talk
sentimentally, and you are thoroughly selfish the whole time.  But don’t
let us have a scene.  Rachel, I want you to look at this matter from the
common-sense point of view, from the point of view of what is best for
our son, leaving you and me out of the question.  What is our son at
present?  An underpaid clerk in a small Provincial Bank in a third-rate
English town.  If you imagine he is quite happy in such a position, you
are mistaken.  He is thoroughly discontented.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  He was not discontented till he met you.  You have made
him so.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Of course, I made him so.  Discontent is the first
step in the progress of a man or a nation.  But I did not leave him with
a mere longing for things he could not get.  No, I made him a charming
offer.  He jumped at it, I need hardly say.  Any young man would.  And
now, simply because it turns out that I am the boy’s own father and he my
own son, you propose practically to ruin his career.  That is to say, if
I were a perfect stranger, you would allow Gerald to go away with me, but
as he is my own flesh and blood you won’t.  How utterly illogical you
are!

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I will not allow him to go.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  How can you prevent it?  What excuse can you give to
him for making him decline such an offer as mine?  I won’t tell him in
what relations I stand to him, I need hardly say.  But you daren’t tell
him.  You know that.  Look how you have brought him up.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I have brought him up to be a good man.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Quite so.  And what is the result?  You have educated
him to be your judge if he ever finds you out.  And a bitter, an unjust
judge he will be to you.  Don’t be deceived, Rachel.  Children begin by
loving their parents.  After a time they judge them.  Rarely, if ever, do
they forgive them.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  George, don’t take my son away from me.  I have had
twenty years of sorrow, and I have only had one thing to love me, only
one thing to love.  You have had a life of joy, and pleasure, and
success.  You have been quite happy, you have never thought of us.  There
was no reason, according to your views of life, why you should have
remembered us at all.  Your meeting us was a mere accident, a horrible
accident.  Forget it.  Don’t come now, and rob me of . . . of all I have
in the whole world.  You are so rich in other things.  Leave me the
little vineyard of my life; leave me the walled-in garden and the well of
water; the ewe-lamb God sent me, in pity or in wrath, oh! leave me that.
George, don’t take Gerald from me.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Rachel, at the present moment you are not necessary to
Gerald’s career; I am.  There is nothing more to be said on the subject.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I will not let him go.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Here is Gerald.  He has a right to decide for himself.

[_Enter_ GERALD.]

GERALD.  Well, dear mother, I hope you have settled it all with Lord
Illingworth?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I have not, Gerald.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Your mother seems not to like your coming with me, for
some reason.

GERALD.  Why, mother?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I thought you were quite happy here with me, Gerald.  I
didn’t know you were so anxious to leave me.

GERALD.  Mother, how can you talk like that?  Of course I have been quite
happy with you.  But a man can’t stay always with his mother.  No chap
does.  I want to make myself a position, to do something.  I thought you
would have been proud to see me Lord Illingworth’s secretary.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I do not think you would be suitable as a private
secretary to Lord Illingworth.  You have no qualifications.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I don’t wish to seem to interfere for a moment, Mrs.
Arbuthnot, but as far as your last objection is concerned, I surely am
the best judge.  And I can only tell you that your son has all the
qualifications I had hoped for.  He has more, in fact, than I had even
thought of.  Far more.  [MRS. ARBUTHNOT _remains silent_.]  Have you any
other reason, Mrs. Arbuthnot, why you don’t wish your son to accept this
post?

GERALD.  Have you, mother?  Do answer.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  If you have, Mrs. Arbuthnot, pray, pray say it.  We
are quite by ourselves here.  Whatever it is, I need not say I will not
repeat it.

GERALD.  Mother?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  If you would like to be alone with your son, I will
leave you.  You may have some other reason you don’t wish me to hear.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I have no other reason.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Then, my dear boy, we may look on the thing as
settled.  Come, you and I will smoke a cigarette on the terrace together.
And Mrs. Arbuthnot, pray let me tell you, that I think you have acted
very, very wisely.

[_Exit with_ GERALD.  MRS. ARBUTHNOT _is left alone_.  _She stands
immobile with a look of unutterable sorrow on her face_.]

                                 ACT DROP




THIRD ACT


                                  SCENE

    _The Picture Gallery at Hunstanton_.  _Door at back leading on to
                                terrace_.

[LORD ILLINGWORTH _and_ GERALD, R.C.  LORD ILLINGWORTH _lolling on a
sofa_.  GERALD _in a chair_.]

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Thoroughly sensible woman, your mother, Gerald.  I
knew she would come round in the end.

GERALD.  My mother is awfully conscientious, Lord Illingworth, and I know
she doesn’t think I am educated enough to be your secretary.  She is
perfectly right, too.  I was fearfully idle when I was at school, and I
couldn’t pass an examination now to save my life.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  My dear Gerald, examinations are of no value
whatsoever.  If a man is a gentleman, he knows quite enough, and if he is
not a gentleman, whatever he knows is bad for him.

GERALD.  But I am so ignorant of the world, Lord Illingworth.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Don’t be afraid, Gerald.  Remember that you’ve got on
your side the most wonderful thing in the world—youth!  There is nothing
like youth.  The middle-aged are mortgaged to Life.  The old are in
life’s lumber-room.  But youth is the Lord of Life.  Youth has a kingdom
waiting for it.  Every one is born a king, and most people die in exile,
like most kings.  To win back my youth, Gerald, there is nothing I
wouldn’t do—except take exercise, get up early, or be a useful member of
the community.

GERALD.  But you don’t call yourself old, Lord Illingworth?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I am old enough to be your father, Gerald.

GERALD.  I don’t remember my father; he died years ago.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  So Lady Hunstanton told me.

GERALD.  It is very curious, my mother never talks to me about my father.
I sometimes think she must have married beneath her.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  [_Winces slightly_.]  Really?  [_Goes over and puts
his hand on_ GERALD’S _shoulder_.]  You have missed not having a father,
I suppose, Gerald?

GERALD.  Oh, no; my mother has been so good to me.  No one ever had such
a mother as I have had.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I am quite sure of that.  Still I should imagine that
most mothers don’t quite understand their sons.  Don’t realise, I mean,
that a son has ambitions, a desire to see life, to make himself a name.
After all, Gerald, you couldn’t be expected to pass all your life in such
a hole as Wrockley, could you?

GERALD.  Oh, no!  It would be dreadful!

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  A mother’s love is very touching, of course, but it is
often curiously selfish.  I mean, there is a good deal of selfishness in
it.

GERALD.  [_Slowly_.]  I suppose there is.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Your mother is a thoroughly good woman.  But good
women have such limited views of life, their horizon is so small, their
interests are so petty, aren’t they?

GERALD.  They are awfully interested, certainly, in things we don’t care
much about.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I suppose your mother is very religious, and that sort
of thing.

GERALD.  Oh, yes, she’s always going to church.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Ah! she is not modern, and to be modern is the only
thing worth being nowadays.  You want to be modern, don’t you, Gerald?
You want to know life as it really is.  Not to be put of with any
old-fashioned theories about life.  Well, what you have to do at present
is simply to fit yourself for the best society.  A man who can dominate a
London dinner-table can dominate the world.  The future belongs to the
dandy.  It is the exquisites who are going to rule.

GERALD.  I should like to wear nice things awfully, but I have always
been told that a man should not think too much about his clothes.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  People nowadays are so absolutely superficial that
they don’t understand the philosophy of the superficial.  By the way,
Gerald, you should learn how to tie your tie better.  Sentiment is all
very well for the button-hole.  But the essential thing for a necktie is
style.  A well-tied tie is the first serious step in life.

GERALD.  [_Laughing_.]  I might be able to learn how to tie a tie, Lord
Illingworth, but I should never be able to talk as you do.  I don’t know
how to talk.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Oh! talk to every woman as if you loved her, and to
every man as if he bored you, and at the end of your first season you
will have the reputation of possessing the most perfect social tact.

GERALD.  But it is very difficult to get into society isn’t it?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  To get into the best society, nowadays, one has either
to feed people, amuse people, or shock people—that is all!

GERALD.  I suppose society is wonderfully delightful!

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  To be in it is merely a bore.  But to be out of it
simply a tragedy.  Society is a necessary thing.  No man has any real
success in this world unless he has got women to back him, and women rule
society.  If you have not got women on your side you are quite over.  You
might just as well be a barrister, or a stockbroker, or a journalist at
once.

GERALD.  It is very difficult to understand women, is it not?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  You should never try to understand them.  Women are
pictures.  Men are problems.  If you want to know what a woman really
means—which, by the way, is always a dangerous thing to do—look at her,
don’t listen to her.

GERALD.  But women are awfully clever, aren’t they?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  One should always tell them so.  But, to the
philosopher, my dear Gerald, women represent the triumph of matter over
mind—just as men represent the triumph of mind over morals.

GERALD.  How then can women have so much power as you say they have?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  The history of women is the history of the worst form
of tyranny the world has ever known.  The tyranny of the weak over the
strong.  It is the only tyranny that lasts.

GERALD.  But haven’t women got a refining influence?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Nothing refines but the intellect.

GERALD.  Still, there are many different kinds of women, aren’t there?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Only two kinds in society: the plain and the coloured.

GERALD.  But there are good women in society, aren’t there?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Far too many.

GERALD.  But do you think women shouldn’t be good?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  One should never tell them so, they’d all become good
at once.  Women are a fascinatingly wilful sex.  Every woman is a rebel,
and usually in wild revolt against herself.

GERALD.  You have never been married, Lord Illingworth, have you?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Men marry because they are tired; women because they
are curious.  Both are disappointed.

GERALD.  But don’t you think one can be happy when one is married?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Perfectly happy.  But the happiness of a married man,
my dear Gerald, depends on the people he has not married.

GERALD.  But if one is in love?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  One should always be in love.  That is the reason one
should never marry.

GERALD.  Love is a very wonderful thing, isn’t it?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  When one is in love one begins by deceiving oneself.
And one ends by deceiving others.  That is what the world calls a
romance.  But a really _grande passion_ is comparatively rare nowadays.
It is the privilege of people who have nothing to do.  That is the one
use of the idle classes in a country, and the only possible explanation
of us Harfords.

GERALD.  Harfords, Lord Illingworth?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  That is my family name.  You should study the Peerage,
Gerald.  It is the one book a young man about town should know
thoroughly, and it is the best thing in fiction the English have ever
done.  And now, Gerald, you are going into a perfectly new life with me,
and I want you to know how to live.  [MRS. ARBUTHNOT _appears on terrace
behind_.]  For the world has been made by fools that wise men should live
in it!

[_Enter_ L.C. LADY HUNSTANTON _and_ DR. DAUBENY.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah! here you are, dear Lord Illingworth.  Well, I
suppose you have been telling our young friend, Gerald, what his new
duties are to be, and giving him a great deal of good advice over a
pleasant cigarette.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I have been giving him the best of advice, Lady
Hunstanton, and the best of cigarettes.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  I am so sorry I was not here to listen to you, but I
suppose I am too old now to learn.  Except from you, dear Archdeacon,
when you are in your nice pulpit.  But then I always know what you are
going to say, so I don’t feel alarmed.  [_Sees_ MRS. ARBUTHNOT.]  Ah!
dear Mrs. Arbuthnot, do come and join us.  Come, dear.  [_Enter_ MRS.
ARBUTHNOT.]  Gerald has been having such a long talk with Lord
Illingworth; I am sure you must feel very much flattered at the pleasant
way in which everything has turned out for him.  Let us sit down.  [_They
sit down_.]  And how is your beautiful embroidery going on?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I am always at work, Lady Hunstanton.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Mrs. Daubeny embroiders a little, too, doesn’t she?

THE ARCHDEACON.  She was very deft with her needle once, quite a Dorcas.
But the gout has crippled her fingers a good deal.  She has not touched
the tambour frame for nine or ten years.  But she has many other
amusements.  She is very much interested in her own health.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah! that is always a nice distraction, in it not?  Now,
what are you talking about, Lord Illingworth?  Do tell us.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I was on the point of explaining to Gerald that the
world has always laughed at its own tragedies, that being the only way in
which it has been able to bear them.  And that, consequently, whatever
the world has treated seriously belongs to the comedy side of things.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Now I am quite out of my depth.  I usually am when Lord
Illingworth says anything.  And the Humane Society is most careless.
They never rescue me.  I am left to sink.  I have a dim idea, dear Lord
Illingworth, that you are always on the side of the sinners, and I know I
always try to be on the side of the saints, but that is as far as I get.
And after all, it may be merely the fancy of a drowning person.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  The only difference between the saint and the sinner
is that every saint has a past, and every sinner has a future.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah! that quite does for me.  I haven’t a word to say.
You and I, dear Mrs. Arbuthnot, are behind the age.  We can’t follow Lord
Illingworth.  Too much care was taken with our education, I am afraid.
To have been well brought up is a great drawback nowadays.  It shuts one
out from so much.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I should be sorry to follow Lord Illingworth in any of
his opinions.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  You are quite right, dear.

[GERALD _shrugs his shoulders and looks irritably over at his mother_.
_Enter_ LADY CAROLINE.]

LADY CAROLINE.  Jane, have you seen John anywhere?

LADY HUNSTANTON.  You needn’t be anxious about him, dear.  He is with
Lady Stutfield; I saw them some time ago, in the Yellow Drawing-room.
They seem quite happy together.  You are not going, Caroline?  Pray sit
down.

LADY CAROLINE.  I think I had better look after John.

[_Exit_ LADY CAROLINE.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  It doesn’t do to pay men so much attention.  And
Caroline has really nothing to be anxious about.  Lady Stutfield is very
sympathetic.  She is just as sympathetic about one thing as she is about
another.  A beautiful nature.

[_Enter_ SIR JOHN _and_ MRS. ALLONBY.]

Ah! here is Sir John!  And with Mrs. Allonby too!  I suppose it was Mrs.
Allonby I saw him with.  Sir John, Caroline has been looking everywhere
for you.

MRS. ALLONBY.  We have been waiting for her in the Music-room, dear Lady
Hunstanton.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah! the Music-room, of course.  I thought it was the
Yellow Drawing-room, my memory is getting so defective.  [_To the_
ARCHDEACON.]  Mrs. Daubeny has a wonderful memory, hasn’t she?

THE ARCHDEACON.  She used to be quite remarkable for her memory, but
since her last attack she recalls chiefly the events of her early
childhood.  But she finds great pleasure in such retrospections, great
pleasure.

[_Enter_ LADY STUTFIELD _and_ MR. KELVIL.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah! dear Lady Stutfield! and what has Mr. Kelvil been
talking to you about?

LADY STUTFIELD.  About Bimetallism, as well as I remember.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Bimetallism!  Is that quite a nice subject?  However, I
know people discuss everything very freely nowadays.  What did Sir John
talk to you about, dear Mrs. Allonby?

MRS. ALLONBY.  About Patagonia.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Really?  What a remote topic!  But very improving, I
have no doubt.

MRS. ALLONBY.  He has been most interesting on the subject of Patagonia.
Savages seem to have quite the same views as cultured people on almost
all subjects.  They are excessively advanced.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  What do they do?

MRS. ALLONBY.  Apparently everything.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Well, it is very gratifying, dear Archdeacon, is it
not, to find that Human Nature is permanently one.—On the whole, the
world is the same world, is it not?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  The world is simply divided into two classes—those who
believe the incredible, like the public—and those who do the improbable—

MRS. ALLONBY.  Like yourself?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Yes; I am always astonishing myself.  It is the only
thing that makes life worth living.

LADY STUTFIELD.  And what have you been doing lately that astonishes you?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I have been discovering all kinds of beautiful
qualities in my own nature.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Ah! don’t become quite perfect all at once.  Do it
gradually!

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I don’t intend to grow perfect at all.  At least, I
hope I shan’t.  It would be most inconvenient.  Women love us for our
defects.  If we have enough of them, they will forgive us everything,
even our gigantic intellects.

MRS. ALLONBY.  It is premature to ask us to forgive analysis.  We forgive
adoration; that is quite as much as should be expected from us.

[_Enter_ LORD ALFRED.  _He joins_ LADY STUTFIELD.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah! we women should forgive everything, shouldn’t we,
dear Mrs. Arbuthnot?  I am sure you agree with me in that.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I do not, Lady Hunstanton.  I think there are many
things women should never forgive.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  What sort of things?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  The ruin of another woman’s life.

[_Moves slowly away to back of stage_.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah! those things are very sad, no doubt, but I believe
there are admirable homes where people of that kind are looked after and
reformed, and I think on the whole that the secret of life is to take
things very, very easily.

MRS. ALLONBY.  The secret of life is never to have an emotion that is
unbecoming.

LADY STUTFIELD.  The secret of life is to appreciate the pleasure of
being terribly, terribly deceived.

KELVIL.  The secret of life is to resist temptation, Lady Stutfield.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  There is no secret of life.  Life’s aim, if it has
one, is simply to be always looking for temptations.  There are not
nearly enough.  I sometimes pass a whole day without coming across a
single one.  It is quite dreadful.  It makes one so nervous about the
future.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  [_Shakes her fan at him_.]  I don’t know how it is,
dear Lord Illingworth, but everything you have said to-day seems to me
excessively immoral.  It has been most interesting, listening to you.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  All thought is immoral.  Its very essence is
destruction.  If you think of anything, you kill it.  Nothing survives
being thought of.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  I don’t understand a word, Lord Illingworth.  But I
have no doubt it is all quite true.  Personally, I have very little to
reproach myself with, on the score of thinking.  I don’t believe in women
thinking too much.  Women should think in moderation, as they should do
all things in moderation.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Moderation is a fatal thing, Lady Hunstanton.  Nothing
succeeds like excess.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  I hope I shall remember that.  It sounds an admirable
maxim.  But I’m beginning to forget everything.  It’s a great misfortune.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  It is one of your most fascinating qualities, Lady
Hunstanton.  No woman should have a memory.  Memory in a woman is the
beginning of dowdiness.  One can always tell from a woman’s bonnet
whether she has got a memory or not.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  How charming you are, dear Lord Illingworth.  You
always find out that one’s most glaring fault is one’s most important
virtue.  You have the most comforting views of life.

[_Enter_ FARQUHAR.]

FARQUHAR.  Doctor Daubeny’s carriage!

LADY HUNSTANTON.  My dear Archdeacon!  It is only half-past ten.

THE ARCHDEACON.  [_Rising_.]  I am afraid I must go, Lady Hunstanton.
Tuesday is always one of Mrs. Daubeny’s bad nights.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  [_Rising_.]  Well, I won’t keep you from her.  [_Goes
with him towards door_.]  I have told Farquhar to put a brace of
partridge into the carriage.  Mrs. Daubeny may fancy them.

THE ARCHDEACON.  It is very kind of you, but Mrs. Daubeny never touches
solids now.  Lives entirely on jellies.  But she is wonderfully cheerful,
wonderfully cheerful.  She has nothing to complain of.

[_Exit with_ LADY HUNSTANTON.]

MRS. ALLONBY.  [_Goes over to_ LORD ILLINGWORTH.]  There is a beautiful
moon to-night.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Let us go and look at it.  To look at anything that is
inconstant is charming nowadays.

MRS. ALLONBY.  You have your looking-glass.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  It is unkind.  It merely shows me my wrinkles.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Mine is better behaved.  It never tells me the truth.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Then it is in love with you.

[_Exeunt_ SIR JOHN, LADY STUTFIELD, MR. KELVIL _and_ LORD ALFRED.]

GERALD.  [_To_ LORD ILLINGWORTH]  May I come too?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Do, my dear boy.  [_Moves towards with_ MRS. ALLONBY
_and_ GERALD.]

[LADY CAROLINE _enters_, _looks rapidly round and goes off in opposite
direction to that taken by_ SIR JOHN _and_ LADY STUTFIELD.]

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Gerald!

GERALD.  What, mother!

[_Exit_ LORD ILLINGWORTH _with_ MRS. ALLONBY.]

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  It is getting late.  Let us go home.

GERALD.  My dear mother.  Do let us wait a little longer.  Lord
Illingworth is so delightful, and, by the way, mother, I have a great
surprise for you.  We are starting for India at the end of this month.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Let us go home.

GERALD.  If you really want to, of course, mother, but I must bid
good-bye to Lord Illingworth first.  I’ll be back in five minutes.
[_Exit_.]

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Let him leave me if he chooses, but not with him—not
with him!  I couldn’t bear it.  [_Walks up and down_.]

[_Enter_ HESTER.]

HESTER.  What a lovely night it is, Mrs. Arbuthnot.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Is it?

HESTER.  Mrs. Arbuthnot, I wish you would let us be friends.  You are so
different from the other women here.  When you came into the Drawing-room
this evening, somehow you brought with you a sense of what is good and
pure in life.  I had been foolish.  There are things that are right to
say, but that may be said at the wrong time and to the wrong people.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I heard what you said.  I agree with it, Miss Worsley.

HESTER.  I didn’t know you had heard it.  But I knew you would agree with
me.  A woman who has sinned should be punished, shouldn’t she?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Yes.

HESTER.  She shouldn’t be allowed to come into the society of good men
and women?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  She should not.

HESTER.  And the man should be punished in the same way?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  In the same way.  And the children, if there are
children, in the same way also?

HESTER.  Yes, it is right that the sins of the parents should be visited
on the children.  It is a just law.  It is God’s law.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  It is one of God’s terrible laws.

[_Moves away to fireplace_.]

HESTER.  You are distressed about your son leaving you, Mrs. Arbuthnot?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Yes.

HESTER.  Do you like him going away with Lord Illingworth?  Of course
there is position, no doubt, and money, but position and money are not
everything, are they?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  They are nothing; they bring misery.

HESTER.  Then why do you let your son go with him?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  He wishes it himself.

HESTER.  But if you asked him he would stay, would he not?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  He has set his heart on going.

HESTER.  He couldn’t refuse you anything.  He loves you too much.  Ask
him to stay.  Let me send him in to you.  He is on the terrace at this
moment with Lord Illingworth.  I heard them laughing together as I passed
through the Music-room.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Don’t trouble, Miss Worsley, I can wait.  It is of no
consequence.

HESTER.  No, I’ll tell him you want him.  Do—do ask him to stay.  [_Exit_
HESTER.]

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  He won’t come—I know he won’t come.

[Enter LADY CAROLINE.  _She looks round anxiously_.  _Enter_ GERALD.]

LADY CAROLINE.  Mr. Arbuthnot, may I ask you is Sir John anywhere on the
terrace?

GERALD.  No, Lady Caroline, he is not on the terrace.

LADY CAROLINE.  It is very curious.  It is time for him to retire.

[_Exit_ LADY CAROLINE.]

GERALD.  Dear mother, I am afraid I kept you waiting.  I forgot all about
it.  I am so happy to-night, mother; I have never been so happy.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  At the prospect of going away?

GERALD.  Don’t put it like that, mother.  Of course I am sorry to leave
you.  Why, you are the best mother in the whole world.  But after all, as
Lord Illingworth says, it is impossible to live in such a place as
Wrockley.  You don’t mind it.  But I’m ambitions; I want something more
than that.  I want to have a career.  I want to do something that will
make you proud of me, and Lord Illingworth is going to help me.  He is
going to do everything for me.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Gerald, don’t go away with Lord Illingworth.  I implore
you not to.  Gerald, I beg you!

GERALD.  Mother, how changeable you are!  You don’t seem to know your own
mind for a single moment.  An hour and a half ago in the Drawing-room you
agreed to the whole thing; now you turn round and make objections, and
try to force me to give up my one chance in life.  Yes, my one chance.
You don’t suppose that men like Lord Illingworth are to be found every
day, do you, mother?  It is very strange that when I have had such a
wonderful piece of good luck, the one person to put difficulties in my
way should be my own mother.  Besides, you know, mother, I love Hester
Worsley.  Who could help loving her?  I love her more than I have ever
told you, far more.  And if I had a position, if I had prospects, I
could—I could ask her to—Don’t you understand now, mother, what it means
to me to be Lord Illingworth’s secretary?  To start like that is to find
a career ready for one—before one—waiting for one.  If I were Lord
Illingworth’s secretary I could ask Hester to be my wife.  As a wretched
bank clerk with a hundred a year it would be an impertinence.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I fear you need have no hopes of Miss Worsley.  I know
her views on life.  She has just told them to me.  [_A pause_.]

GERALD.  Then I have my ambition left, at any rate.  That is something—I
am glad I have that!  You have always tried to crush my ambition,
mother—haven’t you?  You have told me that the world is a wicked place,
that success is not worth having, that society is shallow, and all that
sort of thing—well, I don’t believe it, mother.  I think the world must
be delightful.  I think society must be exquisite.  I think success is a
thing worth having.  You have been wrong in all that you taught me,
mother, quite wrong.  Lord Illingworth is a successful man.  He is a
fashionable man.  He is a man who lives in the world and for it.  Well, I
would give anything to be just like Lord Illingworth.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I would sooner see you dead.

GERALD.  Mother, what is your objection to Lord Illingworth?  Tell
me—tell me right out.  What is it?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  He is a bad man.

GERALD.  In what way bad?  I don’t understand what you mean.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I will tell you.

GERALD.  I suppose you think him bad, because he doesn’t believe the same
things as you do.  Well, men are different from women, mother.  It is
natural that they should have different views.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  It is not what Lord Illingworth believes, or what he
does not believe, that makes him bad.  It is what he is.

GERALD.  Mother, is it something you know of him?  Something you actually
know?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  It is something I know.

GERALD.  Something you are quite sure of?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Quite sure of.

GERALD.  How long have you known it?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  For twenty years.

GERALD.  Is it fair to go back twenty years in any man’s career?  And
what have you or I to do with Lord Illingworth’s early life?  What
business is it of ours?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  What this man has been, he is now, and will be always.

GERALD.  Mother, tell me what Lord Illingworth did?  If he did anything
shameful, I will not go away with him.  Surely you know me well enough
for that?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Gerald, come near to me.  Quite close to me, as you used
to do when you were a little boy, when you were mother’s own boy.
[GERALD _sits down betide his mother_.  _She runs her fingers through his
hair_, _and strokes his hands_.]  Gerald, there was a girl once, she was
very young, she was little over eighteen at the time.  George
Harford—that was Lord Illingworth’s name then—George Harford met her.
She knew nothing about life.  He—knew everything.  He made this girl love
him.  He made her love him so much that she left her father’s house with
him one morning.  She loved him so much, and he had promised to marry
her!  He had solemnly promised to marry her, and she had believed him.
She was very young, and—and ignorant of what life really is.  But he put
the marriage off from week to week, and month to month.—She trusted in
him all the while.  She loved him.—Before her child was born—for she had
a child—she implored him for the child’s sake to marry her, that the
child might have a name, that her sin might not be visited on the child,
who was innocent.  He refused.  After the child was born she left him,
taking the child away, and her life was ruined, and her soul ruined, and
all that was sweet, and good, and pure in her ruined also.  She suffered
terribly—she suffers now.  She will always suffer.  For her there is no
joy, no peace, no atonement.  She is a woman who drags a chain like a
guilty thing.  She is a woman who wears a mask, like a thing that is a
leper.  The fire cannot purify her.  The waters cannot quench her
anguish.  Nothing can heal her! no anodyne can give her sleep! no poppies
forgetfulness!  She is lost!  She is a lost soul!—That is why I call Lord
Illingworth a bad man.  That is why I don’t want my boy to be with him.

GERALD.  My dear mother, it all sounds very tragic, of course.  But I
dare say the girl was just as much to blame as Lord Illingworth
was.—After all, would a really nice girl, a girl with any nice feelings
at all, go away from her home with a man to whom she was not married, and
live with him as his wife?  No nice girl would.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  [_After a pause_.]  Gerald, I withdraw all my
objections.  You are at liberty to go away with Lord Illingworth, when
and where you choose.

GERALD.  Dear mother, I knew you wouldn’t stand in my way.  You are the
best woman God ever made.  And, as for Lord Illingworth, I don’t believe
he is capable of anything infamous or base.  I can’t believe it of him—I
can’t.

HESTER.  [_Outside_.]  Let me go!  Let me go!  [_Enter_ HESTER _in
terror_, _and rushes over to_ GERALD _and flings herself in his arms_.]

HESTER.  Oh! save me—save me from him!

GERALD.  From whom?

HESTER.  He has insulted me!  Horribly insulted me!  Save me!

GERALD.  Who?  Who has dared—?

[LORD ILLINGWORTH _enters at back of stage_.  HESTER _breaks from_
GERALD’S _arms and points to him_.]

GERALD  [_He is quite beside himself with rage and indignation_.]  Lord
Illingworth, you have insulted the purest thing on God’s earth, a thing
as pure as my own mother.  You have insulted the woman I love most in the
world with my own mother.  As there is a God in Heaven, I will kill you!

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  [_Rushing across and catching hold of him_]  No! no!

GERALD.  [_Thrusting her back_.]  Don’t hold me, mother.  Don’t hold
me—I’ll kill him!

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Gerald!

GERALD.  Let me go, I say!

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Stop, Gerald, stop!  He is your own father!

[GERALD _clutches his mother’s hands and looks into her face_.  _She
sinks slowly on the ground in shame_.  HESTER _steals towards the door_.
LORD ILLINGWORTH _frowns and bites his lip_.  _After a time_ GERALD
_raises his mother up_, _puts his am round her_, _and leads her from the
room_.]

                                 ACT DROP




FOURTH ACT


                                  SCENE

_Sitting-room at Mrs. Arbuthnot’s_.  _Large open French window at back_,
_looking on to garden_.  _Doors_ R.C. _and_ L.C.

[GERALD ARBUTHNOT _writing at table_.]

[_Enter_ ALICE R.C. _followed by_ LADY HUNSTANTON _and_ MRS. ALLONBY.]

ALICE.  Lady Hunstanton and Mrs. Allonby.

[_Exit_ L.C.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Good morning, Gerald.

GERALD.  [_Rising_.]  Good morning, Lady Hunstanton.  Good morning, Mrs.
Allonby.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  [_Sitting down_.]  We came to inquire for your dear
mother, Gerald.  I hope she is better?

GERALD.  My mother has not come down yet, Lady Hunstanton.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah, I am afraid the heat was too much for her last
night.  I think there must have been thunder in the air.  Or perhaps it
was the music.  Music makes one feel so romantic—at least it always gets
on one’s nerves.

MRS. ALLONBY.  It’s the same thing, nowadays.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  I am so glad I don’t know what you mean, dear.  I am
afraid you mean something wrong.  Ah, I see you’re examining Mrs.
Arbuthnot’s pretty room.  Isn’t it nice and old-fashioned?

MRS. ALLONBY.  [_Surveying the room through her lorgnette_.]  It looks
quite the happy English home.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  That’s just the word, dear; that just describes it.
One feels your mother’s good influence in everything she has about her,
Gerald.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Lord Illingworth says that all influence is bad, but that
a good influence is the worst in the world.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  When Lord Illingworth knows Mrs. Arbuthnot better he
will change his mind.  I must certainly bring him here.

MRS. ALLONBY.  I should like to see Lord Illingworth in a happy English
home.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  It would do him a great deal of good, dear.  Most women
in London, nowadays, seem to furnish their rooms with nothing but
orchids, foreigners, and French novels.  But here we have the room of a
sweet saint.  Fresh natural flowers, books that don’t shock one, pictures
that one can look at without blushing.

MRS. ALLONBY.  But I like blushing.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Well, there _is_ a good deal to be said for blushing,
if one can do it at the proper moment.  Poor dear Hunstanton used to tell
me I didn’t blush nearly often enough.  But then he was so very
particular.  He wouldn’t let me know any of his men friends, except those
who were over seventy, like poor Lord Ashton: who afterwards, by the way,
was brought into the Divorce Court.  A most unfortunate case.

MRS. ALLONBY.  I delight in men over seventy.  They always offer one the
devotion of a lifetime.  I think seventy an ideal age for a man.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  She is quite incorrigible, Gerald, isn’t she?
By-the-by, Gerald, I hope your dear mother will come and see me more
often now.  You and Lord Illingworth start almost immediately, don’t you?

GERALD.  I have given up my intention of being Lord Illingworth’s
secretary.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Surely not, Gerald!  It would be most unwise of you.
What reason can you have?

GERALD.  I don’t think I should be suitable for the post.

MRS. ALLONBY.  I wish Lord Illingworth would ask me to be his secretary.
But he says I am not serious enough.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  My dear, you really mustn’t talk like that in this
house.  Mrs. Arbuthnot doesn’t know anything about the wicked society in
which we all live.  She won’t go into it.  She is far too good.  I
consider it was a great honour her coming to me last night.  It gave
quite an atmosphere of respectability to the party.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Ah, that must have been what you thought was thunder in
the air.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  My dear, how can you say that?  There is no resemblance
between the two things at all.  But really, Gerald, what do you mean by
not being suitable?

GERALD.  Lord Illingworth’s views of life and mine are too different.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  But, my dear Gerald, at your age you shouldn’t have any
views of life.  They are quite out of place.  You must be guided by
others in this matter.  Lord Illingworth has made you the most flattering
offer, and travelling with him you would see the world—as much of it, at
least, as one should look at—under the best auspices possible, and stay
with all the right people, which is so important at this solemn moment in
your career.

GERALD.  I don’t want to see the world: I’ve seen enough of it.

MRS. ALLONBY.  I hope you don’t think you have exhausted life, Mr.
Arbuthnot.  When a man says that, one knows that life has exhausted him.

GERALD.  I don’t wish to leave my mother.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Now, Gerald, that is pure laziness on your part.  Not
leave your mother!  If I were your mother I would insist on your going.

[_Enter_ ALICE L.C.]

ALICE.  Mrs. Arbuthnot’s compliments, my lady, but she has a bad
headache, and cannot see any one this morning.  [_Exit_ R.C.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  [_Rising_.]  A bad headache!  I am so sorry!  Perhaps
you’ll bring her up to Hunstanton this afternoon, if she is better,
Gerald.

GERALD.  I am afraid not this afternoon, Lady Hunstanton.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Well, to-morrow, then.  Ah, if you had a father,
Gerald, he wouldn’t let you waste your life here.  He would send you off
with Lord Illingworth at once.  But mothers are so weak.  They give up to
their sons in everything.  We are all heart, all heart.  Come, dear, I
must call at the rectory and inquire for Mrs. Daubeny, who, I am afraid,
is far from well.  It is wonderful how the Archdeacon bears up, quite
wonderful.  He is the most sympathetic of husbands.  Quite a model.
Good-bye, Gerald, give my fondest love to your mother.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Good-bye, Mr. Arbuthnot.

GERALD.  Good-bye.

[_Exit_ LADY HUNSTANTON _and_ MRS. ALLONBY.  GERALD _sits down and reads
over his letter_.]

GERALD.  What name can I sign?  I, who have no right to any name.
[_Signs name_, _puts letter into envelope_, _addresses it_, _and is about
to seal it_, _when door_ L.C. _opens and_ MRS. ARBUTHNOT _enters_.
GERALD _lays down sealing-wax_.  _Mother and son look at each other_.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  [_Through French window at the back_.]  Good-bye again,
Gerald.  We are taking the short cut across your pretty garden.  Now,
remember my advice to you—start at once with Lord Illingworth.

MRS. ALLONBY.  _Au revoir_, Mr. Arbuthnot.  Mind you bring me back
something nice from your travels—not an Indian shawl—on no account an
Indian shawl.

[_Exeunt_.]

GERALD.  Mother, I have just written to him.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  To whom?

GERALD.  To my father.  I have written to tell him to come here at four
o’clock this afternoon.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  He shall not come here.  He shall not cross the
threshold of my house.

GERALD.  He must come.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Gerald, if you are going away with Lord Illingworth, go
at once.  Go before it kills me: but don’t ask me to meet him.

GERALD.  Mother, you don’t understand.  Nothing in the world would induce
me to go away with Lord Illingworth, or to leave you.  Surely you know me
well enough for that.  No: I have written to him to say—

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  What can you have to say to him?

GERALD.  Can’t you guess, mother, what I have written in this letter?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  No.

GERALD.  Mother, surely you can.  Think, think what must be done, now, at
once, within the next few days.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  There is nothing to be done.

GERALD.  I have written to Lord Illingworth to tell him that he must
marry you.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Marry me?

GERALD.  Mother, I will force him to do it.  The wrong that has been done
you must be repaired.  Atonement must be made.  Justice may be slow,
mother, but it comes in the end.  In a few days you shall be Lord
Illingworth’s lawful wife.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  But, Gerald—

GERALD.  I will insist upon his doing it.  I will make him do it: he will
not dare to refuse.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  But, Gerald, it is I who refuse.  I will not marry Lord
Illingworth.

GERALD.  Not marry him?  Mother!

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I will not marry him.

GERALD.  But you don’t understand: it is for your sake I am talking, not
for mine.  This marriage, this necessary marriage, this marriage which
for obvious reasons must inevitably take place, will not help me, will
not give me a name that will be really, rightly mine to bear.  But surely
it will be something for you, that you, my mother, should, however late,
become the wife of the man who is my father.  Will not that be something?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I will not marry him.

GERALD.  Mother, you must.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I will not.  You talk of atonement for a wrong done.
What atonement can be made to me?  There is no atonement possible.  I am
disgraced: he is not.  That is all.  It is the usual history of a man and
a woman as it usually happens, as it always happens.  And the ending is
the ordinary ending.  The woman suffers.  The man goes free.

GERALD.  I don’t know if that is the ordinary ending, mother: I hope it
is not.  But your life, at any rate, shall not end like that.  The man
shall make whatever reparation is possible.  It is not enough.  It does
not wipe out the past, I know that.  But at least it makes the future
better, better for you, mother.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I refuse to marry Lord Illingworth.

GERALD.  If he came to you himself and asked you to be his wife you would
give him a different answer.  Remember, he is my father.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  If he came himself, which he will not do, my answer
would be the same.  Remember I am your mother.

GERALD.  Mother, you make it terribly difficult for me by talking like
that; and I can’t understand why you won’t look at this matter from the
right, from the only proper standpoint.  It is to take away the
bitterness out of your life, to take away the shadow that lies on your
name, that this marriage must take place.  There is no alternative: and
after the marriage you and I can go away together.  But the marriage must
take place first.  It is a duty that you owe, not merely to yourself, but
to all other women—yes: to all the other women in the world, lest he
betray more.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I owe nothing to other women.  There is not one of them
to help me.  There is not one woman in the world to whom I could go for
pity, if I would take it, or for sympathy, if I could win it.  Women are
hard on each other.  That girl, last night, good though she is, fled from
the room as though I were a tainted thing.  She was right.  I am a
tainted thing.  But my wrongs are my own, and I will bear them alone.  I
must bear them alone.  What have women who have not sinned to do with me,
or I with them?  We do not understand each other.

[_Enter_ HESTER _behind_.]

GERALD.  I implore you to do what I ask you.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  What son has ever asked of his mother to make so hideous
a sacrifice?  None.

GERALD.  What mother has ever refused to marry the father of her own
child?  None.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Let me be the first, then.  I will not do it.

GERALD.  Mother, you believe in religion, and you brought me up to
believe in it also.  Well, surely your religion, the religion that you
taught me when I was a boy, mother, must tell you that I am right.  You
know it, you feel it.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I do not know it.  I do not feel it, nor will I ever
stand before God’s altar and ask God’s blessing on so hideous a mockery
as a marriage between me and George Harford.  I will not say the words
the Church bids us to say.  I will not say them.  I dare not.  How could
I swear to love the man I loathe, to honour him who wrought you
dishonour, to obey him who, in his mastery, made me to sin?  No: marriage
is a sacrament for those who love each other.  It is not for such as him,
or such as me.  Gerald, to save you from the world’s sneers and taunts I
have lied to the world.  For twenty years I have lied to the world.  I
could not tell the world the truth.  Who can, ever?  But not for my own
sake will I lie to God, and in God’s presence.  No, Gerald, no ceremony,
Church-hallowed or State-made, shall ever bind me to George Harford.  It
may be that I am too bound to him already, who, robbing me, yet left me
richer, so that in the mire of my life I found the pearl of price, or
what I thought would be so.

GERALD.  I don’t understand you now.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Men don’t understand what mothers are.  I am no
different from other women except in the wrong done me and the wrong I
did, and my very heavy punishments and great disgrace.  And yet, to bear
you I had to look on death.  To nurture you I had to wrestle with it.
Death fought with me for you.  All women have to fight with death to keep
their children.  Death, being childless, wants our children from us.
Gerald, when you were naked I clothed you, when you were hungry I gave
you food.  Night and day all that long winter I tended you.  No office is
too mean, no care too lowly for the thing we women love—and oh! how _I_
loved _you_.  Not Hannah, Samuel more.  And you needed love, for you were
weakly, and only love could have kept you alive.  Only love can keep any
one alive.  And boys are careless often and without thinking give pain,
and we always fancy that when they come to man’s estate and know us
better they will repay us.  But it is not so.  The world draws them from
our side, and they make friends with whom they are happier than they are
with us, and have amusements from which we are barred, and interests that
are not ours: and they are unjust to us often, for when they find life
bitter they blame us for it, and when they find it sweet we do not taste
its sweetness with them . . . You made many friends and went into their
houses and were glad with them, and I, knowing my secret, did not dare to
follow, but stayed at home and closed the door, shut out the sun and sat
in darkness.  What should I have done in honest households?  My past was
ever with me. . . . And you thought I didn’t care for the pleasant things
of life.  I tell you I longed for them, but did not dare to touch them,
feeling I had no right.  You thought I was happier working amongst the
poor.  That was my mission, you imagined.  It was not, but where else was
I to go?  The sick do not ask if the hand that smooths their pillow is
pure, nor the dying care if the lips that touch their brow have known the
kiss of sin.  It was you I thought of all the time; I gave to them the
love you did not need: lavished on them a love that was not theirs . . .
And you thought I spent too much of my time in going to Church, and in
Church duties.  But where else could I turn?  God’s house is the only
house where sinners are made welcome, and you were always in my heart,
Gerald, too much in my heart.  For, though day after day, at morn or
evensong, I have knelt in God’s house, I have never repented of my sin.
How could I repent of my sin when you, my love, were its fruit!  Even now
that you are bitter to me I cannot repent.  I do not.  You are more to me
than innocence.  I would rather be your mother—oh! much rather!—than have
been always pure . . . Oh, don’t you see? don’t you understand?  It is my
dishonour that has made you so dear to me.  It is my disgrace that has
bound you so closely to me.  It is the price I paid for you—the price of
soul and body—that makes me love you as I do.  Oh, don’t ask me to do
this horrible thing.  Child of my shame, be still the child of my shame!

GERALD.  Mother, I didn’t know you loved me so much as that.  And I will
be a better son to you than I have been.  And you and I must never leave
each other . . . but, mother . . . I can’t help it . . . you must become
my father’s wife.  You must marry him.  It is your duty.

HESTER.  [_Running forwards and embracing_ MRS. ARBUTHNOT.]  No, no; you
shall not.  That would be real dishonour, the first you have ever known.
That would be real disgrace: the first to touch you.  Leave him and come
with me.  There are other countries than England . . . Oh! other
countries over sea, better, wiser, and less unjust lands.  The world is
very wide and very big.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  No, not for me.  For me the world is shrivelled to a
palm’s breadth, and where I walk there are thorns.

HESTER.  It shall not be so.  We shall somewhere find green valleys and
fresh waters, and if we weep, well, we shall weep together.  Have we not
both loved him?

GERALD.  Hester!

HESTER.  [_Waving him back_.]  Don’t, don’t!  You cannot love me at all,
unless you love her also.  You cannot honour me, unless she’s holier to
you.  In her all womanhood is martyred.  Not she alone, but all of us are
stricken in her house.

GERALD.  Hester, Hester, what shall I do?

HESTER.  Do you respect the man who is your father?

GERALD.  Respect him?  I despise him!  He is infamous.

HESTER.  I thank you for saving me from him last night.

GERALD.  Ah, that is nothing.  I would die to save you.  But you don’t
tell me what to do now!

HESTER.  Have I not thanked you for saving _me_?

GERALD.  But what should I do?

HESTER.  Ask your own heart, not mine.  I never had a mother to save, or
shame.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  He is hard—he is hard.  Let me go away.

GERALD.  [_Rushes over and kneels down bedside his mother_.]  Mother,
forgive me: I have been to blame.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Don’t kiss my hands: they are cold.  My heart is cold:
something has broken it.

HESTER.  Ah, don’t say that.  Hearts live by being wounded.  Pleasure may
turn a heart to stone, riches may make it callous, but sorrow—oh, sorrow
cannot break it.  Besides, what sorrows have you now?  Why, at this
moment you are more dear to him than ever, _dear_ though you have _been_,
and oh! how dear you _have_ been always.  Ah! be kind to him.

GERALD.  You are my mother and my father all in one.  I need no second
parent.  It was for you I spoke, for you alone.  Oh, say something,
mother.  Have I but found one love to lose another?  Don’t tell me that.
O mother, you are cruel.  [_Gets up and flings himself sobbing on a
sofa_.]

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  [_To_ HESTER.]  But has he found indeed another love?

HESTER.  You know I have loved him always.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  But we are very poor.

HESTER.  Who, being loved, is poor?  Oh, no one.  I hate my riches.  They
are a burden.  Let him share it with me.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  But we are disgraced.  We rank among the outcasts Gerald
is nameless.  The sins of the parents should be visited on the children.
It is God’s law.

HESTER.  I was wrong.  God’s law is only Love.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  [_Rises_, _and taking_ HESTER _by the hand_, _goes
slowly over to where_ GERALD _is lying on the sofa with his head buried
in his hands_.  _She touches him and he looks up_.]  Gerald, I cannot
give you a father, but I have brought you a wife.

GERALD.  Mother, I am not worthy either of her or you.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  So she comes first, you are worthy.  And when you are
away, Gerald . . . with . . . her—oh, think of me sometimes.  Don’t
forget me.  And when you pray, pray for me.  We should pray when we are
happiest, and you will be happy, Gerald.

HESTER.  Oh, you don’t think of leaving us?

GERALD.  Mother, you won’t leave us?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I might bring shame upon you!

GERALD.  Mother!

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  For a little then: and if you let me, near you always.

HESTER.  [_To_ MRS. ARBUTHNOT.]  Come out with us to the garden.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Later on, later on.  [_Exeunt_ HESTER _and_ GERALD.
MRS. ARBUTHNOT _goes towards door_ L.C.   _Stops at looking-glass over
mantelpiece and looks into it_.  _Enter_ ALICE R.C.]

ALICE.  A gentleman to see you, ma’am.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Say I am not at home.  Show me the card.  [_Takes card
from salver and looks at it_.]  Say I will not see him.

[LORD ILLINGWORTH _enters_.  MRS. ARBUTHNOT _sees him in the glass and
starts_, _but does not turn round_.  _Exit_ ALICE.]  What can you have to
say to me to-day, George Harford?  You can have nothing to say to me.
You must leave this house.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Rachel, Gerald knows everything about you and me now,
so some arrangement must be come to that will suit us all three.  I
assure you, he will find in me the most charming and generous of fathers.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  My son may come in at any moment.  I saved you last
night.  I may not be able to save you again.  My son feels my dishonour
strongly, terribly strongly.  I beg you to go.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  [_Sitting down_.]  Last night was excessively
unfortunate.  That silly Puritan girl making a scene merely because I
wanted to kiss her.  What harm is there in a kiss?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  [_Turning round_.]  A kiss may ruin a human life, George
Harford.  _I_ know that.  _I_ know that too well.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  We won’t discuss that at present.  What is of
importance to-day, as yesterday, is still our son.  I am extremely fond
of him, as you know, and odd though it may seem to you, I admired his
conduct last night immensely.  He took up the cudgels for that pretty
prude with wonderful promptitude.  He is just what I should have liked a
son of mine to be.  Except that no son of mine should ever take the side
of the Puritans: that is always an error.  Now, what I propose is this.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Lord Illingworth, no proposition of yours interests me.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  According to our ridiculous English laws, I can’t
legitimise Gerald.  But I can leave him my property.  Illingworth is
entailed, of course, but it is a tedious barrack of a place.  He can have
Ashby, which is much prettier, Harborough, which has the best shooting in
the north of England, and the house in St. James Square.  What more can a
gentleman require in this world?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Nothing more, I am quite sure.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  As for a title, a title is really rather a nuisance in
these democratic days.  As George Harford I had everything I wanted.  Now
I have merely everything that other people want, which isn’t nearly so
pleasant.  Well, my proposal is this.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I told you I was not interested, and I beg you to go.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  The boy is to be with you for six months in the year,
and with me for the other six.  That is perfectly fair, is it not?  You
can have whatever allowance you like, and live where you choose.  As for
your past, no one knows anything about it except myself and Gerald.
There is the Puritan, of course, the Puritan in white muslin, but she
doesn’t count.  She couldn’t tell the story without explaining that she
objected to being kissed, could she?  And all the women would think her a
fool and the men think her a bore.  And you need not be afraid that
Gerald won’t be my heir.  I needn’t tell you I have not the slightest
intention of marrying.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  You come too late.  My son has no need of you.  You are
not necessary.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  What do you mean, Rachel?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  That you are not necessary to Gerald’s career.  He does
not require you.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I do not understand you.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Look into the garden.  [LORD ILLINGWORTH _rises and goes
towards window_.]  You had better not let them see you: you bring
unpleasant memories.  [LORD ILLINGWORTH _looks out and starts_.]  She
loves him.  They love each other.  We are safe from you, and we are going
away.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Where?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  We will not tell you, and if you find us we will not
know you.  You seem surprised.  What welcome would you get from the girl
whose lips you tried to soil, from the boy whose life you have shamed,
from the mother whose dishonour comes from you?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  You have grown hard, Rachel.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I was too weak once.  It is well for me that I have
changed.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I was very young at the time.  We men know life too
early.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  And we women know life too late.  That is the difference
between men and women.  [_A pause_.]

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Rachel, I want my son.  My money may be of no use to
him now.  I may be of no use to him, but I want my son.  Bring us
together, Rachel.  You can do it if you choose.  [_Sees letter on
table_.]

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  There is no room in my boy’s life for you.  He is not
interested in _you_.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Then why does he write to me?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  What do you mean?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  What letter is this?  [_Takes up letter_.]

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  That—is nothing.  Give it to me.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  It is addressed to _me_.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  You are not to open it.  I forbid you to open it.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  And in Gerald’s handwriting.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  It was not to have been sent.  It is a letter he wrote
to you this morning, before he saw me.  But he is sorry now he wrote it,
very sorry.  You are not to open it.  Give it to me.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  It belongs to me.  [_Opens it_, _sits down and reads
it slowly_. MRS. ARBUTHNOT _watches him all the time_.]  You have read
this letter, I suppose, Rachel?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  No.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  You know what is in it?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Yes!

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I don’t admit for a moment that the boy is right in
what he says.  I don’t admit that it is any duty of mine to marry you.  I
deny it entirely.  But to get my son back I am ready—yes, I am ready to
marry you, Rachel—and to treat you always with the deference and respect
due to my wife.  I will marry you as soon as you choose.  I give you my
word of honour.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  You made that promise to me once before and broke it.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I will keep it now.  And that will show you that I
love my son, at least as much as you love him.  For when I marry you,
Rachel, there are some ambitions I shall have to surrender.  High
ambitions, too, if any ambition is high.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I decline to marry you, Lord Illingworth.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Are you serious?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Yes.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Do tell me your reasons.  They would interest me
enormously.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I have already explained them to my son.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I suppose they were intensely sentimental, weren’t
they?  You women live by your emotions and for them.  You have no
philosophy of life.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  You are right.  We women live by our emotions and for
them.  By our passions, and for them, if you will.  I have two passions,
Lord Illingworth: my love of him, my hate of you.  You cannot kill those.
They feed each other.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  What sort of love is that which needs to have hate as
its brother?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  It is the sort of love I have for Gerald.  Do you think
that terrible?  Well it is terrible.  All love is terrible.  All love is
a tragedy.  I loved you once, Lord Illingworth.  Oh, what a tragedy for a
woman to have loved you!

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  So you really refuse to marry me?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Yes.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Because you hate me?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Yes.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  And does my son hate me as you do?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  No.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I am glad of that, Rachel.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  He merely despises you.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  What a pity!  What a pity for him, I mean.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Don’t be deceived, George.  Children begin by loving
their parents.  After a time they judge them.  Rarely if ever do they
forgive them.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  [_Reads letter over again_, _very slowly_.]  May I ask
by what arguments you made the boy who wrote this letter, this beautiful,
passionate letter, believe that you should not marry his father, the
father of your own child?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  It was not I who made him see it.  It was another.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  What _fin-de-siècle_ person?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  The Puritan, Lord Illingworth.  [_A pause_.]

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  [_Winces_, _then rises slowly and goes over to table
where his hat and gloves are_.  MRS. ARBUTHNOT _is standing close to the
table_.  _He picks up one of the gloves, and begins pulling it on_.]
There is not much then for me to do here, Rachel?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Nothing.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  It is good-bye, is it?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  For ever, I hope, this time, Lord Illingworth.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  How curious!  At this moment you look exactly as you
looked the night you left me twenty years ago.  You have just the same
expression in your mouth.  Upon my word, Rachel, no woman ever loved me
as you did.  Why, you gave yourself to me like a flower, to do anything I
liked with.  You were the prettiest of playthings, the most fascinating
of small romances . . . [_Pulls out watch_.]  Quarter to two!  Must be
strolling back to Hunstanton.  Don’t suppose I shall see you there again.
I’m sorry, I am, really.  It’s been an amusing experience to have met
amongst people of one’s own rank, and treated quite seriously too, one’s
mistress, and one’s—

[MRS. ARBUTHNOT _snatches up glove and strikes_ LORD ILLINGWORTH _across
the face with it_.  LORD ILLINGWORTH _starts_.  _He is dazed by the
insult of his punishment_.  _Then he controls himself_, _and goes to
window and looks out at his son_.  _Sighs and leaves the room_.]

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  [_Falls sobbing on the sofa_.]  He would have said it.
He would have said it.

[_Enter_ GERALD _and_ HESTER _from the garden_.]

GERALD.  Well, dear mother.  You never came out after all.  So we have
come in to fetch you.  Mother, you have not been crying?  [_Kneels down
beside her_.]

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  My boy!  My boy!  My boy!  [_Running her fingers through
his hair_.]

HESTER.  [_Coming over_.]  But you have two children now.  You’ll let me
be your daughter?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  [_Looking up_.]  Would you choose me for a mother?

HESTER.  You of all women I have ever known.

[_They move towards the door leading into garden with their arms round
each other’s waists_.  GERALD _goes to table_ L.C. _for his hat_.  _On
turning round he sees_ LORD ILLINGWORTH’S _glove lying on the floor_,
_and picks it up_.]

GERALD.  Hallo, mother, whose glove is this?  You have had a visitor.
Who was it?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  [_Turning round_.]  Oh! no one.  No one in particular.
A man of no importance.

                                 CURTAIN




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A WOMAN OF NO IMPORTANCE***


******* This file should be named 854-0.txt or 854-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/8/5/854


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

