PERSONS


ARKËL, _King of Allemonde._

GENEVIÈVE, _mother of Pélléas and Golaud_.

PÉLLÉAS,}
        }_grandsons of Arkël._
GOLAUD, }

MÉLISANDE.

LITTLE YNIOLD, _son of Golaud (by a former marriage)._

A PHYSICIAN.

THE PORTER.

_Servants, Beggars, etc._




Pélléas and Mélisande.

       *       *       *       *       *




ACT FIRST.




SCENE I.--_The gate of the castle._


MAIDSERVANTS _(within)._

Open the gate! Open the gate!

PORTER _(within)._

Who is there? Why do you come and wake me up? Go out by the little
gates; there are enough of them!...

A MAIDSERVANT _(within)._

We have come to wash the threshold, the gate, and the steps; open,
then! open!

ANOTHER MAIDSERVANT _(within)._

There are going to be great happenings!

THIRD MAIDSERVANT _(within)._

There are going to be great fêtes! Open quickly!...

THE MAIDSERVANTS.

Open! open!

PORTER.

Wait! wait! I do not know whether I shall be able to open it;... it is
never opened.... Wait till it is light....

FIRST MAIDSERVANT.

It is light enough without; I see the sunlight through the chinks....

PORTER.

Here are the great keys.... Oh! oh! how the bolts and the locks
grate!... Help me! help me!...

MAIDSERVANTS.

We are pulling; we are pulling....

SECOND MAIDSERVANT.

It will not open....

FIRST MAIDSERVANT.

Ah! ah! It is opening! it is opening slowly!

PORTER.

How it shrieks! how it shrieks! it will wake up everybody....

SECOND MAIDSERVANT.

_[Appearing on the threshold.]_ Oh, how light it is already
out-of-doors!

FIRST MAIDSERVANT.

The sun is rising on the sea!

PORTER.

It is open.... It is wide open!... [_All the maidservants appear on
the threshold and pass over it._]

FIRST MAIDSERVANT.

I am going to wash the sill first....

SECOND MAIDSERVANT.

We shall never be able to clean all this.

OTHER MAIDSERVANTS.

Fetch the water! fetch the water!

PORTER.

Yes, yes; pour on water; pour on water; pour on all the water of the
Flood! You will never come to the end of it....




SCENE II.--_A forest._ MÉLISANDE _discovered at the brink of a
spring._


_Enter_ GOLAUD.

GOLAUD.

I shall never be able to get out of this forest again.--God knows
where that beast has led me. And yet I thought I had wounded him to
death; and here are traces of blood. But now I have lost sight of him;
I believe I am lost myself--my dogs can no longer find me--I shall
retrace my steps....--I hear weeping.... Oh! oh! what is there yonder
by the water's edge?... A little girl weeping by the water's edge?
[_He coughs._]--She does not hear me. I cannot see her face. [_He
approaches and touches_ MÉLISANDE _on the shoulder._] Why weepest
thou? [MÉLISANDE _trembles, starts up, and would flee._]--Do not be
afraid. You have nothing to fear. Why are you weeping here all alone?

MÉLISANDE.

Do not touch me! do not touch me!

GOLAUD.

Do not be afraid.... I will not do you any.... Oh, you are beautiful!

MÉLISANDE.

Do not touch me! do not touch me! or I throw myself in the water!...

GOLAUD.

I will not touch you.... See, I will stay here, against the tree. Do
not be afraid. Has any one hurt you?

MÉLISANDE

Oh! yes! yes! yes!... [_She sobs profoundly._]

GOLAUD.

Who has hurt you?

MÉLISANDE.

Every one! every one!

GOLAUD. What hurt have they done you?

MÉLISANDE.

I will not tell! I cannot tell!...

GOLAUD.

Come; do not weep so. Whence come you?

MÉLISANDE.

I have fled!... fled ... fled....

GOLAUD.

Yes; but whence have you fled?

MÉLISANDE.

I am lost!... lost!... Oh! oh! lost here.... I am not of this
place.... I was not born there....

GOLAUD.

Whence are you? Where were you born?

MÉLISANDE.

Oh! oh! far away from here!... far away ... far away....

GOLAUD.

What is it shining so at the bottom of the water?

MÉLISANDE.

Where?--Ah! it is the crown he gave me. It fell as I was weeping....

GOLAUD.

A crown?--Who was it gave you a crown?--I will try to get it....

MÉLISANDE.

No, no; I will have no more of it! I will have no more of it!... I had
rather die ... die at once....

GOLAUD.

I could easily pull it out. The water is not very deep.

MÉLISANDE.

I will have no more of it! If you take it out, I throw myself in its
place!...

GOLAUD.

No, no; I will leave it there. It could be reached without difficulty,
nevertheless. It seems very beautiful.--Is it long since you fled?

MÉLISANDE.

Yes, yes!... Who are you?

GOLAUD.

I am Prince Golaud,--grandson of Arkël, the old King of Allemonde....

MÉLISANDE.

Oh, you have gray hairs already....

GOLAUD.

Yes; some, here, by the temples....

MÉLISANDE

And in your beard, too.... Why do you look at me so?

GOLAUD.

I am looking at your eyes.--Do you never shut your eyes?

MÉLISANDE.

Oh, yes; I shut them at night....

GOLAUD.

Why do you look so astonished?

MÉLISANDE.

You are a giant?

GOLAUD.

I am a man like the rest....

MÉLISANDE.

Why have you come here?

GOLAUD.

I do not know, myself. I was hunting in the forest, I was chasing a
wild boar. I mistook the road.--You look very young. How old are you?

MÉLISANDE.

I am beginning to be cold....

GOLAUD.

Will you come with me!

MÉLISANDE.

No, no; I will stay here....

GOLAUD.

You cannot stay here all alone. You cannot stay here all night
long.... What is your name?

MÉLISANDE.

Mélisande.

GOLAUD.

You cannot stay here, Mélisande. Come with me....

MÉLISANDE.

I will stay here....

GOLAUD.

You will be afraid, all alone. We do not know what there may be here
... all night long ... all alone ... it is impossible. Mélisande,
come, give me your hand....

MÉLISANDE.

Oh, do not touch me!...

GOLAUD.

Do not scream.... I will not touch you again. But come with me. The
night will be very dark and very cold. Come with me....

MÉLISANDE.

Where are you going?...

GOLAUD.

I do not know.... I am lost too....
                                                                 [_Exeunt._




SCENE III.--_A hall in the castle_. ARKËL _and_ GENEVIÈVE
_discovered_.


GENEVIÈVE.

Here is what he writes to his brother Pélléas: "I found her all in
tears one evening, beside a spring in the forest where I had lost
myself. I do not know her age, nor who she is, nor whence she comes,
and I dare not question her, for she must have had a sore fright; and
when you ask her what has happened to her, she falls at once a-weeping
like a child, and sobs so heavily you are afraid. Just as I found her
by the springs, a crown of gold had slipped from her hair and fallen
to the bottom of the water. She was clad, besides, like a princess,
though her garments had been torn by the briers. It is now six months
since I married her and I know no more about it than on the day of
our meeting. Meanwhile, dear Pélléas, thou whom I love more than a
brother, although we were not born of the same father; meanwhile make
ready for my return.... I know my mother will willingly forgive me.
But I am afraid of the King, our venerable grandsire, I am afraid of
Arkël, in spite of all his kindness, for I have undone by this strange
marriage all his plans of state, and I fear the beauty of Mélisande
will not excuse my folly to eyes so wise as his. If he consents
nevertheless to receive her as he would receive his own daughter,
the third night following this letter, light a lamp at the top of the
tower that overlooks the sea. I shall perceive it from the bridge
of our ship; otherwise I shall go far away again and come back no
more...." What say you of it?

ARKËL.

Nothing. He has done what he probably must have done. I am very old,
and nevertheless I have not yet seen clearly for one moment into
myself; how would you that I judge what others have done? I am not
far from the tomb and do not succeed in judging myself.... One always
mistakes when one does not close his eyes. That may seem strange to
us; but that is all. He is past the age to marry and he weds like a
child, a little girl he finds by a spring.... That may seem strange to
us, because we never see but the reverse of destinies ... the reverse
even of our own.... He has always followed my counsels hitherto; I had
thought to make him happy in sending him to ask the hand of Princess
Ursula.... He could not remain alone; since the death of his wife he
has been sad to be alone; and that marriage would have put an end to
long wars and old hatreds.... He would not have it so. Let it be as he
would have it; I have never put myself athwart a destiny; and he knows
better than I his future. There happen perhaps no useless events....

GENEVIÈVE.

He has always been so prudent, so grave and so firm.... If it were
Pélléas, I should understand.... But he ... at his age.... Who is it
he is going to introduce here?--An unknown found along the roads....
Since his wife's death, he has no longer lived for aught but his son,
the little Yniold, and if he were about to marry again, it was because
you had wished it.... And now ... a little girl in the forest.... He
has forgotten everything....--What shall we do?...

_Enter_ PÉLLÉAS.

ARKËL.

Who is coming in there?

GENEVIÈVE.

It is Pélléas. He has been weeping.

ARKËL.

Is it thou, Pélléas?--Come a little nearer, that I may see thee in the
light....

PÉLLÉAS.

Grandfather, I received another letter at the same time as my
brother's; a letter from my friend Marcellus.... He is about to die
and calls for me. He would see me before dying....

ARKËL.

Thou wouldst leave before thy brother's return?--Perhaps thy friend is
less ill than he thinks....

PÉLLÉAS

His letter is so sad you can see death between the lines.... He says
he knows the very day when death must come.... He tells me I can
arrive before it if I will, but that there is no more time to lose.
The journey is very long, and if I await Golaud's return, it will be
perhaps too late....

ARKËL.

Thou must wait a little while, nevertheless.... We do not know what
this return has in store for us. And besides, is not thy father here,
above us, more sick perhaps than thy friend.... Couldst thou choose
between the father and the friend?...                              [_Exit._

GENEVIÈVE.

Have a care to keep the lamp lit from this evening, Pélléas....

[_Exeunt severally._




SCENE IV.--_Before the castle. Enter_ GENEVIÈVE _and_ MÉLISANDE.


MÉLISANDE.

It is gloomy in the gardens. And what forests, what forests all about
the palaces!...

GENEVIÈVE.

Yes; that astonished me too when I came hither; it astonishes
everybody. There are places where you never see the sun. But one gets
used to it so quickly.... It is long ago, it is long ago.... It is
nearly forty years that I have lived here.... Look toward the other
side, you will have the light of the sea....

MÉLISANDE.

I hear a noise below us....

GENEVIÈVE.

Yes; it is some one coming up toward us.... Ah! it is Pélléas.... He
seems still tired from having waited so long for you....

MÉLISANDE.

He has not seen us.

GENEVIÈVE.

I think he has seen us but does not know what he should do....
Pélléas, Pélléas, is it thou?...

_Enter_ PÉLLÉAS

PÉLLÉAS.

Yes!... I was coming toward the sea....

GENEVIÈVE.

So were we; we were seeking the light. It is a little lighter here
than elsewhere; and yet the sea is gloomy.

PÉLLÉAS

We shall have a storm to-night. There has been one every night for
some time, and yet it is so calm now.... One might embark unwittingly
and come back no more.

MÉLISANDE.

Something is leaving the port....

PÉLLÉAS.

It must be a big ship.... The lights are very high, we shall see it in
a moment, when it enters the band of light....

GENEVIÈVE.

I do not know whether we shall be able to see it ... there is still a
fog on the sea....

PÉLLÉAS.

The fog seems to be rising slowly....

MÉLISANDE.

Yes; I see a little light down there, which I had not seen....

PÉLLÉAS.

It is a lighthouse; there are others we cannot see yet.

MÉLISANDE.

The ship is in the light.... It is already very far away....

PÉLLÉAS.

It is a foreign ship. It looks larger than ours....

MÉLISANDE.

It is the ship that brought me here!...

PÉLLÉAS.

It flies away under full sail....

MÉLISANDE.

It is the ship that brought me here. It has great sails.... I
recognized it by its sails.

PÉLLÉAS.

There will be a rough sea to-night.

MÉLISANDE.

Why does it go away to-night?... You can hardly see it any longer....
Perhaps it will be wrecked....

PÉLLÉAS.

The sight falls very quickly....                              [_A silence._

GENEVIÈVE.

No one speaks any more?... You have nothing more to say to each
other?... It is time to go in. Pélléas, show Mélisande the way. I mast
go see little Yniold a moment.                                     [_Exit._

PÉLLÉAS.

Nothing can be seen any longer on the sea....

MÉLISANDE.

I see more lights.

PÉLLÉAS.

It is the other lighthouses.... Do you hear the sea?... It is the wind
rising.... Let us go down this way. Will you give me your hand?

MÉLISANDE.

See, see, my hands are full....

PÉLLÉAS.

I will hold you by the arm, the road is steep and it is very gloomy
there.... I am going away perhaps to-morrow....

MÉLISANDE.

Oh!... why do you go away?                                       [_Exeunt._




ACT SECOND.




SCENE I.--_A fountain in the park.


Enter_ PÉLLÉAS _and_ MÉLISANDE.

PÉLLÉAS.

You do not know where I have brought you?--I often come to sit here,
toward noon, when it is too hot in the gardens. It is stifling to-day,
even in the shade of the trees.

MÉLISANDE.

Oh, how clear the water is!...

PÉLLÉAS.

It is as cool as winter. It is an old abandoned spring. It seems to
have been a miraculous spring,--it opened the eyes of the blind,--they
still call it "Blind Man's Spring."

MÉLISANDE.

It no longer opens the eyes of the blind?

PÉLLÉAS.

Since the King has been nearly blind himself, no one comes any
more....

MÉLISANDE.

How alone one is here!... There is no sound.

PÉLLÉAS.

There is always a wonderful silence here.... One could hear the water
sleep.... Will you sit down on the edge of the marble basin? There is
one linden where the sun never comes....

MÉLISANDE.

I am going to lie down on the marble.--I should like to see the bottom
of the water....

PÉLLÉAS.

No one has ever seen it.--It is as deep, perhaps, as the sea.--It is
not known whence it comes.--Perhaps it comes from the bottom of the
earth....

MÉLISANDE.

If there were anything shining at the bottom, perhaps one could see
it....

PÉLLÉAS.

Do not lean over so....

MÉLISANDE.

I would like to touch the water....

PÉLLÉAS.

Have a care of slipping.... I will hold your hand....

MÉLISANDE.

No, no, I would plunge both hands in it.... You would say my hands
were sick to-day....

PÉLLÉAS.

Oh! oh! take care! take care! Mélisande!... Mélisande!...--Oh! your
hair!...

MÉLISANDE _(starting upright)._ I cannot,... I cannot reach it....

PÉLLÉAS.

Your hair dipped in the water....

MÉLISANDE.

Yes, it is longer than my arms.... It is longer than I....    [_A silence._

PÉLLÉAS.

It was at the brink of a spring, too, that he found you?

MÉLISANDE.

Yes....

PÉLLÉAS.

What did he say to you?

MÉLISANDE.

Nothing;--I no longer remember....

PÉLLÉAS.

Was he quite near you?

MÉLISANDE.

Yes; he would have kissed me.

PÉLLÉAS.

And you would not?

MÉLISANDE.

No.

PÉLLÉAS.

Why would you not?

MÉLISANDE.

Oh! oh! I saw something pass at the bottom of the water....

PÉLLÉAS.

Take care! take care!--You will fall! What are you playing with?

MÉLISANDE.

With the ring he gave me....

PÉLLÉAS.

Take care; you will lose it....

MÉLISANDE.

No, no; I am sure of my hands....

PÉLLÉAS.

Do not play so, over so deep a water....

MÉLISANDE.

My hands do not tremble.

PÉLLÉAS.

How it shines in the sunlight I--Do not throw it so high in the
air....

MÉLISANDE.

Oh!...

PÉLLÉAS.

It has fallen?

MÉLISANDE.

It has fallen into the water!...

PÉLLÉAS.

Where is it? where is it?...

MÉLISANDE.

I do not see it sink?...

PÉLLÉAS.

I think I see it shine....

MÉLISANDE.

My ring?

PÉLLÉAS.

Yes, yes; down yonder....

MÉLISANDE.

Oh! oh! It is so far away from us!... no, no, that is not it ... that
is not it.... It is lost ... lost.... There is nothing any more but
a great circle on the water.... What shall we do? What shall we do
now?...

PÉLLÉAS.

You need not be so troubled for a ring. It is nothing.... We shall
find it again, perhaps. Or else we will find another....

MÉLISANDE.

No, no; we shall never find it again; we shall never find any others
either.... And yet I thought I had it in my hands.... I had already
shut my hands, and it is fallen in spite of all.... I threw it too
high, toward the sun....

PÉLLÉAS.

Come, come, we will come back another day;... come, it is time. They
will come to meet us. It was striking noon at the moment the ring
fell.

MÉLISANDE.

What shall we say to Golaud if he ask where it is?

PÉLLÉAS.

The truth, the truth, the truth....                              [_Exeunt._




SCENE II.--_An apartment in the castle._ GOLAUD _discovered, stretched
upon his bed;_ MÉLISANDE, _by his bedside_.


GOLAUD.

Ah! ah! all goes well; it will amount to nothing. But I cannot
understand how it came to pass. I was hunting quietly in the forest.
All at once my horse ran away, without cause. Did he see anything
unusual?... I had just heard the twelve strokes of noon. At the
twelfth stroke he suddenly took fright and ran like a blind madman
against a tree. I heard no more. I do not yet know what happened. I
fell, and he must have fallen on me. I thought I had the whole forest
on my breast; I thought my heart was crushed. But my heart is sound.
It is nothing, apparently....

MÉLISANDE.

Would you like a little water?

GOLAUD.

Thanks, thanks; I am not thirsty.

MÉLISANDE.

Would you like another pillow?... There is a little spot of blood on
this.

GOLAUD.

No, no; it is not worth while. I bled at the mouth just now. I shall
bleed again perhaps....

MÉLISANDE.

Are you quite sure?... You are not suffering too much?

GOLAUD.

No, no; I have seen a good many more like this. I was made of iron
and blood.... These are not the little bones of a child; do not alarm
yourself....

MÉLISANDE.

Close your eyes and try to sleep. I shall stay here all night....

GOLAUD.

No, no; I do not wish you to tire yourself so. I do not need anything;
I shall sleep like a child.... What is the matter, Mélisande? Why do
you weep all at once?...

MÉLISANDE _(bursting into tears)._

I am ... I am ill too....

GOLAUD.

Thou art ill?... What ails thee, then; what ails thee, Mélisande?...

MÉLISANDE.

I do not know.... I am ill here.... I had rather tell you to-day; my
lord, my lord, I am not happy here....

GOLAUD.

Why, what has happened, Mélisande? What is it?... And I suspecting
nothing.... What has happened?... Some one has done thee harm?... Some
one has given thee offence?

MÉLISANDE.

No, no; no one has done me the least harm.... It is not that.... It
is not that.... But I can live here no longer. I do not know why.... I
would go away, go away!... I shall die if I am left here....

GOLAUD.

But something has happened? You must be hiding something from me?...
Tell me the whole truth, Mélisande.... Is it the King?... Is it my
mother?... Is it Pélléas?...

MÉLISANDE.

No, no; it is not Pélléas. It is not anybody.... You could not
understand me....

GOLAUD.

Why should I not understand?... If you tell me nothing, what will you
have me do?... Tell me everything and I shall understand everything.

MÉLISANDE.

I do not know myself what it is.... I do not know just what it is....
If I could tell you, I would tell you.... It is something stronger
than I....

GOLAUD.

Come; be reasonable, Mélisande.--What would you have me do?--You are
no longer a child.--Is it I whom you would leave?

MÉLISANDE.

Oh! no, no; it is not that.... I would go away with you.... It is
here that I can live no longer.... I feel that I shall not live a long
while....

GOLAUD.

But there must be a reason nevertheless. You will be thought mad.
It will be thought child's dreams.--Come, is it Pélléas, perhaps?--I
think he does not often speak to you.

MÉLISANDE.

Yes, yes; he speaks to me sometimes. I think he does not like me; I
have seen it in his eyes.... But he speaks to me when he meets me....

GOLAUD.

You must not take it ill of him. He has always been so. He is a little
strange. And just now he is sad; he thinks of his friend Marcellus,
who is at the point of death, and whom he cannot go to see.... He will
change, he will change, you will see; he is young....

MÉLISANDE.

But it is not that ... it is not that....

GOLAUD.

What is it, then?--Can you not get used to the life one leads here?
Is it too gloomy here?--It is true the castle is very old and very
sombre.... It is very cold, and very deep. And all those who dwell in
it, are already old. And the country may seem gloomy too, with all
its forests, all its old forests without light. But that may all be
enlivened if we will. And then, joy, joy, one does not have it every
day; we must take things as they come. But tell me something; no
matter what; I will do everything you could wish....

MÉLISANDE.

Yes, yes; it is true.... You never see the sky here. I saw it for the
first time this morning....

GOLAUD.

It is that, then, that makes you weep, my poor Mélisande?--It is only
that, then?--You weep, not to see the sky?--Come, come, you are no
longer at the age when one may weep for such things.... And then, is
not the summer yonder? You will see the sky every day.--And then, next
year.... Come, give me your hand; give me both your little hands. [_He
takes her hands._] Oh! oh! these little hands that I could crush like
flowers....--Hold! where is the ring I gave you?

MÉLISANDE.

The ring?

GOLAUD.

Yes; our wedding-ring, where is it?

MÉLISANDE.

I think.... I think it has fallen....

GOLAUD.

Fallen?--Where has it fallen?--You have not lost it?

MÉLISANDE.

No, no; it fell ... it must have fallen.... But I know where it is....

GOLAUD.

Where is it?

MÉLISANDE.

You know ... you know well ... the grotto by the seashore?...

GOLAUD.

Yes.

MÉLISANDE.

Well then, it is there.... It must be it is there.... Yes, yes; I
remember.... I went there this morning to pick up shells for little
Yniold.... There were some very fine ones.... It slipped from my
finger ... then the sea came in; and I had to go out before I had
found it.

GOLAUD.

Are you sure it is there?

MÉLISANDE.

Yes, yes; quite sure.... I felt it slip ... then, all at once, the
noise of the waves....

GOLAUD.

You must go look for it at once.

MÉLISANDE.

I must go look for it at once?

GOLAUD.

Yes.

MÉLISANDE.

Now?--at once?--in the dark?

GOLAUD.

Now, at once, in the dark. You must go look for it at once. I had
rather have lost all I have than have lost that ring. You do not know
what it is. You do not know whence it came. The sea will be very high
to-night. The sea will come to take it before you.... Make haste. You
must go look for it at once....

MÉLISANDE.

I dare not.... I dare not go alone....

GOLAUD.

Go, go with no matter whom. But you must go at once, do you
understand?--Make haste; ask Pélléas to go with you.

MÉLISANDE.

Pélléas?--With Pélléas?--But Pélléas would not....

GOLAUD.

Pélléas will do all you ask of him. I know Pélléas better than you do.
Go, go; hurry! I shall not sleep until I have the ring.

MÉLISANDE.

Oh! oh! I am not happy!... I am not happy!...
                                                          [_Exit, weeping._




SCENE III.--_Before a grotto._


_Enter_ PÉLLÉAS _and_ MÉLISANDE.

[_Speaking with great agitation._] Yes; it is here; we are there. It
is so dark you cannot tell the entrance of the grotto from the rest
of the night.... There are no stars on this side. Let us wait till
the moon has torn through that great cloud; it will light up the whole
grotto, and then we can enter without danger. There are dangerous
places, and the path is very narrow between two lakes whose bottom has
not yet been found. I did not think to bring a torch or a lantern, but
I think the light of the sky will be enough for us.--You have never
gone into this grotto?

MÉLISANDE.

No....

PÉLLÉAS.

Let us go in; let us go in.... You must be able to describe the place
where you lost the ring, if he questions you.... It is very big and
very beautiful. There are stalactites that look like plants and men.
It is full of blue darks. It has not yet been explored to the end.
There are great treasures hidden there, it seems. You will see the
remains of ancient shipwrecks there. But you must not go far in it
without a guide. There have been some who never have come back. I
myself dare not go forward too far. We will stop the moment we no
longer see the light of the sea or the sky. When you strike a little
light there, you would say the vault was covered with stars like the
sky. It is bits of crystal or salt, they say, that shine so in the
rock.--Look, look, I think the sky is going to clear.... Give me your
hand; do not tremble, do not tremble so. There is no danger; we will
stop the moment we no longer see the light of the sea.... Is it the
noise of the grotto that frightens you? It is the noise of night or
the noise of silence.... Do you hear the sea behind us?--It does not
seem happy to-night.... Ah! look, the light!...

    [The moon lights up abundantly the entrance and part of the
    darkness of the grotto; and at a certain depth are seen three
    old beggars with white hair, seated side by side, leaning upon
    each other and asleep against a bowlder.]

MÉLISANDE.

Ah!

PÉLLÉAS.

What is it?

MÉLISANDE.

There are ... there are....
                                       [_She points out the three Beggars._

PÉLLÉAS.

Yes, yes; I have seen them too....

MÉLISANDE.

Let us go!... Let us go!...

PÉLLÉAS.

Yes ... it is three old poor men fallen asleep.... There is a famine in
the country.... Why have they come to sleep here....

MÉLISANDE.

Let us go!... Come, come.... Let us go!...

PÉLLÉAS.

Take care; do not speak so loud.... Let us not wake them.... They are
still sleeping heavily.... Come.

MÉLISANDE.

Leave me, leave me; I prefer to walk alone....

PÉLLÉAS.

We will come back another day....                                [_Exeunt._




SCENE IV.--_An apartment in the castle,_ ARKËL _and_ PÉLLÉAS
_discovered._


ARKËL.

You see that everything retains you here just now and forbids you this
useless journey. We have concealed your father's condition from you
until now; but it is perhaps hopeless; and that alone should suffice
to stop you on the threshold. But there are so many other reasons....
And it is not in the day when our enemies awake, and when the people
are dying of hunger and murmur about us, that you have the right
to desert us. And why this journey? Marcellus is dead; and life has
graver duties than the visit to a tomb. You are weary, you say,
of your inactive life; but activity and duty are not found on the
highways. They must be waited for upon the threshold, and let in as
they go by; and they go by every day. You have never seen them? I
hardly see them any more myself; but I will teach you to see them, and
I will point them out to you the day when you would make them a sign.
Nevertheless, listen to me; if you believe it is from the depths of
your life this journey is exacted, I do not forbid your undertaking
it, for you must know better than I the events you must offer to your
being or your fate. I shall ask you only to wait until we know what
must take place ere long....

PÉLLÉAS.

How long must I wait?

ARKËL.

A few weeks; perhaps a few days....

PÉLLÉAS.

I will wait....




ACT THIRD




SCENE I.--_An apartment in the castle._ PÉLLÉAS _and_ MÉLISANDE
_discovered_, MÉLISANDE _plies her distaff at the back of the room._


PÉLLÉAS.

Yniold does not come back; where has he gone?

MÉLISANDE

He had heard something in the corridor; he has gone to see what it is.

PÉLLÉAS.

Mélisande....

MÉLISANDE

What is it?

PÉLLÉAS.

... Can you see still to work there?...

MÉLISANDE

I work as well in the dark....

PÉLLÉAS.

I think everybody is already asleep in the castle. Golaud does not
come back from the chase. It is late, nevertheless.... He no longer
suffers from his fall?...

MÉLISANDE.

He said he no longer suffered from it.

PÉLLÉAS.

He must be more prudent; his body is no longer as supple as at twenty
years.... I see the stars through the window and the light of the moon
on the trees. It is late; he will not come back now. [_Knocking at the
door._] Who is there?... Come in!...

_Little_ YNIOLD _opens the door and enters the room._

It was you knocking so?... That is not the way to knock at doors. It
is as if a misfortune had arrived; look, you have frightened little
mother.

LITTLE YNIOLD.

I only knocked a tiny little bit.

PÉLLÉAS.

It is late; little father will not come back to-night; it is time for
you to go to bed.

LITTLE YNIOLD.

I shall not go to bed before you do.

PÉLLÉAS.

What?... What is that you are saying?

LITTLE YNIOLD.

I say ... not before you ... not before you....

[_Bursts into sobs and takes refuge by_ MÉLISANDE.]

MÉLISANDE.

What is it, Yniold?... What is it?... why do you weep all at once?

YNIOLD _(sobbing)._

Because ... oh! oh! because ...

MÉLISANDE.

Because what?... Because what?... Tell me ...

YNIOLD.

Little mother ... little mother ... you are going away....

MÉLISANDE.

But what has taken hold of you, Yniold?... I have never dreamed of
going away....

YNIOLD.

Yes, you have; yes, you have; little father has gone away.... Little
father does not come back, and you are going to go away too.... I have
seen it ... I have seen it....

MÉLISANDE.

But there has never been any idea of that, Yniold.... Why, what makes
you think that I would go away?...

YNIOLD.

I have seen it ... I have seen it.... You have said things to uncle
that I could not hear....

PÉLLÉAS.

He is sleepy.... He has been dreaming.... Come here, Yniold; asleep
already?... Come and look out at the window; the swans are fighting
with the dogs....

YNIOLD _(at the window)._

Oh! oh! they are chasing the dogs!... They are chasing them!... Oh!
oh! the water!... the wings!... the wings!... they are afraid....

PÉLLÉAS. _(coming back by_ MÉLISANDE_)._

He is sleepy; he is struggling against sleep; his eyes were
closing....

MÉLISANDE _(singing softly as she spins)._

  Saint Daniel and Saint Michaël....
  Saint Michaël and Saint Raphaël....

YNIOLD _(at the window)._

Oh! oh! little mother!...

MÉLISANDE _(rising abruptly)._

What is it, Yniold?... What is it?...

YNIOLD.

I saw something at the window?...
                              [PÉLLÉAS _and_ MÉLISANDE _run to the window._

PÉLLÉAS.

What is there at the window?... What have you seen?...

YNIOLD.

Oh! oh! I saw something!...

PÉLLÉAS.

But there is nothing. I see nothing....

MÉLISANDE.

Nor I....

PÉLLÉAS.

Where did you see something? Which way?...

YNIOLD.

Down there, down there!... It is no longer there....

PÉLLÉAS.

He does not know what he is saying. He must have seen the light of the
moon on the forest. There are often strange reflections,... or else
something must have passed on the highway ... or in his sleep. For
see, see, I believe he is quite asleep....

YNIOLD _(at the window)._

Little father is there! little father is there!

PÉLLÉAS _(going to the window)._

He is right; Golaud is coming into the courtyard....

YNIOLD.

Little father!... little father!... I am going to meet him!...
                                              [_Exit, running,--A silence._

PÉLLÉAS.

They are coming up the stair....

_Enter_ GOLAUD _and little_ YNIOLD _with a lamp._

GOLAUD.

You are still waiting in the dark?

YNIOLD.

I have brought a light, little mother, a big light!... [_He lifts
the lamp and looks at_ MÉLISANDE.] You have been weeping, little
mother?... You have been, weeping?... [_He lifts the lamp toward_
PÉLLÉAS _and looks in turn at him._] You too, you too, you have been
weeping?... Little father, look, little father; they have both been
weeping....

GOLAUD.

Do not hold the light under their eyes so....



SCENE II.--_One of the towers of the castle.--watchman's round passes
under a window in the tower._


MÉLISANDE _(at the window, combing her unbound hair)._

  My long locks fall foaming
    To the threshold of the tower,--
  My locks await your coming
    All along the tower,
    And all the long, long hour,
    And all the long, long hour.

  _Saint Daniel and Saint Michaël,_
  _Saint Michaël and Saint Raphaël._

  I was born on a Sunday,
    A Sunday at high noon....

_Enter_ PÉLLÉAS _by the watchman's round._

PÉLLÉAS.

Holà! Holà! ho!...

MÉLISANDE.

Who is there?

PÉLLÉAS.

I, I, and I!... What art thou doing there at the window, singing like
a bird that is not native here?

MÉLISANDE.

I am doing my hair for the night...

PÉLLÉAS.

Is it that I see upon the wall?... I thought you had some light....

MÉLISANDE.

I have opened the window; it is too hot in the tower.... It is
beautiful to-night....

PÉLLÉAS.

There are innumerable stars; I have never seen so many as to-night;...
but the moon is still upon the sea.... Do not stay in the shadow,
Mélisande; lean forward a little till I see your unbound hair....

MÉLISANDE.

I am frightful so....
                                            [_She learn out at the window._

PÉLLÉAS.

Oh! oh! Mélisande!... oh, thou art beautiful!... thou art beautiful
so!... Lean out! lean out!... Let me come nearer thee....

MÉLISANDE

I cannot come nearer thee.... I am leaning out as far as I can....

PÉLLÉAS.

I cannot come up higher;... give me at least thy hand to-night ...
before I go away.... I leave to-morrow....

MÉLISANDE.

No, no, no!...

PÉLLÉAS.

Yes, yes, yes; I leave, I shall leave to-morrow.... Give me thy hand,
thy hand, thy little hand upon my lips....

MÉLISANDE.

I give thee not my hand if thou wilt leave....

PÉLLÉAS.

Give, give, give!...

MÉLISANDE.

Thou wilt not leave?...

PÉLLÉAS.

I will wait; I will wait....

MÉLISANDE.

I see a rose in the shadows....

PÉLLÉAS.

Where?... I see only the boughs of the willow hanging over the
wall....

MÉLISANDE.

Further down, further down, in the garden; further down, in the sombre
green....

PÉLLÉAS.

It is not a rose.... I will go see by and by, but give me thy hand
first; first thy hand....

MÉLISANDE.

There, there;... I cannot lean out further....

PÉLLÉAS.

I cannot reach thy hand with my lips....

MÉLISANDE.

I cannot lean out further.... I am on the point of falling....--Oh!
oh! my hair is falling down the tower!...

[_Her tresses fall suddenly over her head, as she is leaning out so,
and stream over_ PÉLLÉAS]

PÉLLÉAS.

Oh! oh! what is it?... Thy hair, thy hair is falling down to me!...
All thy locks, Mélisande, all thy locks have fallen down the tower!...
I hold them in my hands; I hold them in my mouth.... I hold them in
my arms; I put them about my neck.... I will not open my hands again
to-night....

MÉLISANDE.

Let me go! let me go!... Thou wilt make me fall!...

PÉLLÉAS.

No, no, no;... I have never seen such hair as thine, Mélisande!...
See, see, see; it comes from so high and yet it floods me to the
heart!... And yet it floods me to the knees!... And it is sweet, sweet
as if it fell from heaven!... I see the sky no longer through thy
locks. Thou seest, thou seest?... I can no longer hold them with both
hands; there are some on the boughs of the willow.... They are alive
like birds in my hands,... and they love me, they love me more than
thou!...

MÉLISANDE.

Let me go; let me go!... Some one might come....

PÉLLÉAS.

No, no, no; I shall not set thee free to-night.... Thou art my
prisoner to-night; all night, all night!...

MÉLISANDE.

Pélléas! Pélléas!...

PÉLLÉAS.

I tie them, I tie them to the willow boughs.... Thou shalt not go away
now;... thou shalt not go away now.... Look, look, I am kissing thy
hair.... I suffer no more in the midst of thy hair.... Hearest thou my
kisses along thy hair?... They mount along thy hair.... Each hair must
bring thee some.... Thou seest, thou seest, I can open my hands.... My
hands are free, and thou canst not leave me now....

MÉLISANDE.

Oh! oh! thou hurtest me.... [_Doves come out of the tower and fly
about them in the night._]--What is that, Pélléas?--What is it flying
about me?

PÉLLÉAS.

It is the doves coming oat of the tower.... I have frightened them;
they are flying away....

MÉLISANDE.

It is my doves, Pélléas.--Let us go away, let me go; they will not
come back again....

PÉLLÉAS.

Why will they not come back again?

MÉLISANDE

They will be lost in the dark.... Let me go; let me lift my head....
I hear a noise of footsteps.... Let me go!--It is Golaud!... I believe
it is Golaud!... He has heard us....

PÉLLÉAS.

Wait! Wait!... Thy hair is about the boughs.... It is caught there in
the darkness.... Wait, wait!... It is dark....

_Enter_ GOLAUD, _by the watchman's round._

GOLAUD.

What do you here?

PÉLLÉAS.

What do I here?... I....

GOLAUD.

You are children.... Mélisande, do not lean out so at the window; you
will fall.... Do you not know it is late?--It is nearly midnight.--Do
not play so in the darkness.--You are children.... [_Laughing
nervously._] What children!... What children!...
                                                     [_Exit, with_ PÉLLÉAS.




SCENE III.--_The-vaults of the castle.


Enter_ GOLAUD _and_ PÉLLÉAS.

GOLAUD.

Take care; this way, this way.--You have never penetrated into these
vaults?

PÉLLÉAS.

Yes; once, of old; but it was long ago....

GOLAUD.

They are prodigious great; it is a succession of enormous crypts that
end, God knows where. The whole castle is builded on these crypts. Do
you smell the deathly odor that reigns here?--That is what I wished,
to show you. In my opinion, it comes from the little underground lake
I am going to have you see. Take care; walk before me, in the light of
my lantern. I will warn you when we are there, [_They continue to walk
in silence._] Hey! hey! Pélléas! stop! stop!--[_He seizes him by the
arm._] For God's sake!... Do you not see?--One step more, and you had
been in the gulf!...

PÉLLÉAS

But I did not see it!... The lantern no longer lighted me....

GOLAUD.

I made a misstep.... but if I had not held you by the arm.... Well,
this is the stagnant water that I spoke of to you.... Do you
perceive the smell of death that rises?--Let us go to the end of this
overhanging rock, and do you lean over a little. It will strike you in
the face.

PÉLLÉAS.

I smell it already;... you would say a smell of the tomb.

GOLAUD.

Further, further.... It is this that on certain days has poisoned
the castle. The King will not believe it comes from here.--The crypt
should be walled up in which this standing water is found. It is time,
besides, to examine these vaults a little. Have you noticed those
lizards on the walls and pillars of the vaults?--There is a labor
hidden here you would not suspect; and the whole castle will be
swallowed up one of these nights, if it is not looked out for. But
what will you have? nobody likes to come down this far.... There are
strange lizards in many of the walls.... Oh! here ... do you perceive
the smell of death that rises?

PÉLLÉAS.

Yes; there is a smell of death rising about us....

GOLAUD.

Lean over; have no fear.... I will hold you ... give me ... no, no,
not your hand ... it might slip ... your arm, your arm!... Do you see
the gulf? [_Moved._]--Pélléas? Pélléas?...

PÉLLÉAS.

Yes; I think I see the bottom of the gulf.... Is it the light that
trembles so?... You ... [_He straightens up, turns, and looks at_
GOLAUD.]

GOLAUD (_with a trembling voice_).

Yes; it is the lantern.... See, I shook it to lighten the walls....

PÉLLÉAS.

I stifle here;... let us go out....

GOLAUD.

Yes; let us go out....
                                                      [_Exeunt in silence._




SCENE IV.--_A terrace at the exit of the vaults. Enter_ GOLAUD _and_
PÉLLÉAS.


PÉLLÉAS.

Ah! I breathe at last!... I thought, one moment, I was going to be ill
in those enormous crypts; I was on the point of falling.... There is
a damp air there, heavy as a leaden dew, and darkness thick as a
poisoned paste.... And now, all the air of all the sea!... There is a
fresh wind, see; fresh as a leaf that has just opened, over the little
green waves.... Hold! the flowers have just been watered at the foot
of the terrace, and the smell of the verdure and the wet roses comes
up to us.... It must be nearly noon; they are already in the shadow of
the tower.... It is noon; I hear the bells ringing, and the children
are going down to the beach to bathe.... I did not know that we had
stayed so long in the caverns....

GOLAUD.

We went down towards eleven o'clock....

PÉLLÉAS.

Earlier; it must have been earlier; I heard it strike half-past ten.

GOLAUD.

Half-past ten or a quarter to eleven....

PÉLLÉAS.

They have opened all the windows of the castle. It will be unusually
hot this afternoon.... Look, there is mother with Mélisande at a
window of the tower....

GOLAUD.

Yes; they have taken refuge on the shady side.--Speaking of Mélisande,
I heard what passed and what was said last night. I am quite aware all
that is but child's play; but it need not be repeated. Mélisande is
very young and very impressionable; and she must be treated the more
circumspectly that she is perhaps with child at this moment.... She
is very delicate, hardly woman; and the least emotion might bring on
a mishap. It is not the first time I have noticed there might be
something between you.... You are older than she; it will suffice to
have told you.... Avoid her as much as possible; without affectation
moreover; without affectation....--What is it I see yonder on the
highway toward the forest?...

PÉLLÉAS.

Some herds they are leading to the city....

GOLAUD.

They cry like lost children; you would say they smelt the butcher
already.--It will be time for dinner.--What a fine day! What a capital
day for the harvest!...
                                                                 [_Exeunt._




SCENE V.--_Before the castle._


_Enter_ GOLAUD _and little_ YNIOLD.

GOLAUD.

Come, we are going to sit down here, Yniold; sit on my knee; we shall
see from here what passes in the forest. I do not see you any more
at all now. You abandon me too; you are always at little mother's....
Why, we are sitting just under little mother's windows.--Perhaps she
is saying her evening prayer at this moment.... But tell me, Yniold,
she is often with your uncle Pélléas, isn't she?

YNIOLD.

Yes, yes; always, little father; when you are not there, little
father....

GOLAUD.

Ah!--look; some one is going by with a lantern in the garden.--But I
have been told they did not like each other.... It seems they often
quarrel;... no? Is it true?

YNIOLD.

Yes, yes; it is true.

GOLAUD.

Yes?--Ah! ah!--But what do they quarrel about?

YNIOLD.

About the door.

GOLAUD.

What? about the door?--What are you talking about?--No, come, explain
yourself; why do they quarrel about the door?

YNIOLD.

Because it won't stay open.

GOLAUD.

Who wants it to stay open?--Come, why do they quarrel?

YNIOLD.

I don't know, little father; about the light.

GOLAUD.

I am not talking to you about the light; we will talk of that by and
by. I am talking to you about the door. Answer what I ask you; you
must learn to talk; it is time.... Do not put your hand in your mouth
so;... come....

YNIOLD.

Little father! little father!... I won't do it any more.... [_He
cries._]

GOLAUD.

Come; what are you crying for now? What has happened?

YNIOLD.

Oh! oh! little father, you hurt me....

GOLAUD.

I hurt you?--Where did I hurt you? I did not mean to....

YNIOLD.

Here, here; on my little arm....

GOLAUD.

I did not mean to; come, don't cry any more, and I will give you
something to-morrow.

YNIOLD.

What, little father?

GOLAUD.

A quiver and some arrows; but tell me what you know about the door.

YNIOLD.

Big arrows?

GOLAUD.

Yes, yes; very big arrows.--But why don't they want the door to be
open?--Come, answer me sometime!--no, no; do not open your mouth to
cry. I am not angry. We are going to have a quiet talk, like Pélléas
and little mother when they are together. What do they talk about when
they are together?

YNIOLD.

Pélléas and little mother?

GOLAUD.

Yes; what do they talk about?

YNIOLD.

About me; always about me.

GOLAUD.

And what do they say about you?

YNIOLD.

They say I am going to be very big.

GOLAUD.

Oh, plague of my life!... I am here like a blind man searching for
his treasure at the bottom of the ocean!... I am here like a new-born
child lost in the forest, and you ... Come, come, Yniold, I was
wandering; we are going to talk seriously. Do Pélléas and little
mother never speak of me when I am not there?...

YNIOLD.

Yes, yes, little father; they are always speaking of you.

GOLAUD.

Ah!... And what do they say of me?

YNIOLD.

They say I shall grow as big as you are.

GOLAUD.

You are always by them?

YNIOLD.

Yes, yes, always, always, little father.

GOLAUD.

They never tell you to go play somewhere else?

YNIOLD.

No, little father; they are afraid when I am not there.

GOLAUD.

They are afraid?... What makes you think they are afraid?

YNIOLD.

Little mother always says, "Don't go away; don't go away!"... They are
unhappy, but they laugh....

GOLAUD.

But that does not prove they are afraid.

YNIOLD.

Yes, yes, little father; she is afraid....

GOLAUD.

Why do you say she is afraid?

YNIOLD.

They always weep in the dark.

GOLAUD.

Ah! ah!...

YNIOLD.

That makes one weep too.

GOLAUD.

Yes, yes!...

YNIOLD.

She is pale, little father.

GOLAUD.

Ah! ah!... patience, my God, patience!...

YNIOLD.

What, little father?

GOLAUD.

Nothing, nothing, my child.--I saw a wolf go by in the forest.--Then
they get on well together?--I am glad to learn they are on good
terms.--They kiss each other sometimes--No?...

YNIOLD.

Kiss each other, little father?--No, no,--ah! yes, little father, yes;
yes; once ... once when it rained....

GOLAUD.

They kissed?--But how, how did they kiss?

YNIOLD.

So, little father, so!... [_He gives him a kiss on the mouth,
laughing._] Ah! ah! your beard, little father!... It pricks! it
pricks! it pricks! It is getting all gray, little father, and your
hair, too; all gray, all gray, all gray.... [_The window under which
they are sitting is lighted up at this moment, and the light falls
upon them._] Ah! ah! little mother has lit her lamp. It is light,
little father; it is light....

GOLAUD.

Yes; it is beginning to be light....

YNIOLD.

Let us go there too, little father; let us go there too....

GOLAUD.

Where do you want to go?

YNIOLD.

Where it is light, little father.

GOLAUD.

No, no, my child; let us stay in the dark a little longer.... One
cannot tell, one cannot tell yet.... Do you see those poor people down
there trying to kindle a little fire in the forest?--It has rained.
And over there, do you see the old gardener trying to lift that tree
the wind has blown down across the road?--He cannot; the tree is too
big; the tree is too heavy, and it will lie where it fell. All that
cannot be helped.... I think Pélléas is mad....

YNIOLD.

No, little father, he is not mad; he is very good.

GOLAUD.

Do you want to see little mother?

YNIOLD.

Yes, yes; I want to see her!

GOLAUD.

Don't make any noise; I am going to hoist you up to the window. It is
too high for me, for all I am so big.... [_He lifts the child._] Do
not make the least noise; little mother would be terribly afraid....
Do you see her?--Is she in the room?

YNIOLD.

Yes.... Oh, how light it is!

GOLAUD.

She is alone?

YNIOLD.

Yes;... no, no; Uncle Pélléas Is there, too.

GOLAUD.

He--...!

YNIOLD.

Ah! ah! little father! you have hurt me!...

GOLAUD.

It is nothing; be still; I will not do it any more; look, look,
Yniold!... I stumbled; speak lower. What are they doing?--

YNIOLD.

They are not doing anything, little father; they are waiting for
something.

GOLAUD.

Are they near each other?

YNIOLD.

No, little father.

GOLAUD.

And ... and the bed? are they near the bed?

YNIOLD.

The bed, little father?--I can't see the bed.

GOLAUD.

Lower, lower; they will hear you. Are they speaking?

YNIOLD.

No, little father; they do not speak.

GOLAUD.

But what are they doing?--They must be doing something....

YNIOLD.

They are looking at the light.

GOLAUD.

Both?

YNIOLD.

Yes, little father.

GOLAUD.

They do not say anything?

YNIOLD.

No, little father; they do not close their eyes.

GOLAUD.

They do not come near each other?

YNIOLD.

No, little father; they do not stir.

GOLAUD.

They are sitting down?

YNIOLD.

No, little father; they are standing upright against the wall.

GOLAUD.

They make no gestures?--They do not look at each other?--They make no
signs?...

YNIOLD.

No, little father.--Oh! oh! little father; they never close their
eyes.... I am terribly afraid....

GOLAUD.

Be still. They do not stir yet?

YNIOLD.

No, little father.--I am afraid, little father; let me come down!...

GOLAUD.

Why, what are you afraid of?--Look! look!...

YNIOLD.

I dare not look any more, little father!... Let me come down!...

GOLAUD.

Look! look!...

YNIOLD.

Oh! oh! I am going to cry, little father!--Let me come down! let me
come down!,..

GOLAUD.

Come; we will go see what has happened.
                                                                 [_Exeunt._




ACT FOURTH




SCENE I.--_A corridor in the castle._


_Enter_ PÉLLÉAS _and_ MÉLISANDE, _meeting_.

PÉLLÉAS.

Where goest thou? I must speak to thee to-night. Shall I see thee?

MÉLISANDE.

Yes.

PÉLLÉAS.

I have just left my father's room. He is getting better. The physician
has told us he is saved.... And yet this morning I had a presentiment
this day would end ill. I have had a rumor of misfortune in my ears
for some time.... Then, all at once there was a great change; to-day
it is no longer anything but a question of time. All the windows in
his room have been thrown open. He speaks; he seems happy. He does not
speak yet like an ordinary man, but already his ideas no longer all
come from the other world.... He recognized me. He took my hand and
said with that strange air he has had since he fell sick: "Is it thou,
Pélléas? Why, why, I had not noticed it before, but thou hast the
grave and friendly look of those who will not live long.... You must
travel; you must travel...." It is strange; I shall obey him.... My
mother listened to him and wept for joy.--Hast thou not been aware of
it?--The whole house seems already to revive, you hear breathing, you
hear speaking, you hear walking.... Listen; I hear some one speaking
behind that door. Quick, quick! answer quickly! where shall I see
thee?

MÉLISANDE.

Where wouldst thou?

PÉLLÉAS.

In the park; near "Blind Man's Spring."--Wilt thou?--Wilt thou come?

MÉLISANDE.

Yes.

PÉLLÉAS.

It will be the last night;--I am going to travel, as my father said.
Thou wilt not see me more....

MÉLISANDE.

Do not say that, Pélléas.... I shall see thee always; I shall look
upon thee always....

PÉLLÉAS.

Thou wilt look in vain.... I shall be so far away thou couldst no
longer see me.... I shall try to go very far away.... I am full of
joy, and you would say I had all the weight of heaven and earth on my
body to-day....

MÉLISANDE.

What has happened, Pélléas?--I no longer understand what you say....

PÉLLÉAS.

Go, go; let us separate. I hear some one speaking behind that door....
It is the strangers who came to the castle this morning.... They are
going out.... Let us go; it is the strangers....       [_Exeunt severally._




SCENE II.--_An apartment in the castle._ ARKËL _and_ MÉLISANDE
_discovered._


ARKËL.

Now that Pélléas's father is saved, and sickness, the old handmaid of
Death, has left the castle, a little joy and a little sunlight will
at last come into the house again.... It was time!--For, since thy
coming, we have only lived here whispering about a closed room.... And
truly I have pitied thee, Mélisande.... Thou camest here all joyous,
like a child seeking a gala-day, and at the moment thou enteredst in
the vestibule I saw thy face change, and probably thy soul, as the
face changes in spite of us when we enter at noon into a grotto too
gloomy and too cold.... And since,--since, on account of all that, I
have often no longer understood thee.... I observed thee, thou went
there, listless perhaps, but with the strange, astray look of one
awaiting ever a great trouble, in the sunlight, in a beautiful
garden.... I cannot explain.... But I was sad to see thee so; for thou
art too young and too beautiful to live already day and night under
the breath of death.... But now all that will change. At my age,--and
there perhaps is the surest fruit of my life,--at my age I have gained
I know not what faith in the fidelity of events, and I have always
seen that every young and beautiful being creates about itself young,
beautiful, and happy events.... And it is thou who wilt now open the
door for the new era I have glimpses of.... Come here; why dost thou
stay there without answering and without lifting thine eyes?--I have
kissed thee but once only hitherto,--the day of thy coming; and yet
old men need sometimes to touch with their lips a woman's forehead or
a child's cheek, to believe still in the freshness of life and avert
awhile the menaces.... Art thou afraid of my old lips? How I have
pitied thee these months!...

MÉLISANDE.

Grandfather, I have not been unhappy....

ARKËL.

Perhaps you were of those who are unhappy without knowing it,... and
they are the most unhappy.... Let me look at thee, so, quite near, a
moment;... we have such need of beauty beside Death....

_Enter_ GOLAUD.

GOLAUD.

Pélléas leaves to-night.

ARKËL.

Thou hast blood on thy forehead.--What hast thou done?

GOLAUD.

Nothing, nothing.... I have passed through a hedge of thorns.

MÉLISANDE.

Bend down your head a little, my lord.... I will wipe your
forehead....

GOLAUD (_repulsing her_).

I will not that you touch me, do you understand? Go, go!--I am not
speaking to you.--Where is my sword?--I came to seek my sword....

MÉLISANDE.

Here; on the praying-stool.

GOLAUD.

Bring it. [_To_ ARKËL.]--They have just found another peasant dead of
hunger, along by the sea. You would say they all meant to die under
our eyes.--[_To_ MÉLISANDE.] Well, my sword?--Why do you tremble
so?--I am not going to kill you. I would simply examine the blade. I
do not employ the sword for these uses. Why do you examine me like a
beggar?--I do not come to ask alms of you. You hope to see something
in my eyes without my seeing anything in yours?--Do you think I may
know something?--[_To_ ARKËL.]--Do you see those great eyes?--It is as
if they were proud of their richness....

ARKËL.

I see there only a great innocence....

GOLAUD.

A great innocence!... They are greater than innocence!... They are
purer than the eyes of a lamb.... They would give God lessons in
innocence! A great innocence! Listen: I am so near them I feel the
freshness of their lashes when they wink; and yet I am less far away
from the great secrets of the other world than from the smallest
secret of those eyes!... A great innocence!... More than innocence!
You would say the angels of heaven celebrated there an eternal
baptism!... I know those eyes! I have seen them at their work! Close
them! close them! or I shall close them for a long while!...--Do
not put your right hand to your throat so; I am saying a very simple
thing.... I have no under-thought.... If I had an under-thought, why
should I not say it? Ah! ah!--do not attempt to flee!--Here!--Give
me that hand!--Ah! your hands are too hot.... Go away! Your flesh
disgusts me!... Here!--There is no more question of fleeing now!--[_He
seizes her by the hair._]--You shall follow me on your knees!--On your
knees!--On your knees before me!--Ah! ah! your long hair serves
some purpose at last!... Right,... left!--Left,... right!--Absalom!
Absalom.--Forward! back! To the ground! to the ground!... You see, you
see; I laugh already like an old man....

ARKËL (_running up_).

Golaud!...

GOLAUD (_affecting a sudden calm_).

You will do as you may please, look you.--I attach no importance
to that.--I am too old; and, besides, I am not a spy. I shall await
chance; and then ... Oh! then!... simply because it is the custom;
simply because it is the custom....                                [_Exit._

ARKËL.

What ails him?--He is drunk?

MÉLISANDE (_in tears_).

No, no; he does not love me any more.... I am not happy!... I am not
happy!...

ARKËL.

If I were God, I would have pity on men's hearts....




SCENE III.--_A terrace of the castle. Little_ YNIOLD _discovered,
trying to lift a bowlder._


LITTLE YNIOLD.

Oh, this stone is heavy!... It is heavier than I am.... It is
heavier than everybody.... It is heavier than everything that ever
happened.... I can see my golden ball between the rock and this
naughty stone, and I cannot reach it.... My little arm is not long
enough,... and this stone won't be lifted.... I can't lift it,... and
nobody could lift it.... It is heavier than the whole house;... you
would think it had roots in the earth.... [_The Bleatings of a flock
heard far away._]--Oh! oh! I hear the sheep crying.... [_He goes to
look, at the edge of the terrace._] Why! there is no more sun.... They
are coming ... the little sheep ... they are coming.... There is a lot
of them!... There is a lot of them!... They are afraid of the dark....
They crowd together! they crowd together!... They can hardly walk any
more.... They are crying! they are crying! and they go quick!... They
go quick!... They are already at the great crossroads. Ah! ah! They
don't know where they ought to go any more.... They don't cry any
more.... They wait.... Some of them want to go to the right....
They all want to go to the right.... They cannot!... The shepherd is
throwing earth at them.... Ah! ah! They are going to pass by here....
They obey! They obey! They are going to pass under the terrace....
They are going to pass under the rocks.... I am going to see them near
by.... Oh! oh! what a lot of them!... What a lot of them!... The
whole road is full of them.... They all keep still now ... Shepherd!
shepherd! why don't they speak any more?

THE SHEPHERD (_who is out of sight_).

Because it is no longer the road to the stable....

YNIOLD.

Where are they going?--Shepherd! shepherd!--where are they going?--He
doesn't hear me any more. They are too far away already.... They go
quick.... They are not making a noise any more.... It is no longer the
road to the stable.... Where are they going to sleep to-night?--Oh!
oh!--It is too dark.... I am going to tell something to somebody....
                                                                   [_Exit._




SCENE IV.--_A fountain in the park._


_Enter_ PÉLLÉAS.

PÉLLÉAS.

It is the last evening ... the last evening. It must all end. I have
played like a child about a thing I did not guess.... I have played
a-dream about the snares of fate.... Who has awakened me all at once?
I shall flee, crying out for joy and woe like a blind man fleeing
from his burning house.... I am going to tell her I shall flee....
My father is out of danger; and I have no more reason to lie to
myself.... It is late; she does not come.... I should do better to
go away without seeing her again.... I must look well at her this
time.... There are some things that I no longer recall.... It seems at
times as if I had not seen her for a hundred years.... And I have not
yet looked upon her look.... There remains nought to me if I go away
thus. And all those memories ... it is as if I were to take away a
little water in a muslin bag.... I must see her one last time, to the
bottom of her heart.... I must tell her all that I have never told
her.

_Enter_ MÉLISANDE.

MÉLISANDE.

Pélléas!

Mélisande!--Is it thou, Mélisande?

MÉLISANDE.

Yes.

PÉLLÉAS.

Come hither; do not stay at the edge of the moonlight.--Come hither.
We have so many things to tell each other.... Come hither in the
shadow of the linden.

MÉLISANDE.

Let me stay in the light....

PÉLLÉAS.

We might be seen from the windows of the tower. Come hither; here, we
have nothing to fear.--Take care; we might be seen....

MÉLISANDE.

I wish to be seen....

PÉLLÉAS.

Why, what doth ail thee?--Thou wert able to come out without being
seen?

MÉLISANDE.

Yes; your brother slept....

PÉLLÉAS.

It is late.--In an hour they will close the gates. We must be careful.
Why art thou come so late?

MÉLISANDE.

Your brother had a bad dream. And then my gown was caught on the nails
of the gate. See, it is torn. I lost all this time, and ran....

PÉLLÉAS.

My poor Mélisande!... I should almost be afraid to touch thee.... Thou
art still out of breath, like a hunted bird.... It is for me, for me,
thou doest all that?... I hear thy heart beat as if it were mine....
Come hither ... nearer, nearer me....

MÉLISANDE.

Why do you laugh?

PÉLLÉAS.

I do not laugh;--or else I laugh for joy, unwittingly.... It were a
weeping matter, rather....

MÉLISANDE.

We have come here before.... I recollect....

PÉLLÉAS.

Yes ... yes.... Long months ago.--I knew not then.... Knowest thou why
I asked thee to come here to-night?

MÉLISANDE.

No.

PÉLLÉAS.

It is perhaps the last time I shall see thee.... I must go away
forever....

MÉLISANDE.

Why sayest thou always thou wilt go away?...

PÉLLÉAS.

I must tell thee what thou knowest already?--Thou knowest not what I
am going to tell thee?

MÉLISANDE.

Why, no; why, no; I know nothing--...

PÉLLÉAS.

Thou knowest not why I must go afar.... Thou knowest not it is
because ... [_He kisses her abruptly._] I love thee....

MÉLISANDE (_in a low voice_).

I love thee too....

PÉLLÉAS.

Oh! oh! What saidst thou, Mélisande?... I hardly heard it!... Thou
sayest that in a voice coming from the end of the world!... I hardly
heard thee.... Thou lovest me?--Thou lovest me too?... Since when
lovest thou me?...

MÉLISANDE.

Since always.... Since I saw thee....

PÉLLÉAS.

Oh, how thou sayest that!... Thy voice seems to have blown across the
sea in spring!... I have never heard it until now;... one would say
it had rained on my heart!... Thou sayest that so frankly!... Like an
angel questioned!... I cannot believe it, Mélisande!... Why shouldst
thou love me?--Nay, why dost thou love me?--Is what thou sayest
true?--Thou dost not mock me?--Thou dost not lie a little, to make me
smile?...

MÉLISANDE.

No; I never lie; I lie but to thy brother....

PÉLLÉAS.

Oh, how thou sayest that!... Thy voice! thy voice!... It is cooler and
more frank than the water is!... It is like pure water on my lips!...
It is like pure water on my hands.... Give me, give me thy hands!...
Oh, how small thy hands are!... I did not know thou wert so
beautiful!... I have never seen anything so beautiful before thee....
I was fall of unrest; I sought throughout the house.... I sought
throughout the country.... And I found not beauty.... And now I have
found thee!... I have found thee!.,. I do not think there could be on
the earth a fairer woman!... Where art thou?--I no longer hear thee
breathe....

MÉLISANDE.

Because I look on thee....

PÉLLÉAS.

Why dost thou look so gravely on me?--We are already in the
shadow.--It is too dark under this tree. Come into the light. We
cannot see how happy we are. Come, come; so little time remains to
us....

MÉLISANDE.

No, no; let us stay here.... I am nearer thee in the dark....

PÉLLÉAS.

Where are thine eyes?--Thou art not going to fly me?--Thou dost not
think of me just now.

MÉLISANDE.

Oh, yes; oh, yes; I only think of thee....

PÉLLÉAS.

Thou wert looking elsewhere....

MÉLISANDE.

I saw thee elsewhere....

PÉLLÉAS.

Thy soul is far away.... What ails thee, then?--Meseems thou art not
happy....

MÉLISANDE.

Yes, yes; I am happy, but I am sad....

PÉLLÉAS.

One is sad often when one loves....

MÉLISANDE.

I weep always when I think of thee....

PÉLLÉAS.

I too.... I too, Mélisande.... I am quite near thee; I weep for joy,
and yet ...[_He kisses her again._]--Thou art strange when I kiss thee
so.... Thou art so beautiful that one would think thou wert about to
die....

MÉLISANDE.

Thou too....

PÉLLÉAS.

There, there.... We do not what we will.... I did not love thee the
first time I saw thee....

MÉLISANDE.

Nor I ... nor I.... I was afraid....

PÉLLÉAS.

I could not admit thine eyes.... I would have gone away at once ...
and then....

MÉLISANDE.

And I,--I would not have come.... I do not yet know why,--I was afraid
to come....

PÉLLÉAS.

There are so many things one never knows. We are ever waiting; and
then.... What is that noise?--They are closing the gates!...

MÉLISANDE.

Yes, they have closed the gates....

PÉLLÉAS.

We cannot go back now?--Hearest thou the bolts?--Listen! listen!...
the great chains!... the great chains!... It is too late; it is too
late!...

MÉLISANDE.

All the better! all the better! all the better!...

PÉLLÉAS.

Thou--...? Behold, behold!... It is no longer we who will it so!...
All's lost, all's saved! all is saved to-night!--Come, come.... My
heart beats like a madman,--up to my very throat.... [_They embrace._]
Listen! listen! my heart is almost strangling me.... Come! come!...
Ah, how beautiful it is in the shadows!...

MÉLISANDE.

There is some one behind us!...

PÉLLÉAS.

I see no one....

MÉLISANDE.

I heard a noise....

PÉLLÉAS.

I hear only thy heart in the dark....

MÉLISANDE.

I heard the crackling of dead leaves....

PÉLLÉAS.

Because the wind is silent all at once.... It fell as we were
kissing....

MÉLISANDE.

How long our shadows are to-night!...

PÉLLÉAS.

They embrace to the very end of the garden. Oh, how they kiss far away
from us!... Look! look!...

MÉLISANDE.(_a stifled voice_).

A-a-h!--He is behind a tree!

PÉLLÉAS.

Who?

MÉLISANDE.

Golaud!

PÉLLÉAS.

Golaud!--where?--I see nothing....

MÉLISANDE.

There ... at the end of our shadows.

PÉLLÉAS.

Yes, yes; I saw him.... Let us not turn abruptly....

MÉLISANDE.

He has his sword....

PÉLLÉAS.

I have not mine....

MÉLISANDE.

He saw us kiss....

PÉLLÉAS.

He does not know we have seen him.... Do not stir; do not turn your
head.... He would rush headlong on us.... He will remain there while
he thinks we do not know. He watches us.... He is still motionless....
Go, go at once this way.... I will wait for him.... I will stop
him....

MÉLISANDE.

No, no, no!...

PÉLLÉAS.

Go! go! he has seen all!... He will kill us!...

MÉLISANDE.

All the better! all the better! all the better!...

PÉLLÉAS.

He comes! he comes!... Thy mouth!... Thy mouth!...

MÉLISANDE.

Yes!... yes! yes!...
                                                  [_They kiss desperately._

PÉLLÉAS

Oh! oh! All the stars are falling!...

MÉLISANDE.

Upon me too! upon me too!...

PÉLLÉAS.

Again! Again!... Give! give!...

MÉLISANDE.

All! all! all!...

    [Golaud rushes upon them, sword in hand, and strikes Pélléas, who
    falls at the brink of the fountain. Mélisande flees terrified.]

MÉLISANDE. (_fleeing_).

Oh! oh! I have no courage I ... I have no courage!...

                         [GOLAUD _pursues her through the wood in silence._




ACT FIFTH.




SCENE I.--_A lower hall in the castle. The women servants discovered,
gathered together, while without children are playing before one of
the ventilators of the hall._


AN OLD SERVANT.

You will see, you will see, my daughters; it will be to-night.--Some
one will come to tell us by and by....

ANOTHER SERVANT.

They will not come to tell us.... They don't know what they are doing
any longer....

THIRD SERVANT.

Let us wait here....

FOURTH SERVANT.

We shall know well enough when we must go up....

FIFTH SERVANT.

When the time is come, we shall go up of ourselves....

SIXTH SERVANT.

There is no longer a sound heard in the house....

SEVENTH SERVANT.

We ought to make the children keep still, who are playing before the
ventilator.

EIGHTH SERVANT.

They will be still of themselves by and by.

NINTH SERVANT.

The time has not yet come....

_Enter an old Servant._

THE OLD SERVANT.

No one can go in the room any longer. I have listened more than
an hour.... You could hear the flies walk on the doors.... I heard
nothing....

FIRST SERVANT.

Has she been left alone in the room?

THE OLD SERVANT.

No, no; I think the room is full of people.

FIRST SERVANT.

They will come, they will come, by and by....

THE OLD SERVANT.

Lord! Lord! It is not happiness that has come into the house.... One
may not speak, but if I could say what I know...

SECOND SERVANT.

It was you who found them before the gate?

THE OLD SERVANT.

Why, yes! why, yes! it was I who found them. The porter says it was
he who saw them first; but it was I who waked them. He was sleeping on
his face and would not get up.--And now he comes saying, "It was I who
saw them first." Is that just?--See, I burned myself lighting a lamp
to go down cellar.--Now what was I going to do down cellar?--I can't
remember any more what I was going to do down cellar.--At any rate I
got up very early; it was not yet very light; I said to myself, I will
go across the courtyard, and then I will open the gate. Good; I
go down the stairs on tiptoe, and I open the gate as if it were an
ordinary gate.... My God! My God! What do I see? Divine a little what
I see!...

FIRST SERVANT.

They were before the gate?

THE OLD SERVANT.

They were both stretched out before the gate!... Exactly like poor
folk that are too hungry.... They were huddled together like little
children who are afraid.... The little princess was nearly dead, and
the great Golaud had still his sword in his side.... There was blood
on the sill....

SECOND SERVANT.

We ought to make the children keep still.... They are screaming with
all their might before the ventilator....

THIRD SERVANT.

You can't hear yourself speak....

FOURTH SERVANT.

There is nothing to be done: I have tried already; they won't keep
still....

FIRST SERVANT.

It seems he is nearly cured?

THE OLD SERVANT.

Who?

FIRST SERVANT.

The great Golaud.

THIRD SERVANT.

Yes, yes; they have taken him to his wife's room. I met them just
now, in the corridor. They were holding him up as if he were drunk. He
cannot yet walk alone.

THE OLD SERVANT.

He could not kill himself; he is too big. But she is hardly wounded,
and it is she who is going to die.... Can you understand that?

FIRST SERVANT.

You have seen the wound?

THE OLD SERVANT.

As I see you, my daughter.--I saw everything, you understand.... I saw
it before all the others.... A tiny little wound under her little left
breast,--a little wound that wouldn't kill a pigeon. Is it natural?

FIRST SERVANT.

Yes, yes; there is something underneath....

SECOND SERVANT.

Yes; but she was delivered of her babe three days ago....

THE OLD SERVANT.

Exactly!... She was delivered on her death-bed; is that a little
sign?--And what a child! Have you seen it?--A wee little girl a beggar
would not bring into the world.... A little wax figure that came much
too soon;... a little wax figure that must live in lambs' wool....
Yes, yes; it is not happiness that has come into the house....

FIRST SERVANT.

Yes, yes; it Is the hand of God that has been stirring....

SECOND SERVANT.

Yes, yes; all that did not happen without reason....

THIRD SERVANT.

It is as good lord Pélléas ... where is he?--No one knows....

THE OLD SERVANT.

Yes, yes; everybody knows.... But nobody dare speak of it.... One does
not speak of this;... one does not speak of that;... one speaks no
more of anything;... one no longer speaks truth.... But _I_ know he
was found at the bottom of Blind Man's Spring;... but no one, no one
could see him.... Well, well, we shall only know all that at the last
day....

FIRST SERVANT.

I dare not sleep here any longer....

THE OLD SERVANT.

Yes, yes; once ill-fortune is in the house, one keeps silence in
vain....

THIRD SERVANT.

Yes; it finds you all the same....

THE OLD SERVANT.

Yes, yes; but we do not go where we would....

FOURTH SERVANT.

Yes, yes; we do not do what we would....

FIRST SERVANT.

They are afraid of us now....

SECOND SERVANT.

They all keep silence....

THIRD SERVANT.

They cast down their eyes in the corridors.

FOURTH SERVANT.

They do not speak any more except in a low voice.

FIFTH SERVANT.

You would think they had all done it together.

SIXTH SERVANT.

One doesn't know what they have done....

SEVENTH SERVANT.

What is to be done when the masters are afraid?...            [_A silence_.

FIRST SERVANT.

I no longer hear the children screaming.

SECOND SERVANT.

They are sitting down before the ventilator.

THIRD SERVANT.

They are huddled against each other.

THE OLD SERVANT.

I no longer hear anything in the house....

FIRST SERVANT.

You no longer even hear the children breathe....

THE OLD SERVANT.

Come, come; it is time to go up....
                                                      [_Exeunt in silence._




SCENE II.--_An apartment in the castle._


ARKËL, GOLAUD, _and the_ PHYSICIAN _discovered in one corner of the
room._ MÉLISANDE _is stretched upon her bed._

THE PHYSICIAN.

It cannot be of that little wound she is dying; a bird would not have
died of it.... It is not you, then, who have killed her, good my lord;
do not be so disconsolate.... She could not have lived.... She was
born without reason ... to die; and she dies without reason.... And
then, it is not sure we shall not save her....

ARKËL.

No, no; it seems to me we keep too silent, in spite of ourselves, in
her room.... It is not a good sign.... Look how she sleeps ... slowly,
slowly;... it is as if her soul was cold forever....

GOLAUD.

I have killed her without cause! I have killed her without cause!...
Is it not enough to make the stones weep?... They had kissed like
little children.... They had simply kissed.... They were brother and
sister.... And I, and I at once!... I did it in spite of myself, look
you.... I did it in spite of myself....

THE PHYSICIAN.

Stop; I think she is waking....

MÉLISANDE.

Open the window;... open the window....

ARKËL

Shall I open this one, Mélisande?

MÉLISANDE.

No, no; the great window ... the great window.... It is to see....

ARKËL.

Is not the sea air too cold to-night? Do it; do it....

MÉLISANDE.

Thanks.... Is it sunset?

ARKËL.

Yes; it is sunset on the sea; it is late.--How are you, Mélisande?

MÉLISANDE.

Well, well.--Why do you ask that? I have never been better.--And yet
it seems to me I know something....

ARKËL.

What sayest thou?--I do not understand thee....

MÉLISANDE.

Neither do I understand all I say, you see.... I do not know what I
am saying.... I do not know what I know.... I no longer say what I
would....

ARKËL.

Why, yes! why, yes!... I am quite happy to hear thee speak so; thou
hast raved a little these last days, and one no longer understood
thee.... But now all that is far away....

MÉLISANDE.

I do not know....--Are you all alone in the room, grandfather?

ARKËL.

No; there is the physician, besides, who cured thee....

MÉLISANDE.

Ah!...

ARKËL.

And then there is still some one else....

MÉLISANDE.

Who is it?

ARKËL.

It is ... thou must not be frightened.... He does not wish thee the
least harm, be sure.... If thou'rt afraid, he will go away.... He is
very unhappy....

MÉLISANDE.

Who is it?

ARKËL.

It is thy ... thy husband.... It is Golaud....

MÉLISANDE.

Golaud is here? Why does he not come by me?

GOLAUD (_dragging himself toward the bed._)

Mélisande ... Mélisande....

MÉLISANDE.

Is it you, Golaud? I should hardly recognize you any more.... It is
the evening sunlight in my eyes.... Why look you on the walls? You
have grown thin and old.... Is it a long while since we saw each
other?

GOLAUD (_to_ ARKËL _and the_ PHYSICIAN).

Will you withdraw a moment, if you please, if you please?... I will
leave the door wide open.... One moment only.... I would say something
to her; else I could not die.... Will you?--Go clear to the end of
the corridor; you can come back at once, at once.... Do not refuse
me this.... I am a wretch.... [_Exit_ ARKËL _and the_
PHYSICIAN.]--Mélisande, hast thou pity on me, as I have pity on
thee?... Mélisande?... Dost thou forgive me, Mélisande?...

MÉLISANDE.

Yes, yes, I do forgive thee.... What must I forgive?...

GOLAUD.

I have wrought thee so much ill, Mélisande.... I cannot tell thee the
ill I have wrought thee.... But I see it, I see it so clearly to-day
... since the first day.... And all I did not know till now leaps in
my eyes to-night.... And it is all my fault, all that has happened,
all that will happen.... If I could tell it, thou wouldst see as I
do!... I see all! I see all!... But I loved thee so!... I loved thee
so!... But now there is some one dying.... It is I who am dying....
And I would know.... I would ask thee.... Thou'lt bear me no
ill-will.... I would.... The truth must be told to a dying man.... He
must know the truth, or else he could not sleep.... Swearest thou to
tell me the truth?

MÉLISANDE

Yes.

GOLAUD.

Didst thou love Pélléas?

MÉLISANDE.

Why, yes; I loved him.--Where is he?

GOLAUD.

Thou dost not understand me?--Thou wilt not understand me?--It seems
to me ... it seems to me.... Well, then, here: I ask thee if thou
lovedst him with a forbidden love?... Wert thou ... were you guilty?
Say, say, yes, yes, yes!...

MÉLISANDE.

No, no; we were not guilty.--Why do you ask that?

GOLAUD.

Mélisande!... tell me the truth, for the love of God!

MÉLISANDE.

Why have I not told the truth?

GOLAUD.

Do not lie so any more, at the moment of death!

MÉLISANDE.

Who is dying?--Is it I?

GOLAUD.

Thou, thou! and I, I too, after thee!... And we must have the
truth.... We must have the truth at last, dost thou understand?...
Tell me all! Tell me all! I forgive thee all!...

MÉLISANDE.

Why am I going to die?--I did not know it....

GOLAUD.

Thou knowest it now!... It is time! It is time!... Quick! quick!...
The truth! the truth!...

MÉLISANDE.

The truth ... the truth....

GOLAUD.

Where art thou?--Mélisande!--Where art thou?--It is not natural!
Mélisande! Where art thou?--Where goest thou? [_Perceiving_ ARKËL
_and the_ PHYSICIAN _at the door of the room.]--_ Yes, yes; you may
come in.... I know nothing; it is useless.... It is too late; she is
already too far away from us.... I shall never know!... I shall die
here like a blind man!...

ARKËL.

What have you done? You will kill her....

GOLAUD.

I have already killed her....

ARKËL.

Mélisande....

MÉLISANDE.

Is it you, grandfather?

ARKËL.

Yes, my daughter.... What would you have me do?

MÉLISANDE.

Is it true that the winter is beginning?...

ARKËL.

Why dost thou ask?

MÉLISANDE.

Because it is cold, and there are no more leaves....

ARKËL.

Thou art cold?--Wilt thou have the windows closed?

MÉLISANDE.

No, no,... not till the sun be at the bottom of the sea.--It sinks
slowly; then it is the winter beginning?

ARKËL.

Yes.--Thou dost not like the winter?

MÉLISANDE.

Oh! no. I am afraid of the cold.--I am so afraid of the great cold....

ARKËL.

Dost thou feel better?

MÉLISANDE.

Yes, yes; I have no longer all those qualms....

ARKËL.

Wouldst thou see thy child?

MÉLISANDE.

What child?

ARKËL.

Thy child.--Thou art a mother.... Thou hast brought a little daughter
into the world....

MÉLISANDE.

Where is she?

ARKËL.

Here....

MÉLISANDE.

It is strange.... I cannot lift my arms to take her....

ARKËL.

Because you are still very weak.... I will hold her myself; look....

MÉLISANDE.

She does not laugh.... She is little.... She is going to weep too....
I pity her....

    [The room has been invaded, little by little, by the women
    servants of the castle, who range themselves in silence along
    the walls and wait]

GOLAUD (_rising abruptly_).

What is the matter?--What are all these women coming here for?...

THE PHYSICIAN.

It is the servants....

ARKËL.

Who was it called them?

THE PHYSICIAN.

It was not I....

GOLAUD.

Why do you come here?--No one has asked for you.... What come you here
to do?--But what is it, then?--Answer me!...
                                            [_The servants make no answer._

ARKËL.

Do not speak too loud.... She is going to sleep; she has closed her
eyes....

GOLAUD.

It is not...?

THE PHYSICIAN.

No, no; see, she breathes....

ARKËL.

Her eyes are full of tears.--It is her soul weeping now.... Why does
she stretch her arms out so?--What would she?

THE PHYSICIAN.

It is toward the child, without doubt.... It is the straggle of
motherhood against...

GOLAUD.

At this moment?--At this moment?--You must say. Say! Say!...

THE PHYSICIAN.

Perhaps.

GOLAUD.

At once?... Oh! oh! I must tell her....--Mélisande! Mélisande!...
Leave me alone! leave me alone with her!...

ARKËL.

No, no; do not come near.... Trouble her not.... Speak no more to
her.... You know not what the soul is....

GOLAUD.

It is not my fault!... It is not my fault!

ARKËL.

Hush!... Hush!... We must speak softly now.--She must not be
disturbed.... The human soul is very silent.... The human soul likes
to depart alone.... It suffers so timorously.... But the sadness,
Golaud ... the sadness of all we see!... Oh! oh! oh!... [_At this
moment, all the servants fall suddenly on their knees at the back of
the chamber._]

ARKËL (_turning_).

What is the matter?

THE PHYSICIAN (_approaching the bed and feeling the body_).

They are right....
                                                         [_A long silence._

ARKËL.

I saw nothing.--Are you sure?...

THE PHYSICIAN.

Yes, yes.

ARKËL.

I heard nothing.... So quick, so quick!... All at once!... She goes
without a word....

GOLAUD (_sobbing_).

Oh! oh! oh!

_ARKËL._

Do not stay here, Golaud.... She must have silence now.... Come,
come.... It is terrible, but it is not your fault.... 'T was a little
being, so quiet, so fearful, and so silent.... 'T was a poor little
mysterious being, like everybody.... She lies there as if she were the
big sister of her child.... Come, come.... My God! My God!... I shall
never understand it at all.... Let us not stay here.--Come; the child
most not stay here in this room.... She must live now in her place....
It is the poor little one's turn....
                                                 [_They go out in silence._


[CURTAIN.]
