"ANNA CHRISTIE"

A Play in Four Acts


By

EUGENE O'NEILL





CHARACTERS


  "JOHNNY-THE-PRIEST"
  TWO LONGSHOREMEN
  A POSTMAN
  LARRY, bartender
  CHRIS. CHRISTOPHERSON, captain of the barge "Simeon Winthrop"
  MARTHY OWEN
  ANNA CHRISTOPHERSON, Chris's daughter
  THREE MEN OF A STEAMER'S CREW
  MAT BURKE, a stoker
  JOHNSON, deckhand on the barge




SCENES


ACT I

"Johnny-the-Priest's" saloon near the waterfront. New York City.

ACT II

The barge, Simeon Winthrop, at anchor in the harbor of Provincetown,
Mass. Ten days later.

ACT III

Cabin of the barge, at dock in Boston. A week later.

ACT IV

The same. Two days later.




Time of the Play--About 1910.




ACT I


SCENE--"Johnny-The-Priest's" saloon near South Street, New York City.
The stage is divided into two sections, showing a small back room on
the right. On the left, forward, of the barroom, a large window looking
out on the street. Beyond it, the main entrance--a double swinging
door. Farther back, another window. The bar runs from left to right
nearly the whole length of the rear wall. In back of the bar, a small
showcase displaying a few bottles of case goods, for which there is
evidently little call. The remainder of the rear space in front of the
large mirrors is occupied by half-barrels of cheap whiskey of the
"nickel-a-shot" variety, from which the liquor is drawn by means of
spigots. On the right is an open doorway leading to the back room. In
the back room are four round wooden tables with five chairs grouped
about each. In the rear, a family entrance opening on a side street.

It is late afternoon of a day in fall.

As the curtain rises, Johnny is discovered. "Johnny-The-Priest"
deserves his nickname. With his pale, thin, clean-shaven face, mild
blue eyes and white hair, a cassock would seem more suited to him than
the apron he wears. Neither his voice nor his general manner dispel
this illusion which has made him a personage of the water front. They
are soft and bland. But beneath all his mildness one senses the man
behind the mask--cynical, callous, hard as nails. He is lounging at
ease behind the bar, a pair of spectacles on his nose, reading an
evening paper.

Two longshoremen enter from the street, wearing their working aprons,
the button of the union pinned conspicuously on the caps pulled
sideways on their heads at an aggressive angle.

FIRST LONGSHOREMAN--[As they range themselves at the bar.] Gimme a
shock. Number Two. [He tosses a coin on the bar.]

SECOND LONGSHOREMAN--Same here. [Johnny sets two glasses of barrel
whiskey before them.]

FIRST LONGSHOREMAN--Here's luck! [The other nods. They gulp down their
whiskey.]

SECOND LONGSHOREMAN--[Putting money on the bar.] Give us another.

FIRST LONGSHOREMAN--Gimme a scoop this time--lager and porter. I'm dry.

SECOND LONGSHOREMAN--Same here. [Johnny draws the lager and porter and
sets the big, foaming schooners before them. They drink down half the
contents and start to talk together hurriedly in low tones. The door on
the left is swung open and Larry enters. He is a boyish, red-cheeked,
rather good-looking young fellow of twenty or so.]

LARRY--[Nodding to Johnny--cheerily.] Hello, boss.

JOHNNY--Hello, Larry. [With a glance at his watch.] Just on time.
[LARRY goes to the right behind the bar, takes off his coat, and puts
on an apron.]

FIRST LONGSHOREMAN--[Abruptly.] Let's drink up and get back to it.
[They finish their drinks and go out left. The POSTMAN enters as they
leave. He exchanges nods with JOHNNY and throws a letter on the bar.]

THE POSTMAN--Addressed care of you, Johnny. Know him?

JOHNNY--[Picks up the letter, adjusting his spectacles. LARRY comes and
peers over his shoulders. JOHNNY reads very slowly.] Christopher
Christopherson.

THE POSTMAN--[Helpfully.] Square-head name.

LARRY--Old Chris--that's who.

JOHNNY--Oh, sure. I was forgetting Chris carried a hell of a name like
that. Letters come here for him sometimes before, I remember now. Long
time ago, though.

THE POSTMAN--It'll get him all right then?

JOHNNY--Sure thing. He comes here whenever he's in port.

THE POSTMAN--[Turning to go.] Sailor, eh?

JOHNNY--[With a grin.] Captain of a coal barge.

THE POSTMAN--[Laughing.] Some job! Well, s'long.

JOHNNY--S'long. I'll see he gets it. [The POSTMAN goes out. JOHNNY
scrutinizes the letter.] You got good eyes, Larry. Where's it from?

LARRY--[After a glance.] St. Paul. That'll be in Minnesota, I'm
thinkin'. Looks like a woman's writing, too, the old divil!
JOHNNY--He's got a daughter somewheres out West, I think he told me
once. [He puts the letter on the cash register.] Come to think of it, I
ain't seen old Chris in a dog's age. [Putting his overcoat on, he comes
around the end of the bar.] Guess I'll be gettin' home. See you
to-morrow.

LARRY--Good-night to ye, boss. [As JOHNNY goes toward the street door,
it is pushed open and CHRISTOPHER CHRISTOPHERSON enters. He is a short,
squat, broad-shouldered man of about fifty, with a round,
weather-beaten, red face from which his light blue eyes peer
short-sightedly, twinkling with a simple good humor. His large mouth,
overhung by a thick, drooping, yellow mustache, is childishly
self-willed and weak, of an obstinate kindliness. A thick neck is
jammed like a post into the heavy trunk of his body. His arms with
their big, hairy, freckled hands, and his stumpy legs terminating in
large flat feet, are awkwardly short and muscular. He walks with a
clumsy, rolling gait. His voice, when not raised in a hollow boom, is
toned down to a sly, confidential half-whisper with something vaguely
plaintive in its quality. He is dressed in a wrinkled, ill-fitting dark
suit of shore clothes, and wears a faded cap of gray cloth over his mop
of grizzled, blond hair. Just now his face beams with a too-blissful
happiness, and he has evidently been drinking. He reaches his hand out
to JOHNNY.]

CHRIS--Hello, Yohnny! Have drink on me. Come on, Larry. Give us drink.
Have one yourself. [Putting his hand in his pocket.] Ay gat
money--plenty money.

JOHNNY--[Shakes CHRIS by the hand.] Speak of the devil. We was just
talkin' about you.

LARRY--[Coming to the end of the bar.] Hello, Chris. Put it there.
[They shake hands.]

CHRIS--[Beaming.] Give us drink.

JOHNNY--[With a grin.] You got a half-snootful now. Where'd you get it?

CHRIS--[Grinning.] Oder fallar on oder barge--Irish fallar--he gat
bottle vhiskey and we drank it, yust us two. Dot vhiskey gat kick, by
yingo! Ay yust come ashore. Give us drink, Larry. Ay vas little drunk,
not much. Yust feel good. [He laughs and commences to sing in a nasal,
high-pitched quaver.]

    "My Yosephine, come board de ship. Long time Ay
    vait for you.
    De moon, she shi-i-i-ine. She looka yust like you.
    Tchee-tchee, tchee-tchee, tchee-tchee, tchee-tchee."

[To the accompaniment of this last he waves his hand as if he were
conducting an orchestra.]

JOHNNY--[With a laugh.] Same old Yosie, eh, Chris?

CHRIS--You don't know good song when you hear him. Italian fallar on
oder barge, he learn me dat. Give us drink. [He throws change on the
bar.]

LARRY--[With a professional air.] What's your pleasure, gentlemen?

JOHNNY--Small beer, Larry.

CHRIS--Vhiskey--Number Two.

LARRY--[As he gets their drinks.] I'll take a cigar on you.

CHRIS--[Lifting his glass.] Skoal! [He drinks.]

JOHNNY--Drink hearty.

CHRIS--[Immediately.] Have oder drink.

JOHNNY--No. Some other time. Got to go home now. So you've just landed?
Where are you in from this time?

CHRIS--Norfolk. Ve make slow voyage--dirty vedder--yust fog, fog, fog,
all bloody time! [There is an insistent ring from the doorbell at the
family entrance in the back room. Chris gives a start--hurriedly.] Ay
go open, Larry. Ay forgat. It vas Marthy. She come with me. [He goes
into the back room.]

LARRY--[With a chuckle.] He's still got that same cow livin' with him,
the old fool!

JOHNNY--[With a grin.] A sport, Chris is. Well, I'll beat it home.
S'long. [He goes to the street door.]

LARRY--So long, boss.

JOHNNY--Oh--don't forget to give him his letter.

LARRY--I won't. [JOHNNY goes out. In the meantime, CHRIS has opened the
family entrance door, admitting MARTHY. She might be forty or fifty.
Her jowly, mottled face, with its thick red nose, is streaked with
interlacing purple veins. Her thick, gray hair is piled anyhow in a
greasy mop on top of her round head. Her figure is flabby and fat; her
breath comes in wheezy gasps; she speaks in a loud, mannish voice,
punctuated by explosions of hoarse laughter. But there still twinkles
in her blood-shot blue eyes a youthful lust for life which hard usage
has failed to stifle, a sense of humor mocking, but good-tempered. She
wears a man's cap, double-breasted man's jacket, and a grimy, calico
skirt. Her bare feet are encased in a man's brogans several sizes too
large for her, which gives her a shuffling, wobbly gait.]

MARTHY--[Grumblingly.] What yuh tryin' to do, Dutchy--keep me standin'
out there all day? [She comes forward and sits at the table in the
right corner, front.]

CHRIS--[Mollifyingly.] Ay'm sorry, Marthy. Ay talk to Yohnny. Ay
forgat. What you goin' take for drink?

MARTHY--[Appeased.] Gimme a scoop of lager an' ale.

CHRIS--Ay go bring him back. [He returns to the bar.] Lager and ale for
Marthy, Larry. Vhiskey for me. [He throws change on the bar.]

LARRY--Right you are. [Then remembering, he takes the letter from in
back of the bar.] Here's a letter for you--from St. Paul,
Minnesota--and a lady's writin'. [He grins.]

CHRIS--[Quickly--taking it.] Oh, den it come from my daughter, Anna.
She live dere. [He turns the letter over in his hands uncertainly.] Ay
don't gat letter from Anna--must be a year.

LARRY--[Jokingly.] That's a fine fairy tale to be tellin'--your
daughter! Sure I'll bet it's some bum.

CHRIS--[Soberly.] No. Dis come from Anna. [Engrossed by the letter in
his hand--uncertainly.] By golly, Ay tank Ay'm too drunk for read dis
letter from Anna. Ay tank Ay sat down for a minute. You bring drinks in
back room, Larry. [He goes into the room on right.]

MARTHY--[Angrily.] Where's my lager an' ale, yuh big stiff?

CHRIS--[Preoccupied.] Larry bring him. [He sits down opposite her.
LARRY brings in the drinks and sets them on the table. He and MARTHY
exchange nods of recognition. LARRY stands looking at CHRIS curiously.
MARTHY takes a long draught of her schooner and heaves a huge sigh of
satisfaction, wiping her mouth with the back of her hand. CHRIS stares
at the letter for a moment--slowly opens it, and, squinting his eyes,
commences to read laboriously, his lips moving as he spells out the
words. As he reads his face lights up with an expression of mingled joy
and bewilderment.]

LARRY--Good news?

MARTHY--[Her curiosity also aroused.] What's that yuh got--a letter,
fur Gawd's sake?

CHRIS--[Pauses for a moment, after finishing the letter, as if to let
the news sink in--then suddenly pounds his fist on the table with happy
excitement.] Py yiminy! Yust tank, Anna say she's comin' here right
avay! She gat sick on yob in St. Paul, she say. It's short letter,
don't tal me much more'n dat. [Beaming.] Py golly, dat's good news all
at one time for ole fallar! [Then turning to MARTHY, rather
shamefacedly.] You know, Marthy, Ay've tole you Ay don't see my Anna
since she vas little gel in Sveden five year ole.

MARTHY--How old'll she be now?

CHRIS--She must be--lat me see--she must be twenty year ole, py Yo!

LARRY--[Surprised.] You've not seen her in fifteen years?

CHRIS--[Suddenly growing somber--in a low tone.] No. Ven she vas little
gel, Ay vas bo'sun on vindjammer. Ay never gat home only few time dem
year. Ay'm fool sailor fallar. My voman--Anna's mother--she gat tired
vait all time Sveden for me ven Ay don't never come. She come dis
country, bring Anna, dey go out Minnesota, live with her cousins on
farm. Den ven her mo'der die ven Ay vas on voyage, Ay tank it's better
dem cousins keep Anna. Ay tank it's better Anna live on farm, den she
don't know dat ole davil, sea, she don't know fader like me.

LARRY--[With a wink at MARTHY.] This girl, now, 'll be marryin' a
sailor herself, likely. It's in the blood.

CHRIS--[Suddenly springing to his feet and smashing his fist on the
table in a rage.] No, py God! She don't do dat!

MARTHY--[Grasping her schooner hastily--angrily.] Hey, look out, yuh
nut! Wanta spill my suds for me?

LARRY--[Amazed.] Oho, what's up with you? Ain't you a sailor yourself
now, and always been?

CHRIS--[Slowly.] Dat's yust vhy Ay say it. [Forcing a smile.] Sailor
vas all right fallar, but not for marry gel. No. Ay know dat. Anna's
mo'der, she know it, too.

LARRY--[As CHRIS remains sunk in gloomy reflection.] When is your
daughter comin'? Soon?

CHRIS--[Roused.] Py yiminy, Ay forgat. [Reads through the letter
hurriedly.] She say she come right avay, dat's all.

LARRY--She'll maybe be comin' here to look for you, I s'pose. [He
returns to the bar, whistling. Left alone with MARTHY, who stares at
him with a twinkle of malicious humor in her eyes, CHRIS suddenly
becomes desperately ill-at-ease. He fidgets, then gets up hurriedly.]

CHRIS--Ay gat speak with Larry. Ay be right back. [Mollifyingly.] Ay
bring you oder drink.

MARTHY--[Emptying her glass.] Sure. That's me. [As he retreats with the
glass she guffaws after him derisively.]

CHRIS--[To LARRY in an alarmed whisper.] Py yingo, Ay gat gat Marthy
shore off barge before Anna come! Anna raise hell if she find dat out.
Marthy raise hell, too, for go, py golly!

LARRY--[With a chuckle.] Serve ye right, ye old divil--havin' a woman
at your age!

CHRIS--[Scratching his head in a quandary.] You tal me lie for tal
Marthy, Larry, so's she gat off barge quick.

LARRY--She knows your daughter's comin'. Tell her to get the hell out
of it.

CHRIS--No. Ay don't like make her feel bad.

LARRY--You're an old mush! Keep your girl away from the barge, then.
She'll likely want to stay ashore anyway. [Curiously.] What does she
work at, your Anna?

CHRIS--She stay on dem cousins' farm 'till two year ago. Dan she gat
yob nurse gel in St. Paul. [Then shaking his head resolutely.] But Ay
don't vant for her gat yob now. Ay vant for her stay with me.

LARRY--[Scornfully.] On a coal barge! She'll not like that, I'm
thinkin'.

MARTHY--[Shouts from next room.] Don't I get that bucket o' suds,
Dutchy?

CHRIS--[Startled--in apprehensive confusion.] Yes, Ay come, Marthy.

LARRY--[Drawing the lager and ale, hands it to CHRIS--laughing.] Now
you're in for it! You'd better tell her straight to get out!

CHRIS--[Shaking in his boots.] Py golly. [He takes her drink in to
MARTHY and sits down at the table. She sips it in silence. LARRY moves
quietly close to the partition to listen, grinning with expectation.
CHRIS seems on the verge of speaking, hesitates, gulps down his whiskey
desperately as if seeking for courage. He attempts to whistle a few
bars of "Yosephine" with careless bravado, but the whistle peters out
futilely. MARTHY stares at him keenly, taking in his embarrassment with
a malicious twinkle of amusement in her eye. CHRIS clears his throat.]
Marthy--

MARTHY--[Aggressively.] Wha's that? [Then, pretending to fly into a
rage, her eyes enjoying CHRIS' misery.] I'm wise to what's in back of
your nut, Dutchy. Yuh want to git rid o' me, huh?--now she's comin'.
Gimme the bum's rush ashore, huh? Lemme tell yuh, Dutchy, there ain't a
square-head workin' on a boat man enough to git away with that. Don't
start nothin' yuh can't finish!

CHRIS--[Miserably.] Ay don't start nutting, Marthy.

MARTHY--[Glares at him for a second--then cannot control a burst of
laughter.] Ho-ho! Yuh're a scream, Square-head--an honest-ter-Gawd
knockout! Ho-ho! [She wheezes, panting for breath.]

CHRIS--[With childish pique.] Ay don't see nutting for laugh at.

MARTHY--Take a slant in the mirror and yuh'll see. Ho-ho! [Recovering
from her mirth--chuckling, scornfully.] A square-head tryin' to kid
Marthy Owen at this late day!--after me campin' with barge men the last
twenty years. I'm wise to the game, up, down, and sideways. I ain't
been born and dragged up on the water front for nothin'. Think I'd make
trouble, huh? Not me! I'll pack up me duds an' beat it. I'm quittin'
yuh, get me? I'm tellin' yuh I'm sick of stickin' with yuh, and I'm
leavin' yuh flat, see? There's plenty of other guys on other barges
waitin' for me. Always was, I always found. [She claps the astonished
CHRIS on the back.] So cheer up, Dutchy! I'll be offen the barge before
she comes. You'll be rid o' me for good--and me o' you--good riddance
for both of us. Ho-ho!

CHRIS--[Seriously.] Ay don' tank dat. You vas good gel, Marthy.

MARTHY--[Grinning.] Good girl? Aw, can the bull! Well, yuh treated me
square, yuhself. So it's fifty-fifty. Nobody's sore at nobody. We're
still good frien's, huh? [LARRY returns to bar.]

CHRIS--[Beaming now that he sees his troubles disappearing.] Yes, py
golly.

MARTHY--That's the talkin'! In all my time I tried never to split with
a guy with no hard feelin's. But what was yuh so scared about--that I'd
kick up a row? That ain't Marthy's way. [Scornfully.] Think I'd break
my heart to lose yuh? Commit suicide, huh? Ho-ho! Gawd! The world's
full o' men if that's all I'd worry about! [Then with a grin, after
emptying her glass.] Blow me to another scoop, huh? I'll drink your
kid's health for yuh.

CHRIS--[Eagerly.] Sure tang. Ay go gat him. [He takes the two glasses
into the bar.] Oder drink. Same for both.

LARRY--[Getting the drinks and putting them on the bar.] She's not such
a bad lot, that one.

CHRIS--[Jovially.] She's good gel, Ay tal you! Py golly, Ay calabrate
now! Give me vhiskey here at bar, too. [He puts down money. LARRY
serves him.] You have drink, Larry.

LARRY--[Virtuously.] You know I never touch it.

CHRIS--You don't know what you miss. Skoal! [He drinks--then begins to
sing loudly.]

    "My Yosephine, come board de ship--"

[He picks up the drinks for MARTHY and himself and walks unsteadily
into the back room, singing.]

    "De moon, she shi-i-i-ine. She looks yust like you.
    Tche-tchee, tchee-tchee, tchee-tchee, tchee-tchee."

MARTHY--[Grinning, hands to ears.] Gawd!

CHRIS--[Sitting down.] Ay'm good singer, yes? Ve drink, eh? Skoal! Ay
calabrate! [He drinks.] Ay calabrate 'cause Anna's coming home. You
know, Marthy, Ay never write for her to come, 'cause Ay tank Ay'm no
good for her. But all time Ay hope like hell some day she vant for see
me and den she come. And dat's vay it happen now, py yiminy! [His face
beaming.] What you tank she look like, Marthy? Ay bet you she's fine,
good, strong gel, pooty like hell! Living on farm made her like dat.
And Ay bet you some day she marry good, steady land fallar here in
East, have home all her own, have kits--and dan Ay'm ole grandfader, py
golly! And Ay go visit dem every time Ay gat in port near! [Bursting
with joy.] By yiminy crickens, Ay calabrate dat! [Shouts.] Bring oder
drink, Larry! [He smashes his fist on the table with a bang.]

LARRY--[Coming in from bar--irritably.] Easy there! Don't be breakin'
the table, you old goat!

CHRIS--[By way of reply, grins foolishly and begins to sing.] "My
Yosephine comes board de ship--"

MARTHY--[Touching CHRIS' arm persuasively.] You're soused to the ears,
Dutchy. Go out and put a feed into you. It'll sober you up. [Then as
CHRIS shakes his head obstinately.] Listen, yuh old nut! Yuh don't know
what time your kid's liable to show up. Yuh want to be sober when she
comes, don't yuh?

CHRIS--[Aroused--gets unsteadily to his feet.] Py golly, yes.

LARRY--That's good sense for you. A good beef stew'll fix you. Go round
the corner.

CHRIS--All right. Ay be back soon, Marthy. [CHRIS goes through the bar
and out the street door.]

LARRY--He'll come round all right with some grub in him.

MARTHY--Sure. [LARRY goes back to the bar and resumes his newspaper.
MARTHY sips what is left of her schooner reflectively. There is the
ring of the family entrance bell. LARRY comes to the door and opens it
a trifle--then, with a puzzled expression, pulls it wide. ANNA
CHRISTOPHERSON enters. She is a tall, blond, fully-developed girl of
twenty, handsome after a large, Viking-daughter fashion but now run
down in health and plainly showing all the outward evidences of
belonging to the world's oldest profession. Her youthful face is
already hard and cynical beneath its layer of make-up. Her clothes are
the tawdry finery of peasant stock turned prostitute. She comes and
sinks wearily in a chair by the table, left front.]

ANNA--Gimme a whiskey--ginger ale on the side. [Then, as LARRY turns to
go, forcing a winning smile at him.] And don't be stingy, baby.

LARRY--[Sarcastically.] Shall I serve it in a pail?

ANNA--[With a hard laugh.] That suits me down to the ground. [LARRY
goes into the bar. The two women size each other up with frank stares.
LARRY comes back with the drink which he sets before ANNA and returns
to the bar again. ANNA downs her drink at a gulp. Then, after a moment,
as the alcohol begins to rouse her, she turns to MARTHY with a friendly
smile.] Gee, I needed that bad, all right, all right!

MARTHY--[Nodding her head sympathetically.] Sure--yuh look all in. Been
on a bat?

ANNA--No--travelling--day and a half on the train. Had to sit up all
night in the dirty coach, too. Gawd, I thought I'd never get here!

MARTHY--[With a start--looking at her intently.] Where'd yuh come from,
huh?

ANNA--St. Paul--out in Minnesota.

MARTHY--[Staring at her in amazement--slowly.] So--yuh're--[She
suddenly bursts out into hoarse, ironical laughter.] Gawd!

ANNA--All the way from Minnesota, sure. [Flaring up.] What you laughing
at? Me?

MARTHY--[Hastily.] No, honest, kid. I was thinkin' of somethin' else.

ANNA--[Mollified--with a smile.] Well, I wouldn't blame you, at that.
Guess I do look rotten--yust out of the hospital two weeks. I'm going
to have another 'ski. What d'you say? Have something on me?

MARTHY--Sure I will. T'anks. [She calls.] Hey, Larry! Little service!
[He comes in.]

ANNA--Same for me.

MARTHY--Same here. [LARRY takes their glasses and goes out.]

ANNA--Why don't you come sit over here, be sociable. I'm a dead
stranger in this burg--and I ain't spoke a word with no one since day
before yesterday.

MARTHY--Sure thing. [She shuffles over to ANNA'S table and sits down
opposite her. LARRY brings the drinks and ANNA pays him.]

ANNA--Skoal! Here's how! [She drinks.]

MARTHY--Here's luck! [She takes a gulp from her schooner.]

ANNA--[Taking a package of Sweet Caporal cigarettes from her bag.] Let
you smoke in here, won't they?

MARTHY--[Doubtfully.] Sure. [Then with evident anxiety.] On'y trow it
away if yuh hear someone comin'.

ANNA--[Lighting one and taking a deep inhale.] Gee, they're fussy in
this dump, ain't they? [She puffs, staring at the table top. MARTHY
looks her over with a new penetrating interest, taking in every detail
of her face. ANNA suddenly becomes conscious of this appraising
stare--resentfully.] Ain't nothing wrong with me, is there? You're
looking hard enough.

MARTHY--[Irritated by the other's tone--scornfully.] Ain't got to look
much. I got your number the minute you stepped in the door.

ANNA--[Her eyes narrowing.] Ain't you smart! Well, I got yours, too,
without no trouble. You're me forty years from now. That's you! [She
gives a hard little laugh.]

MARTHY--[Angrily.] Is that so? Well, I'll tell you straight, kiddo,
that Marthy Owen never--[She catches herself up short--with a grin.]
What are you and me scrappin' over? Let's cut it out, huh? Me, I don't
want no hard feelin's with no one. [Extending her hand.] Shake and
forget it, huh?

ANNA--[Shakes her hand gladly.] Only too glad to. I ain't looking for
trouble. Let's have 'nother. What d'you say?

MARTHY--[Shaking her head.] Not for mine. I'm full up. And you-- Had
anythin' to eat lately?

ANNA--Not since this morning on the train.

MARTHY--Then yuh better go easy on it, hadn't yuh?

ANNA--[After a moment's hesitation.] Guess you're right. I got to meet
someone, too. But my nerves is on edge after that rotten trip.

MARTHY--Yuh said yuh was just outa the hospital?

ANNA--Two weeks ago. [Leaning over to MARTHY confidentially.] The joint
I was in out in St. Paul got raided. That was the start. The judge give
all us girls thirty days. The others didn't seem to mind being in the
cooler much. Some of 'em was used to it. But me, I couldn't stand it.
It got my goat right--couldn't eat or sleep or nothing. I never could
stand being caged up nowheres. I got good and sick and they had to send
me to the hospital. It was nice there. I was sorry to leave it, honest!

MARTHY--[After a slight pause.] Did yuh say yuh got to meet someone
here?

ANNA--Yes. Oh, not what you mean. It's my Old Man I got to meet.
Honest! It's funny, too. I ain't seen him since I was a kid--don't even
know what he looks like--yust had a letter every now and then. This was
always the only address he give me to write him back. He's yanitor of
some building here now--used to be a sailor.

MARTHY--[Astonished.] Janitor!

ANNA--Sure. And I was thinking maybe, seeing he ain't never done a
thing for me in my life, he might be willing to stake me to a room and
eats till I get rested up. [Wearily.] Gee, I sure need that rest! I'm
knocked out. [Then resignedly.] But I ain't expecting much from him.
Give you a kick when you're down, that's what all men do. [With sudden
passion.] Men, I hate 'em--all of 'em! And I don't expect he'll turn
out no better than the rest. [Then with sudden interest.] Say, do you
hang out around this dump much?

MARTHY--Oh, off and on.

ANNA--Then maybe you know him--my Old Man--or at least seen him?

MARTHY--It ain't old Chris, is it?

ANNA--Old Chris?

MARTHY--Chris Christopherson, his full name is.

ANNA--[Excitedly.] Yes, that's him! Anna Christopherson--that's my real
name--only out there I called myself Anna Christie. So you know him, eh?

MARTHY--[Evasively.] Seen him about for years.

ANNA--Say, what's he like, tell me, honest?

MARTHY--Oh, he's short and--

ANNA--[Impatiently.] I don't care what he looks like. What kind is he?

MARTHY--[Earnestly.] Well, yuh can bet your life, kid, he's as good an
old guy as ever walked on two feet. That goes!

ANNA--[Pleased.] I'm glad to hear it. Then you think's he'll stake me
to that rest cure I'm after?

MARTHY--[Emphatically.] Surest thing you know. [Disgustedly.] But
where'd yuh get the idea he was a janitor?

ANNA--He wrote me he was himself.

MARTHY--Well, he was lyin'. He ain't. He's captain of a barge--five men
under him.

ANNA--[Disgusted in her turn.] A barge? What kind of a barge?

MARTHY--Coal, mostly.

ANNA--A coal barge! [With a harsh laugh.] If that ain't a swell job to
find your long lost Old Man working at! Gee, I knew something'd be
bound to turn out wrong--always does with me. That puts my idea of his
giving me a rest on the bum.

MARTHY--What d'yuh mean?

ANNA--I s'pose he lives on the boat, don't he?

MARTHY--Sure. What about it? Can't you live on it, too?

ANNA--[Scornfully.] Me? On a dirty coal barge! What d'you think I am?

MARTHY--[Resentfully.] What d'yuh know about barges, huh? Bet yuh ain't
never seen one. That's what comes of his bringing yuh up inland--away
from the old devil sea--where yuh'd be safe--Gawd! [The irony of it
strikes her sense of humor and she laughs hoarsely.]

ANNA--[Angrily.] His bringing me up! Is that what he tells people! I
like his nerve! He let them cousins of my Old Woman's keep me on their
farm and work me to death like a dog.

MARTHY--Well, he's got queer notions on some things. I've heard him say
a farm was the best place for a kid.

ANNA--Sure. That's what he'd always answer back--and a lot of crazy
stuff about staying away from the sea--stuff I couldn't make head or
tail to. I thought he must be nutty.

MARTHY--He is on that one point. [Casually.] So yuh didn't fall for
life on the farm, huh?

ANNA--I should say not! The old man of the family, his wife, and four
sons--I had to slave for all of 'em. I was only a poor relation, and
they treated me worse than they dare treat a hired girl. [After a
moment's hesitation--somberly.] It was one of the sons--the
youngest--started me--when I was sixteen. After that, I hated 'em so
I'd killed 'em all if I'd stayed. So I run away--to St. Paul.

MARTHY--[Who has been listening sympathetically.] I've heard Old Chris
talkin' about your bein' a nurse girl out there. Was that all a bluff
yuh put up when yuh wrote him?

ANNA--Not on your life, it wasn't. It was true for two years. I didn't
go wrong all at one jump. Being a nurse girl was yust what finished me.
Taking care of other people's kids, always listening to their bawling
and crying, caged in, when you're only a kid yourself and want to go
out and see things. At last I got the chance--to get into that house.
And you bet your life I took it! [Defiantly.] And I ain't sorry
neither. [After a pause--with bitter hatred.] It was all men's
fault--the whole business. It was men on the farm ordering and beating
me--and giving me the wrong start. Then when I was a nurse, it was men
again hanging around, bothering me, trying to see what they could get.
[She gives a hard laugh.] And now it's men all the time. Gawd, I hate
'em all, every mother's son of 'em! Don't you?

MARTHY--Oh, I dunno. There's good ones and bad ones, kid. You've just
had a run of bad luck with 'em, that's all. Your Old Man, now--old
Chris--he's a good one.

ANNA--[Sceptically.] He'll have to show me.

MARTHY--Yuh kept right on writing him yuh was a nurse girl still, even
after yuh was in the house, didn't yuh?

ANNA--Sure. [Cynically.] Not that I think he'd care a darn.

MARTHY--Yuh're all wrong about him, kid, [Earnestly.] I know Old Chris
well for a long time. He's talked to me 'bout you lots o' times. He
thinks the world o' you, honest he does.

ANNA--Aw, quit the kiddin'!

MARTHY--Honest! Only, he's a simple old guy, see? He's got nutty
notions. But he means well, honest. Listen to me, kid--[She is
interrupted by the opening and shutting of the street door in the bar
and by hearing CHRIS' voice.] Ssshh!

ANNA--What's up?

CHRIS--[Who has entered the bar. He seems considerably sobered up.] Py
golly, Larry, dat grub taste good. Marthy in back?

LARRY--Sure--and another tramp with her. [CHRIS starts for the entrance
to the back room.]

MARTHY--[To ANNA in a hurried, nervous whisper.] That's him now. He's
comin' in here. Brace up!

ANNA--Who? [Chris opens the door.]

MARTHY--[As if she were greeting him for the first time]. Why hello,
Old Chris. [Then before he can speak, she shuffles hurriedly past him
into the bar, beckoning him to follow her.] Come here. I wanta tell yuh
somethin'. [He goes out to her. She speaks hurriedly in a low voice.]
Listen! I'm goin' to beat it down to the barge--pack up me duds and
blow. That's her in there--your Anna--just come--waitin' for yuh. Treat
her right, see? She's been sick. Well, s'long! [She goes into the back
room--to ANNA.] S'long, kid. I gotta beat it now. See yuh later.

ANNA--[Nervously.] So long. [MARTHY goes quickly out of the family
entrance.] LARRY--[Looking at the stupefied CHRIS curiously.] Well,
what's up now?

CHRIS--[Vaguely.] Nutting--nutting. [He stands before the door to the
back room in an agony of embarrassed emotion--then he forces himself to
a bold decision, pushes open the door and walks in. He stands there,
casts a shy glance at ANNA, whose brilliant clothes, and, to him,
high-toned appearance awe him terribly. He looks about him with pitiful
nervousness as if to avoid the appraising look with which she takes in
his face, his clothes, etc--his voice seeming to plead for her
forbearance.] Anna!

ANNA--[Acutely embarrassed in her turn.] Hello--father. She told me it
was you. I yust got here a little while ago.

CHRIS--[Goes slowly over to her chair.] It's good--for see you--after
all dem years, Anna. [He bends down over her. After an embarrassed
struggle they manage to kiss each other.]

ANNA--[A trace of genuine feeling in her voice.] It's good to see you,
too.

CHRIS--[Grasps her arms and looks into her face--then overcome by a
wave of fierce tenderness.] Anna lilla! Anna lilla! [Takes her in his
arms.]

ANNA--[Shrinks away from him, half-frightened.] What's that--Swedish? I
don't know it. [Then as if seeking relief from the tension in a voluble
chatter.] Gee, I had an awful trip coming here. I'm all in. I had to
sit up in the dirty coach all night--couldn't get no sleep, hardly--and
then I had a hard job finding this place. I never been in New York
before, you know, and--

CHRIS--[Who has been staring down at her face admiringly, not hearing
what she says--impulsively.] You know you vas awful pooty gel, Anna? Ay
bet all men see you fall in love with you, py yiminy!

ANNA--[Repelled--harshly.] Cut it! You talk same as they all do.

CHRIS--[Hurt--humbly.] Ain't no harm for your fader talk dat vay, Anna.

ANNA--[Forcing a short laugh.] No--course not. Only--it's funny to see
you and not remember nothing. You're like--a stranger.

CHRIS--[Sadly.] Ay s'pose. Ay never come home only few times ven you
vas kit in Sveden. You don't remember dat?

ANNA--No. [Resentfully.] But why didn't you never come home them days?
Why didn't you never come out West to see me?

CHRIS--[Slowly.] Ay tank, after your mo'der die, ven Ay vas avay on
voyage, it's better for you you don't never see me! [He sinks down in
the chair opposite her dejectedly--then turns to her--sadly.] Ay don't
know, Anna, vhy Ay never come home Sveden in ole year. Ay vant come
home end of every voyage. Ay vant see your mo'der, your two bro'der
before dey vas drowned, you ven you vas born--but--Ay--don't go. Ay
sign on oder ships--go South America, go Australia, go China, go every
port all over world many times--but Ay never go aboard ship sail for
Sveden. Ven Ay gat money for pay passage home as passenger den--[He
bows his head guiltily.] Ay forgat and Ay spend all money. Ven Ay tank
again, it's too late. [He sighs.] Ay don't know vhy but dat's vay with
most sailor fallar, Anna. Dat ole davil sea make dem crazy fools with
her dirty tricks. It's so.

ANNA--[Who has watched him keenly while he has been speaking--with a
trace of scorn in her voice.] Then you think the sea's to blame for
everything, eh? Well, you're still workin' on it, ain't you, spite of
all you used to write me about hating it. That dame was here told me
you was captain of a coal barge--and you wrote me you was yanitor of a
building!

CHRIS--[Embarrassed but lying glibly.] Oh, Ay work on land long time as
yanitor. Yust short time ago Ay got dis yob cause Ay vas sick, need
open air.

ANNA--[Sceptically.] Sick? You? You'd never think it.

CHRIS--And, Anna, dis ain't real sailor yob. Dis ain't real boat on
sea. She's yust ole tub--like piece of land with house on it dat float.
Yob on her ain't sea yob. No. Ay don't gat yob on sea, Anna, if Ay die
first. Ay swear dat, ven your mo'der die. Ay keep my word, py yingo!

ANNA--[Perplexed.] Well, I can't see no difference. [Dismissing the
subject.] Speaking of being sick, I been there myself--yust out of the
hospital two weeks ago.

CHRIS--[Immediately all concern.] You, Anna? Py golly! [Anxiously.] You
feel better now, dough, don't you? You look little tired, dat's all!

ANNA--[Wearily.] I am. Tired to death. I need a long rest and I don't
see much chance of getting it.

CHRIS--What you mean, Anna?

ANNA--Well, when I made up my mind to come to see you, I thought you
was a yanitor--that you'd have a place where, maybe, if you didn't mind
having me, I could visit a while and rest up--till I felt able to get
back on the job again.

CHRIS--[Eagerly.] But Ay gat place, Anna--nice place. You rest all you
want, py yiminy! You don't never have to vork as nurse gel no more. You
stay with me, py golly!

ANNA--[Surprised and pleased by his eagerness--with a smile.] Then
you're really glad to see me--honest?

CHRIS--[Pressing one of her hands in both of his.] Anna, Ay like see
you like hell, Ay tal you! And don't you talk no more about gatting
yob. You stay with me. Ay don't see you for long time, you don't forgat
dat. [His voice trembles.] Ay'm gatting ole. Ay gat no one in vorld but
you.

ANNA--[Touched--embarrassed by this unfamiliar emotion.] Thanks. It
sounds good to hear someone--talk to me that way. Say, though--if
you're so lonely--it's funny--why ain't you ever married again?

CHRIS--[Shaking his head emphatically--after a pause.] Ay love your
mo'der too much for ever do dat, Anna.

ANNA--[Impressed--slowly.] I don't remember nothing about her. What was
she like? Tell me.

CHRIS--Ay tal you all about everytang--and you tal me all tangs happen
to you. But not here now. Dis ain't good place for young gel, anyway.
Only no good sailor fallar come here for gat drunk. [He gets to his
feet quickly and picks up her bag.] You come with me, Anna. You need
lie down, gat rest.

ANNA--[Half rises to her feet, then sits down again.] Where're you
going?

CHRIS--Come. Ve gat on board.

ANNA--[Disappointedly.] On board your barge, you mean? [Dryly.] Nix for
mine! [Then seeing his crestfallen look--forcing a smile.] Do you think
that's a good place for a young girl like me--a coal barge?

CHRIS--[Dully.] Yes, Ay tank. [He hesitates--then continues more and
more pleadingly.] You don't know how nice it's on barge, Anna. Tug come
and ve gat towed out on voyage--yust water all round, and sun, and
fresh air, and good grub for make you strong, healthy gel. You see many
tangs you don't see before. You gat moonlight at night, maybe; see
steamer pass; see schooner make sail--see everytang dat's pooty. You
need take rest like dat. You work too hard for young gel already. You
need vacation, yes!

ANNA--[Who has listened to him with a growing interest--with an
uncertain laugh.] It sounds good to hear you tell it. I'd sure like a
trip on the water, all right. It's the barge idea has me stopped. Well,
I'll go down with you and have a look--and maybe I'll take a chance.
Gee, I'd do anything once.

CHRIS--[Picks up her bag again.] Ye go, eh?

ANNA--What's the rush? Wait a second. [Forgetting the situation for a
moment, she relapses into the familiar form and flashes one of her
winning trade smiles at him.] Gee, I'm thirsty.

CHRIS--[Sets down her bag immediately--hastily.] Ay'm sorry, Anna. What
you tank you like for drink, eh?

ANNA--[Promptly.] I'll take a--[Then suddenly reminded--confusedly.] I
don't know. What'a they got here?

CHRIS--[With a grin.] Ay don't tank dey got much fancy drink for young
gel in dis place, Anna. Yinger ale--sas'prilla, maybe.

ANNA--[Forcing a laugh herself.] Make it sas, then.

CHRIS--[Coming up to her--with a wink.] Ay tal you, Anna, we calabrate,
yes--dis one time because we meet after many year. [In a half whisper,
embarrassedly.] Dey gat good port wine, Anna. It's good for you. Ay
tank--little bit--for give you appetite. It ain't strong, neider. One
glass don't go to your head, Ay promise.

ANNA--[With a half hysterical laugh.] All right! I'll take port.

CHRIS--Ay go gat him. [He goes out to the bar. As soon as the door
closes, Anna starts to her feet.]

ANNA--[Picking up her bag--half--aloud--stammeringly.] Gawd, I can't
stand this! I better beat it. [Then she lets her bag drop, stumbles
over to her chair again, and covering her face with her hands, begins
to sob.]

LARRY--[Putting down his paper as CHRIS comes up--with a grin.] Well,
who's the blond?

CHRIS--[Proudly.] Dat vas Anna, Larry.

LARRY--[In amazement.] Your daughter, Anna? [CHRIS nods. LARRY lets a
long, low whistle escape him and turns away embarrassedly.]

CHRIS--Don't you tank she vas pooty gel, Larry?

LARRY--[Rising to the occasion.] Sure! A peach!

CHRIS--You bet you! Give me drink for take back--one port vine for
Anna--she calabrate dis one time with me--and small beer for me.

LARRY--[As he gets the drinks.] Small beer for you, eh? She's reformin'
you already.

CHRIS--[Pleased.] You bet! [He takes the drinks. As she hears him
coming, ANNA hastily dries her eyes, tries to smile. CHRIS comes in and
sets the drinks down on the table--stares at her for a second
anxiously--patting her hand.] You look tired, Anna. Veil, Ay make you
take good long rest now. [Picking up his beer.] Come, you drink vine.
It put new life in you. [She lifts her glass--he grins.] Skoal, Anna!
You know dat Svedish word?

ANNA--Skoal! [Downing her port at a gulp like a drink of whiskey--her
lips trembling.] Skoal? Guess I know that word, all right, all right!

[The Curtain Falls]





Act II


SCENE--Ten days later. The stern of the deeply-laden barge, "SIMEON
WINTHROP," at anchor in the outer harbor of Provincetown, Mass. It is
ten o'clock at night. Dense fog shrouds the barge on all sides, and she
floats motionless on a calm. A lantern set up on an immense coil of
thick hawser sheds a dull, filtering light on objects near it--the
heavy steel bits for making fast the tow lines, etc. In the rear is the
cabin, its misty windows glowing wanly with the light of a lamp inside.
The chimney of the cabin stove rises a few feet above the roof. The
doleful tolling of bells, on Long Point, on ships at anchor, breaks the
silence at regular intervals.

As the curtain rises, ANNA is discovered standing near the coil of rope
on which the lantern is placed. She looks healthy, transformed, the
natural color has come back to her face. She has on a black, oilskin
coat, but wears no hat. She is staring out into the fog astern with an
expression of awed wonder. The cabin door is pushed open and CHRIS
appears. He is dressed in yellow oilskins--coat, pants, sou'wester--and
wears high sea-boots.

CHRIS--[The glare from the cabin still in his eyes, peers blinkmgly
astern.] Anna! [Receiving no reply, he calls again, this time with
apparent apprehension.] Anna!

ANNA--[With a start--making a gesture with her hand as if to impose
silence--in a hushed whisper.] Yes, here I am. What d'you want?

CHRIS--[Walks over to her--solicitously.] Don't you come turn in, Anna?
It's late--after four bells. It ain't good for you stay out here in
fog, Ay tank.

ANNA--Why not? [With a trace of strange exultation.] I love this fog!
Honest! It's so--[She hesitates, groping for a word.]--Funny and still.
I feel as if I was--out of things altogether.

CHRIS--[Spitting disgustedly.] Fog's vorst one of her dirty tricks, py
yingo!

ANNA--[With a short laugh.] Beefing about the sea again? I'm getting
so's I love it, the little I've seen.

CHRIS--[Glancing at her moodily.] Dat's foolish talk, Anna. You see her
more, you don't talk dat vay. [Then seeing her irritation, he hastily
adopts a more cheerful tone.] But Ay'm glad you like it on barge. Ay'm
glad it makes you feel good again. [With a placating grin.] You like
live like dis alone with ole fa'der, eh?

ANNA--Sure I do. Everything's been so different from anything I ever
come across before. And now--this fog--Gee, I wouldn't have missed it
for nothing. I never thought living on ships was so different from
land. Gee, I'd just love to work on it, honest I would, if I was a man.
I don't wonder you always been a sailor.

CHRIS--[Vehemently.] Ay ain't sailor, Anna. And dis ain't real sea. You
only see nice part. [Then as she doesn't answer, he continues
hopefully.] Vell, fog lift in morning, Ay tank.

ANNA--[The exultation again in her voice.] I love it! I don't give a
rap if it never lifts! [CHRIS fidgets from one foot to the other
worriedly. ANNA continues slowly, after a pause.] It makes me feel
clean--out here--'s if I'd taken a bath.

CHRIS--[After a pause.] You better go in cabin--read book. Dat put you
to sleep.

ANNA--I don't want to sleep. I want to stay out here--and think about
things.

CHRIS--[Walks away from her toward the cabin--then comes back.] You act
funny to-night, Anna.

ANNA--[Her voice rising angrily.] Say, what're you trying to do--make
things rotten? You been kind as kind can be to me and I certainly
appreciate it--only don't spoil it all now. [Then, seeing the hurt
expression on her father's face, she forces a smile.] Let's talk of
something else. Come. Sit down here. [She points to the coil of rope.]

CHRIS--[Sits down beside her with a sigh.] It's gatting pooty late in
night, Anna. Must be near five bells.

ANNA--[Interestedly.] Five bells? What time is that?

CHRIS--Half past ten.

ANNA--Funny I don't know nothing about sea talk--but those cousins was
always talking crops and that stuff. Gee, wasn't I sick of it--and of
them!

CHRIS--You don't like live on farm, Anna?

ANNA--I've told you a hundred times I hated it. [Decidedly.] I'd rather
have one drop of ocean than all the farms in the world! Honest! And you
wouldn't like a farm, neither. Here's where you belong. [She makes a
sweeping gesture seaward.] But not on a coal barge. You belong on a
real ship, sailing all over the world.

CHRIS--[Moodily.] Ay've done dat many year, Anna, when Ay vas damn fool.

ANNA--[Disgustedly.] Oh, rats! [After a pause she speaks musingly.] Was
the men in our family always sailors--as far back as you know about?

CHRIS--[Shortly.] Yes. Damn fools! All men in our village on coast,
Sveden, go to sea. Ain't nutting else for dem to do. My fa'der die on
board ship in Indian Ocean. He's buried at sea. Ay don't never know him
only little bit. Den my tree bro'der, older'n me, dey go on ships. Den
Ay go, too. Den my mo'der she's left all 'lone. She die pooty quick
after dat--all 'lone. Ve vas all avay on voyage when she die. [He
pauses sadly.] Two my bro'der dey gat lost on fishing boat same like
your bro'ders vas drowned. My oder bro'der, he save money, give up sea,
den he die home in bed. He's only one dat ole davil don't kill.
[Defiantly.] But me, Ay bet you Ay die ashore in bed, too!

ANNA--Were all of 'em yust plain sailors?

CHEIS--Able body seaman, most of dem. [With a certain pride.] Dey vas
all smart seaman, too--A one. [Then after hesitating a moment--shyly.]
Ay vas bo'sun.

ANNA--Bo'sun?

CHRIS--Dat's kind of officer.

ANNA--Gee, that was fine. What does he do?

CHRIS--[After a second's hesitation, plunged into gloom again by his
fear of her enthusiasm.] Hard vork all time. It's rotten, Ay tal you,
for go to sea. [Determined to disgust her with sea life--volubly.]
Dey're all fool fallar, dem fallar in our family. Dey all vork rotten
yob on sea for nutting, don't care nutting but yust gat big pay day in
pocket, gat drunk, gat robbed, ship avay again on oder voyage. Dey
don't come home, Dey don't do anytang like good man do. And dat ole
davil, sea, sooner, later she svallow dem up.

ANNA--[With an excited laugh.] Good sports, I'd call 'em. [Then
hastily.] But say--listen--did all the women of the family marry
sailors?

CHRIS--[Eagerly--seeing a chance to drive home his point.] Yes--and
it's bad on dem like hell vorst of all. Dey don't see deir men only
once in long while. Dey set and vait all 'lone. And vhen deir boys
grows up, go to sea, dey sit and vait some more. [Vehemently.] Any gel
marry sailor, she's crazy fool! Your mo'der she tal you same tang if
she vas alive. [He relapses into an attitude of somber brooding.]

ANNA--[After a pause--dreamily.] Funny! I do feel sort of--nutty,
to-night. I feel old.

CHRIS--[Mystified. ] Old?

ANNA--Sure--like I'd been living a long, long time--out here in the
fog. [Frowning perplexedly.] I don't know how to tell you yust what I
mean. It's like I'd come home after a long visit away some place. It
all seems like I'd been here before lots of times--on boats--in this
same fog. [With a short laugh.] You must think I'm off my base.

CHRIS--[Gruffly.] Anybody feel funny dat vay in fog.

ANNA--[Persistently.] But why d'you s'pose I feel so--so--like I'd
found something I'd missed and been looking for--'s if this was the
right place for me to fit in? And I seem to have forgot--everything
that's happened--like it didn't matter no more. And I feel clean,
somehow--like you feel yust after you've took a bath. And I feel happy
for once--yes, honest!--happier than I ever been anywhere before! [As
CHRIS makes no comment but a heavy sigh, she continues wonderingly.]
It's nutty for me to feel that way, don't you think?

CHRIS--[A grim foreboding in his voice.] Ay tank Ay'm damn fool for
bring you on voyage, Anna.

ANNA--[Impressed by his tone.] You talk--nutty to-night yourself. You
act's if you was scared something was going to happen.

CHRIS--Only God know dat, Anna.

ANNA--[Half-mockingly.] Then it'll be Gawd's will, like the preachers
say-what does happen.

CHRIS--[Starts to his feet with fierce protest.] No! Dat ole davil,
sea, she ain't God! [In the pause of silence that comes after his
defiance a hail in a man's husky, exhausted voice comes faintly out of
the fog to port.] "Ahoy!" [CHRIS gives a startled exclamation.]

ANNA--[Jumping to her feet.] What's that?

CHRIS--[Who has regained his composure--sheepishly.] Py golly, dat
scare me for minute. It's only some fallar hail, Anna--loose his course
in fog. Must be fisherman's power boat. His engine break down, Ay
guess. [The "ahoy" comes again through the wall of fog, sounding much
nearer this time. CHRIS goes over to the port bulwark.] Sound from dis
side. She come in from open sea. [He holds his hands to his mouth,
megaphone-fashion, and shouts back.] Ahoy, dere! Vhat's trouble?

THE VOICE--[This time sounding nearer but up forward toward the bow.]
Heave a rope when we come alongside. [Then irritably.] Where are ye, ye
scut?

CHRIS--Ay hear dem rowing. Dey come up by bow, Ay tank. [Then shouting
out again.] Dis vay!

THE VOICE--Right ye are! [There is a muffled sound of oars in
oar-locks.]

ANNA--[Half to herself--resentfully.] Why don't that guy stay where he
belongs?

CHRIS--[Hurriedly.] Ay go up bow. All hands asleep 'cepting fallar on
vatch. Ay gat heave line to dat fallar. [He picks up a coil of rope and
hurries off toward the bow. ANNA walks back toward the extreme stern as
if she wanted to remain as much isolated possible. She turns her back
on the proceedings and stares out into the fog. THE VOICE is heard
again shouting "Ahoy" and CHRIS answering "Dis way" Then there is a
pause--the murmur of excited voices--then the scuffling of feet. CHRIS
appears from around the cabin to port. He is supporting the limp form
of a man dressed in dungarees, holding one of the man's arms around his
neck. The deckhand, JOHNSON, a young, blond Swede, follows him, helping
along another exhausted man similar fashion. ANNA turns to look at
them. Chris stops for a second--volubly.] Anna! You come help, vill
you? You find vhiskey in cabin. Dese fallars need drink for fix dem.
Dey vas near dead.

ANNA--[Hurrying to him.] Sure--but who are they? What's the trouble?

CHRIS--Sailor fallars. Deir steamer gat wrecked. Dey been five days in
open boat--four fallars--only one left able stand up. Come, Anna. [She
precedes him into the cabin, holding the door open while he and JOHNSON
carry in their burdens. The door is shut, then opened again as JOHNSON
comes out. CHRIS'S voice shouts after him.] Go gat oder fallar, Yohnson.

JOHNSON--Yes, sir. [He goes. The door is closed again. MAT BURKE
stumbles in around the port side of the cabin. He moves slowly, feeling
his way uncertainly, keeping hold of the port bulwark with his right
hand to steady himself. He is stripped to the waist, has on nothing but
a pair of dirty dungaree pants. He is a powerful, broad-chested
six-footer, his face handsome in a hard, rough, bold, defiant way. He
is about thirty, in the full power of his heavy-muscled, immense
strength. His dark eyes are bloodshot and wild from sleeplessness. The
muscles of his arms and shoulders are lumped in knots and bunches, the
veins of his forearms stand out like blue cords. He finds his way to
the coil of hawser and sits down on it facing the cabin, his back
bowed, head in his hands, in an attitude of spent weariness.]

BURKE--[Talking aloud to himself.] Row, ye divil! Row! [Then lifting
his head and looking about him.] What's this tub? Well, we're safe
anyway--with the help of God. [He makes the sign of the cross
mechanically. JOHNSON comes along the deck to port, supporting the
fourth man, who is babbling to himself incoherently. BURKE glances at
him disdainfully.] Is it losing the small wits ye iver had, ye are?
Deck-scrubbing scut! [They pass him and go into the cabin, leaving the
door open. BURKE sags forward wearily.] I'm bate out--bate out entirely.

ANNA--[Comes out of the cabin with a tumbler quarter-full of whiskey in
her hand. She gives a start when she sees BURKE so near her, the light
from the open door falling full on him. Then, overcoming what is
evidently a feeling of repulsion, she comes up beside him.] Here you
are. Here's a drink for you. You need it, I guess.

BURKE--[Lifting his head slowly--confusedly.] Is it dreaming I am?

ANNA--[Half smiling.] Drink it and you'll find it ain't no dream.

BURKE--To hell with the drink--but I'll take it just the same. [He
tosses it down.] Aah! I'm needin' that--and 'tis fine stuff. [Looking
up at her with frank, grinning admiration.] But 'twasn't the booze I
meant when I said, was I dreaming. I thought you was some mermaid out
of the sea come to torment me. [He reaches out to feel of her arm.]
Aye, rale flesh and blood, divil a less.

ANNA--[Coldly. Stepping back from him.] Cut that.

BURKE--But tell me, isn't this a barge I'm on--or isn't it?

ANNA--Sure.

BURKE--And what is a fine handsome woman the like of you doing on this
scow?

ANNA--[Coldly.] Never you mind. [Then half-amused in spite of herself.]
Say, you're a great one, honest--starting right in kidding after what
you been through.

BURKE--[Delighted--proudly.] Ah, it was nothing--aisy for a rale man
with guts to him, the like of me. [He laughs.] All in the day's work,
darlin'. [Then, more seriously but still in a boastful tone,
confidentially.] But I won't be denying 'twas a damn narrow squeak.
We'd all ought to be with Davy Jones at the bottom of the sea, be
rights. And only for me, I'm telling you, and the great strength and
guts is in me, we'd be being scoffed by the fishes this minute!

ANNA--[Contemptuously.] Gee, you hate yourself, don't you? [Then
turning away from him indifferently.] Well, you'd better come in and
lie down. You must want to sleep.

BURKE--[Stung--rising unsteadily to his feet with chest out and head
thrown back--resentfully.] Lie down and sleep, is it? Divil a wink I'm
after having for two days and nights and divil a bit I'm needing now.
Let you not be thinking I'm the like of them three weak scuts come in
the boat with me. I could lick the three of them sitting down with one
hand tied behind me. They may be bate out, but I'm not--and I've been
rowing the boat with them lying in the bottom not able to raise a hand
for the last two days we was in it. [Furiously, as he sees this is
making no impression on her.] And I can lick all hands on this tub, wan
be wan, tired as I am!

ANNA--[Sarcastically.] Gee, ain't you a hard guy! [Then, with a trace
of sympathy, as she notices him swaying from weakness.] But never mind
that fight talk. I'll take your word for all you've said. Go on and sit
down out here, anyway, if I can't get you to come inside. [He sits down
weakly.] You're all in, you might as well own up to it.

BURKE--[Fiercely.] The hell I am!

ANNA--[Coldly.] Well, be stubborn then for all I care. And I must say I
don't care for your language. The men I know don't pull that rough
stuff when ladies are around.

BURKE--[Getting unsteadily to his feet again--in a rage.] Ladies!
Ho-ho! Divil mend you! Let you not be making game of me. What would
ladies be doing on this bloody hulk? [As ANNA attempts to go to the
cabin, he lurches into her path.] Aisy, now! You're not the old
Square-head's woman, I suppose you'll be telling me next--living in his
cabin with him, no less! [Seeing the cold, hostile expression on ANNA's
face, he suddenly changes his tone to one of boisterous joviality.] But
I do be thinking, iver since the first look my eyes took at you, that
it's a fool you are to be wasting yourself--a fine, handsome girl--on a
stumpy runt of a man like that old Swede. There's too many strapping
great lads on the sea would give their heart's blood for one kiss of
you!

ANNA--[Scornfully.] Lads like you, eh?

BURKE--[Grinning.] Ye take the words out o' my mouth. I'm the proper
lad for you, if it's meself do be saying it. [With a quick movement he
puts his arms about her waist.] Whisht, now, me daisy! Himself's in the
cabin. It's wan of your kisses I'm needing to take the tiredness from
me bones. Wan kiss, now! [He presses her to him and attempts to kiss
her.]

ANNA--[Struggling fiercely.] Leggo of me, you big mut! [She pushes him
away with all her might. BURKE, weak and tottering, is caught off his
guard. He is thrown down backward and, in falling, hits his head a hard
thump against the bulwark. He lies there still, knocked out for the
moment. ANNA stands for a second, looking down at him frightenedly.
Then she kneels down beside him and raises his head to her knee,
staring into his face anxiously for some sign of life.]

BURKE--[Stirring a bit--mutteringly.] God stiffen it! [He opens his
eyes and blinks up at her with vague wonder.]

ANNA--[Letting his head sink back on the deck, rising to her feet with
a sigh of relief.] You're coming to all right, eh? Gee, I was scared
for a moment I'd killed you.

BURKE--[With difficulty rising to a sitting position--scornfully.]
Killed, is it? It'd take more than a bit of a blow to crack my thick
skull. [Then looking at her with the most intense admiration.] But,
glory be, it's a power of strength is in them two fine arms of yours.
There's not a man in the world can say the same as you, that he seen
Mat Burke lying at his feet and him dead to the world.

ANNA--[Rather remorsefully.] Forget it. I'm sorry it happened, see?
[BURKE rises and sits on bench. Then severely.] Only you had no right
to be getting fresh with me. Listen, now, and don't go getting any more
wrong notions. I'm on this barge because I'm making a trip with my
father. The captain's my father. Now you know.

BURKE--The old square--the old Swede, I mean?

ANNA--Yes.

BURKE--[Rising--peering at her face.] Sure I might have known it, if I
wasn't a bloody fool from birth. Where else'd you get that fine yellow
hair is like a golden crown on your head.

ANNA--[With an amused laugh.] Say, nothing stops you, does it? [Then
attempting a severe tone again.] But don't you think you ought to be
apologizing for what you said and done yust a minute ago, instead of
trying to kid me with that mush?

BURKE--[Indignantly.] Mush! [Then bending forward toward her with very
intense earnestness.] Indade and I will ask your pardon a thousand
times--and on my knees, if ye like. I didn't mean a word of what I said
or did. [Resentful again for a second.] But divil a woman in all the
ports of the world has iver made a great fool of me that way before!

ANNA--[With amused sarcasm.] I see. You mean you're a lady-killer and
they all fall for you.

BURKE--[Offended. Passionately.] Leave off your fooling! 'Tis that is
after getting my back up at you. [Earnestly.] 'Tis no lie I'm telling
you about the women. [Ruefully.] Though it's a great jackass I am to be
mistaking you, even in anger, for the like of them cows on the
waterfront is the only women I've met up with since I was growed to a
man. [As ANNA shrinks away from him at this, he hurries on pleadingly.]
I'm a hard, rough man and I'm not fit, I'm thinking, to be kissing the
shoe-soles of a fine, dacent girl the like of yourself. 'Tis only the
ignorance of your kind made me see you wrong. So you'll forgive me, for
the love of God, and let us be friends from this out. [Passionately.]
I'm thinking I'd rather be friends with you than have my wish for
anything else in the world. [He holds out his hand to her shyly.]

ANNA--[Looking queerly at him, perplexed and worried, but moved and
pleased in spite of herself--takes his hand uncertainly.] Sure.

BURKE--[With boyish delight.] God bless you! [In his excitement he
squeezes her hand tight.]

ANNA--Ouch!

BURKE--[Hastily dropping her hand--ruefully.] Your pardon, Miss. 'Tis a
clumsy ape I am. [Then simply--glancing down his arm proudly.] It's
great power I have in my hand and arm, and I do be forgetting it at
times.

ANNA--[Nursing her crushed hand and glancing at his arm, not without a
trace of his own admiration.] Gee, you're some strong, all right.

BURKE--[Delighted.] It's no lie, and why shouldn't I be, with me
shoveling a million tons of coal in the stokeholes of ships since I was
a lad only. [He pats the coil of hawser invitingly.] Let you sit down,
now, Miss, and I'll be telling you a bit of myself, and you'll be
telling me a bit of yourself, and in an hour we'll be as old friends as
if we was born in the same house. [He pulls at her sleeve shyly.] Sit
down now, if you plaze.

ANNA--[With a half laugh.] Well--[She sits down.] But we won't talk
about me, see? You tell me about yourself and about the wreck.

BURKE--[Flattered.] I'll tell you, surely. But can I be asking you one
question. Miss, has my head in a puzzle?

ANNA--[Guardedly.] Well--I dunno--what is it?

BURKE--What is it you do when you're not taking a trip with the Old
Man? For I'm thinking a fine girl the like of you ain't living always
on this tub.

ANNA--[Uneasily.] No--of course I ain't. [She searches his face
suspiciously, afraid there may be some hidden insinuation in his words.
Seeing his simple frankness, she goes on confidently.] Well, I'll tell
you. I'm a governess, see? I take care of kids for people and learn
them things.

BURKE--[Impressed.] A governess, is it? You must be smart, surely.

ANNA--But let's not talk about me. Tell me about the wreck, like you
promised me you would.

BURKE--[Importantly.] 'Twas this way, Miss. Two weeks out we ran into
the divil's own storm, and she sprang wan hell of a leak up for'ard.
The skipper was hoping to make Boston before another blow would finish
her, but ten days back we met up with another storm the like of the
first, only worse. Four days we was in it with green seas raking over
her from bow to stern. That was a terrible time, God help us.
[Proudly.] And if 'twasn't for me and my great strength, I'm telling
you--and it's God's truth--there'd been mutiny itself in the stokehole.
'Twas me held them to it, with a kick to wan and a clout to another,
and they not caring a damn for the engineers any more, but fearing a
clout of my right arm more than they'd fear the sea itself. [He glances
at her anxiously, eager for her approval.]

ANNA--[Concealing a smile--amused by this boyish boasting of his.] You
did some hard work, didn't you?

BURKE--[Promptly.] I did that! I'm a divil for sticking it out when
them that's weak give up. But much good it did anyone! 'Twas a mad,
fightin' scramble in the last seconds with each man for himself. I
disremember how it come about, but there was the four of us in wan boat
and when we was raised high on a great wave I took a look about and
divil a sight there was of ship or men on top of the sea.

ANNA--[In a subdued voice.] Then all the others was drowned?

BURKE--They was, surely.

ANNA--[With a shudder.] What a terrible end!

BURKE--[Turns to her.] A terrible end for the like of them swabs does
live on land, maybe. But for the like of us does be roaming the seas, a
good end, I'm telling you--quick and clane.

ANNA--[Struck by the word.] Yes, clean. That's yust the word for--all
of it--the way it makes me feel.

BURKE--The sea, you mean? [Interestedly.] I'm thinking you have a bit
of it in your blood, too. Your Old Man wasn't only a barge rat--begging
your pardon--all his life, by the cut of him.

ANNA--No, he was bo'sun on sailing ships for years. And all the men on
both sides of the family have gone to sea as far back as he remembers,
he says. All the women have married sailors, too.

BURKE--[With intense satisfaction.] Did they, now? They had spirit in
them. It's only on the sea you'd find rale men with guts is fit to wed
with fine, high-tempered girls [Then he adds half-boldly] the like of
yourself.

ANNA--[With a laugh.] There you go kiddin' again. [Then seeing his hurt
expression--quickly.] But you was going to tell me about yourself.
You're Irish, of course I can tell that.

BURKE--[Stoutly.] Yes, thank God, though I've not seen a sight of it in
fifteen years or more.

ANNA--[Thoughtfully.] Sailors never do go home hardly, do they? That's
what my father was saying.

BURKE--He wasn't telling no lie. [With sudden melancholy.] It's a hard
and lonesome life, the sea is. The only women you'd meet in the ports
of the world who'd be willing to speak you a kind word isn't woman at
all. You know the kind I mane, and they're a poor, wicked lot, God
forgive them. They're looking to steal the money from you only.

ANNA--[Her face averted--rising to her feet--agitatedly.] I think--I
guess I'd better see what's doing inside.

BURKE--[Afraid he has offended her--beseechingly.] Don't go, I'm
saying! Is it I've given you offence with my talk of the like of them?
Don't heed it at all! I'm clumsy in my wits when it comes to talking
proper with a girl the like of you. And why wouldn't I be? Since the
day I left home for to go to sea punching coal, this is the first time
I've had a word with a rale, dacent woman. So don't turn your back on
me now, and we beginning to be friends.

ANNA--[Turning to him again--forcing a smile.] I'm not sore at you,
honest.

BURKE--[Gratefully.] God bless you!

ANNA--[Changing the subject abruptly.] But if you honestly think the
sea's such a rotten life, why don't you get out of it?

BURKE--[Surprised.] Work on land, is it? [She nods. He spits
scornfully.] Digging spuds in the muck from dawn to dark, I suppose?
[Vehemently.] I wasn't made for it, Miss.

ANNA--[With a laugh.] I thought you'd say that.

BURKE--[Argumentatively.] But there's good jobs and bad jobs at sea,
like there'd be on land. I'm thinking if it's in the stokehole of a
proper liner I was, I'd be able to have a little house and be home to
it wan week out of four. And I'm thinking that maybe then I'd have the
luck to find a fine dacent girl--the like of yourself, now--would be
willing to wed with me.

ANNA--[Turning away from him with a short laugh--uneasily.] Why, sure.
Why not?

BURKE--[Edging up close to her--exultantly.] Then you think a girl the
like of yourself might maybe not mind the past at all but only be
seeing the good herself put in me?

ANNA--[In the same tone.] Why, sure.

BURKE--[Passionately.] She'd not be sorry for it, I'd take my oath!
'Tis no more drinking and roving about I'd be doing then, but giving my
pay day into her hand and staying at home with her as meek as a lamb
each night of the week I'd be in port.

ANNA--[Moved in spite of herself and troubled by this half-concealed
proposal--with a forced laugh.] All you got to do is find the girl.

BURKE--I have found her!

ANNA--[Half-frightenedly--trying to laugh it off.] You have? When? I
thought you was saying--

BURKE--[Boldly and forcefully.] This night. [Hanging his head--humbly.]
If she'll be having me. [Then raising his eyes to hers--simply.] 'Tis
you I mean.

ANNA--[Is held by his eyes for a moment--then shrinks back from him
with a strange, broken laugh.] Say--are you--going crazy? Are you
trying to kid me? Proposing--to me!--for Gawd's sake!--on such short
acquaintance? [CHRIS comes out of the cabin and stands staring
blinkingly astern. When he makes out ANNA in such intimate proximity to
this strange sailor, an angry expression comes over his face.]

BURKE--[Following her--with fierce, pleading insistence.] I'm telling
you there's the will of God in it that brought me safe through the
storm and fog to the wan spot in the world where you was! Think of that
now, and isn't it queer--

CHRIS--Anna! [He comes toward them, raging, his fists clenched.] Anna,
you gat in cabin, you hear!

ANNA--[All her emotions immediately transformed into resentment at his
bullying tone.] Who d'you think you're talking to--a slave?

CHRIS--[Hurt--his voice breaking--pleadingly.] You need gat rest, Anna.
You gat sleep. [She does not move. He turns on BURKE furiously.] What
you doing here, you sailor fallar? You ain't sick like oders. You gat
in fo'c's'tle. Dey give you bunk. [Threateningly.] You hurry, Ay tal
you!

ANNA--[Impulsively.] But he is sick. Look at him. He can hardly stand
up.

BURKE--[Straightening and throwing out his chest--with a bold laugh.]
Is it giving me orders ye are, me bucko? Let you look out, then! With
wan hand, weak as I am, I can break ye in two and fling the pieces over
the side--and your crew after you. [Stopping abruptly.] I was
forgetting. You're her Old Man and I'd not raise a fist to you for the
world. [His knees sag, he wavers and seems about to fall. ANNA utters
an exclamation of alarm and hurries to his slde.]

ANNA--[Taking one of his arms over her shoulder.] Come on in the cabin.
You can have my bed if there ain't no other place.

BURKE--[With jubilant happiness--as they proceed toward the cabin.]
Glory be to God, is it holding my arm about your neck you are! Anna!
Anna! Sure it's a sweet name is suited to you.

ANNA--[Guiding him carefully.] Sssh! Sssh!

BURKE--Whisht, is it? Indade, and I'll not. I'll be roaring it out like
a fog horn over the sea! You're the girl of the world and we'll be
marrying soon and I don't care who knows it!

ANNA--[As she guides him through the cabin door.] Ssshh! Never mind
that talk. You go to sleep. [They go out of sight in the cabin. CHRIS,
who has been listening to BURKE's last words with open-mouthed
amazement stands looking after them helplessly.]

CHRIS--[Turns suddenly and shakes his fist out at the sea--with bitter
hatred.] Dat's your dirty trick, damn ole davil, you! [Then in a frenzy
of rage.] But, py God, you don't do dat! Not while Ay'm living! No, py
God, you don't!

[The Curtain Falls]




ACT III


SCENE--The interior of the cabin on the barge, "Simeon Winthrop" (at
dock in Boston)--a narrow, low-ceilinged compartment the walls of which
are painted a light brown with white trimmings. In the rear on the
left, a door leading to the sleeping quarters. In the far left corner,
a large locker-closet, painted white, on the door of which a mirror
hangs on a nail. In the rear wall, two small square windows and a door
opening out on the deck toward the stern. In the right wall, two more
windows looking out on the port deck. White curtains, clean and stiff,
are at the windows. A table with two cane-bottomed chairs stands in the
center of the cabin. A dilapidated, wicker rocker, painted brown, is
also by the table.

It is afternoon of a sunny day about a week later. From the harbor and
docks outside, muffled by the closed door and windows, comes the sound
of steamers' whistles and the puffing snort of the donkey engines of
some ship unloading nearby.

As the curtain rises, CHRIS and ANNA are discovered. ANNA is seated in
the rocking-chair by the table, with a newspaper in her hands. She is
not reading but staring straight in front of her. She looks unhappy,
troubled, frowningly concentrated on her thoughts. CHRIS wanders about
the room, casting quick, uneasy side glances at her face, then stopping
to peer absentmindedly out of the window. His attitude betrays an
overwhelming, gloomy anxiety which has him on tenter hooks. He pretends
to be engaged in setting things ship-shape, but this occupation is
confined to picking up some object, staring at it stupidly for a
second, then aimlessly putting it down again. He clears his throat and
starts to sing to himself in a low, doleful voice: "My Yosephine, come
aboard de ship. Long time Ay wait for you."

ANNA--[Turning on him, sarcastically.] I'm glad someone's feeling good.
[Wearily.] Gee, I sure wish we was out of this dump and back in New
York.

CHRIS--[With a sigh.] Ay'm glad vhen ve sail again, too. [Then, as she
makes no comment, he goes on with a ponderous attempt at sarcasm.] Ay
don't see vhy you don't like Boston, dough. You have good time here, Ay
tank. You go ashore all time, every day and night veek ve've been here.
You go to movies, see show, gat all kinds fun--[His eyes hard with
hatred.] All with that damn Irish fallar!

ANNA--[With weary scorn.] Oh, for heaven's sake, are you off on that
again? Where's the harm in his taking me around? D'you want me to sit
all day and night in this cabin with you--and knit? Ain't I got a right
to have as good a time as I can?

CHRIS--It ain't right kind of fun--not with that fallar, no.

ANNA--I been back on board every night by eleven, ain't I? [Then struck
by some thought--looks at him with keen suspicion--with rising anger.]
Say, look here, what d'you mean by what you yust said?

CHRIS--[Hastily.] Nutting but what Ay say, Anna.

ANNA--You said "ain't right" and you said it funny. Say, listen here,
you ain't trying to insinuate that there's something wrong between us,
are you?

CHRIS--[Horrified.] No, Anna! No, Ay svear to God, Ay never tank dat!

ANNA--[Mollified by his very evident sincerity--sitting down again.]
Well, don't you never think it neither if you want me ever to speak to
you again. [Angrily again.] If I ever dreamt you thought that, I'd get
the hell out of this barge so quick you couldn't see me for dust.

CHRIS--[Soothingly.] Ay wouldn't never dream--[Then, after a second's
pause, reprovingly.] You vas gatting learn to svear. Dat ain't nice for
young gel, you tank?

ANNA--[With a faint trace of a smile.] Excuse me. You ain't used to
such language, I know. [Mockingly.] That's what your taking me to sea
has done for me.

CHRIS--[Indignantly.] No, it ain't me. It's dat damn sailor fallar
learn you bad tangs.

ANNA--He ain't a sailor. He's a stoker.

CHRIS--[Forcibly.] Dat vas million times vorse, Ay tal you! Dem fallars
dat vork below shoveling coal vas de dirtiest, rough gang of no-good
fallars in vorld!

ANNA--I'd hate to hear you say that to Mat.

CHRIS--Oh, Ay tal him same tang. You don't gat it in head Ay'm scared
of him yust 'cause he vas stronger'n Ay vas. [Menacingly.] You don't
gat for fight with fists with dem fallars. Dere's oder vay for fix him.

ANNA--[Glancing at him with sudden alarm.] What d'you mean?

CHRIS--[Sullenly.] Nutting.

ANNA--You'd better not. I wouldn't start no trouble with him if I was
you. He might forget some time that you was old and my father--and then
you'd be out of luck.

CHRIS--[With smouldering hatred.] Vell, yust let him! Ay'm ole bird
maybe, but Ay bet Ay show him trick or two.

ANNA--[Suddenly changing her tone--persuasively.] Aw come on, be good.
What's eating you, anyway? Don't you want no one to be nice to me
except yourself?

CHRIS--[Placated--coming to her--eagerly.] Yes, Ay do, Anna--only not
fallar on sea. But Ay like for you marry steady fallar got good yob on
land. You have little home in country all your own--

ANNA--[Rising to her feet--brusquely.] Oh, cut it out! [Scornfully.]
Little home in the country! I wish you could have seen the little home
in the country where you had me in jail till I was sixteen! [With
rising irritation.] Some day you're going to get me so mad with that
talk, I'm going to turn loose on you and tell you--a lot of things
that'll open your eyes.

CHRIS--[Alarmed.] Ay don't vant--

ANNA--I know you don't; but you keep on talking yust the same.

CHRIS--Ay don't talk no more den, Anna.

ANNA--Then promise me you'll cut out saying nasty things about Mat
Burke every chance you get.

CHRIS--[Evasive and suspicious.] Vhy? You like dat fallar--very much,
Anna?

ANNA--Yes, I certainly do! He's a regular man, no matter what faults
he's got. One of his fingers is worth all the hundreds of men I met out
there--inland.

CHRIS--[His face darkening.] Maybe you tank you love him, den?

ANNA--[Defiantly.] What of it if I do?

CHRIS--[Scowling and forcing out the words.] Maybe--you tank you--marry
him?

ANNA--[Shaking her head.] No! [CHRIS' face lights up with relief. ANNA
continues slowly, a trace of sadness in her voice.] If I'd met him four
years ago--or even two years ago--I'd have jumped at the chance, I tell
you that straight. And I would now--only he's such a simple guy--a big
kid--and I ain't got the heart to fool him. [She breaks off suddenly.]
But don't never say again he ain't good enough for me. It's me ain't
good enough for him.

CHRIS--[Snorts scornfully.] Py yiminy, you go crazy, Ay tank!

ANNA--[With a mournful laugh.] Well, I been thinking I was myself the
last few days. [She goes and takes a shawl from a hook near the door
and throws it over her shoulders.] Guess I'll take a walk down to the
end of the dock for a minute and see what's doing. I love to watch the
ships passing. Mat'll be along before long, I guess. Tell him where I
am, will you?

CHRIS--[Despondently.] All right, Ay tal him. [ANNA goes out the
doorway on rear. CHRIS follows her out and stands on the deck outside
for a moment looking after her. Then he comes back inside and shuts the
door. He stands looking out of the window--mutters--"Dirty die davil,
you." Then he goes to the table, sets the cloth straight mechanically,
picks up the newspaper ANNA has let fall to the floor and sits down in
the rocking-chair. He stares at the paper for a while, then puts it on
table, holds his head in his hands and sighs drearily. The noise of a
man's heavy footsteps comes from the deck outside and there is a loud
knock on the door. CHRIS starts, makes a move as if to get up and go to
the door, then thinks better of it and sits still. The knock is
repeated--then as no answer comes, the door is flung open and MAT BURKE
appears. CHRIS scowls at the intruder and his hand instinctively goes
back to the sheath knife on his hip. BURKE is dressed up--wears a cheap
blue suit, a striped cotton shirt with a black tie, and black shoes
newly shined. His face is beaming with good humor.]

BURKE--[As he sees CHRIS--in a jovial tone of mockery.] Well, God bless
who's here! [He bends down and squeezes his huge form through the
narrow doorway.] And how is the world treating you this afternoon,
Anna's father?

CHRIS--[Sullenly.] Pooty goot--if it ain't for some fallars.
BURKE--[With a grin.] Meaning me, do you? [He laughs.] Well, if you
ain't the funny old crank of a man! [Then soberly.] Where's herself?
[CHRIS sits dumb, scowling, his eyes averted. BURKE is irritated by
this silence.] Where's Anna, I'm after asking you?

CHRIS--[Hesitating--then grouchily.] She go down end of dock.

BURKE--I'll be going down to her, then. But first I'm thinking I'll
take this chance when we're alone to have a word with you. [He sits
down opposite CHRIS at the table and leans over toward him.] And that
word is soon said. I'm marrying your Anna before this day is out, and
you might as well make up your mind to it whether you like it or no.

CHRIS--[Glaring at him with hatred and forcing a scornful laugh.]
Ho-ho! Dat's easy for say!

BURKE--You mean I won't? [Scornfully.] Is it the like of yourself will
stop me, are you thinking?

CHRIS--Yes, Ay stop it, if it come to vorst.

BURKE--[With scornful pity.] God help you!

CHRIS--But ain't no need for me do dat. Anna--

BURKE--[Smiling confidently.] Is it Anna you think will prevent me?

CHRIS--Yes.

BURKE--And I'm telling you she'll not. She knows I'm loving her, and
she loves me the same, and I know it.

CHRIS--Ho-ho! She only have fun. She make big fool of you, dat's all!

BURKE--[Unshaken--pleasantly.] That's a lie in your throat, divil mend
you!

CHRIS--No, it ain't lie. She tal me yust before she go out she never
marry fallar like you.

BURKE--I'll not believe it. 'Tis a great old liar you are, and a divil
to be making a power of trouble if you had your way. But 'tis not
trouble I'm looking for, and me sitting down here. [Earnestly.] Let us
be talking it out now as man to man. You're her father, and wouldn't it
be a shame for us to be at each other's throats like a pair of dogs,
and I married with Anna. So out with the truth, man alive. What is it
you're holding against me at all?

CHRIS--[A bit placated, in spite of himself, by BURKE'S evident
sincerity--but puzzled and suspicious.] Vell--Ay don't vant for Anna
gat married. Listen, you fallar. Ay'm a ole man. Ay don't see Anna for
fifteen year. She vas all Ay gat in vorld. And now ven she come on
first trip--you tank Ay vant her leave me 'lone again?

BURKE--[Heartily.] Let you not be thinking I have no heart at all for
the way you'd be feeling.

CHRIS--[Astonished and encouraged--trying to plead persuasively.] Den
you do right tang, eh? You ship avay again, leave Anna alone.
[Cajolingly.] Big fallar like you dat's on sea, he don't need vife. He
gat new gel in every port, you know dat.

BURKE--[Angry for a second.] God stiffen you! [Then controlling
himself--calmly.] I'll not be giving you the lie on that. But divil
take you, there's a time comes to every man, on sea or land, that isn't
a born fool, when he's sick of the lot of them cows, and wearing his
heart out to meet up with a fine dacent girl, and have a home to call
his own and be rearing up children in it. 'Tis small use you're asking
me to leave Anna. She's the wan woman of the world for me, and I can't
live without her now, I'm thinking.

CHRIS--You forgat all about her in one veek out of port, Ay bet you!

BURKE--You don't know the like I am. Death itself wouldn't make me
forget her. So let you not be making talk to me about leaving her. I'll
not, and be damned to you! It won't be so bad for you as you'd make out
at all. She'll be living here in the States, and her married to me. And
you'd be seeing her often so--a sight more often than ever you saw her
the fifteen years she was growing up in the West. It's quare you'd be
the one to be making great trouble about her leaving you when you never
laid eyes on her once in all them years.

CHRIS--[Guiltily.] Ay taught it vas better Anna stay avay, grow up
inland where she don't ever know ole davil, sea.

BURKE--[Scornfully.] Is it blaming the sea for your troubles ye are
again, God help you? Well, Anna knows it now. 'Twas in her blood,
anyway.

CHRIS--And Ay don't vant she ever know no-good fallar on sea--

BURKE--She knows one now.

CHRIS--[Banging the table with his fist--furiously.] Dat's yust it!
Dat's yust what you are--no-good, sailor fallar! You tank Ay lat her
life be made sorry by you like her mo'der's vas by me! No, Ay svear!
She don't marry you if Ay gat kill you first!

BURKE--[Looks at him a moment, in astonishment--then laughing
uproariously.] Ho-ho! Glory be to God, it's bold talk you have for a
stumpy runt of a man!

CHRIS--[Threateningly.] Vell--you see!

BURKE--[With grinning defiance.] I'll see, surely! I'll see myself and
Anna married this day, I'm telling you! [Then with contemptuous
exasperation.] It's quare fool's blather you have about the sea done
this and the sea done that. You'd ought to be shamed to be saying the
like, and you an old sailor yourself. I'm after hearing a lot of it
from you and a lot more that Anna's told me you do be saying to her,
and I'm thinking it's a poor weak thing you are, and not a man at all!

CHRIS--[Darkly.] You see if Ay'm man--maybe quicker'n you tank.

BURKE--[Contemptuously.] Yerra, don't be boasting. I'm thinking 'tis
out of your wits you've got with fright of the sea. You'd be wishing
Anna married to a farmer, she told me. That'd be a swate match, surely!
Would you have a fine girl the like of Anna lying down at nights with a
muddy scut stinking of pigs and dung? Or would you have her tied for
life to the like of them skinny, shrivelled swabs does be working in
cities?

CHRIS--Dat's lie, you fool!

BURKE--'Tis not. 'Tis your own mad notions I'm after telling. But you
know the truth in your heart, if great fear of the sea has made you a
liar and coward itself. [Pounding the table.] The sea's the only life
for a man with guts in him isn't afraid of his own shadow! 'Tis only on
the sea he's free, and him roving the face of the world, seeing all
things, and not giving a damn for saving up money, or stealing from his
friends, or any of the black tricks that a landlubber'd waste his life
on. 'Twas yourself knew it once, and you a bo'sun for years.

CHRIS--[Sputtering with rage.] You vas crazy fool, Ay tal you!

BURKE--You've swallowed the anchor. The sea give you a clout once
knocked you down, and you're not man enough to get up for another, but
lie there for the rest of your life howling bloody murder. [Proudly.]
Isn't it myself the sea has nearly drowned, and me battered and bate
till I was that close to hell I could hear the flames roaring, and
never a groan out of me till the sea gave up and it seeing the great
strength and guts of a man was in me?

CHRIS--[Scornfully.] Yes, you vas hell of fallar, hear you tal it!

BURKE--[Angrily.] You'll be calling me a liar once too often, me old
bucko! Wasn't the whole story of it and my picture itself in the
newspapers of Boston a week back? [Looking CHRIS up and down
belittlingly.] Sure I'd like to see you in the best of your youth do
the like of what I done in the storm and after. 'Tis a mad lunatic,
screeching with fear, you'd be this minute!

CHRIS--Ho-ho! You vas young fool! In ole years when Ay was on
windyammer, Ay vas through hundred storms vorse'n dat! Ships vas ships
den--and men dat sail on dem vas real men. And now what you gat on
steamers? You gat fallars on deck don't know ship from mudscow. [With a
meaning glance at BURKE.] And below deck you gat fallars yust know how
for shovel coal--might yust as veil vork on coal vagon ashore!

BURKE--[Stung--angrily.] Is it casting insults at the men in the
stokehole ye are, ye old ape? God stiffen you! Wan of them is worth any
ten stock-fish-swilling Square-heads ever shipped on a windbag!

CHRIS--[His face working with rage, his hand going back to the
sheath-knife on his hip.] Irish svine, you!

BURKE--[Tauntingly.] Don't ye like the Irish, ye old babboon? 'Tis that
you're needing in your family, I'm telling you--an Irishman and a man
of the stokehole--to put guts in it so that you'll not be having
grandchildren would be fearful cowards and jackasses the like of
yourself!

CHRIS--[Half rising from his chair--in a voice choked with rage.] You
look out!

BURKE--[Watching him intently--a mocking smile on his lips.] And it's
that you'll be having, no matter what you'll do to prevent; for Anna
and me'll be married this day, and no old fool the like of you will
stop us when I've made up my mind.

CHRIS--[With a hoarse cry.] You don't! [He throws himself at BURKE,
knife in hand, knocking his chair over backwards. BURKE springs to his
feet quickly in time to meet the attack. He laughs with the pure love
of battle. The old Swede is like a child in his hands. BURKE does not
strike or mistreat him in any way, but simply twists his right hand
behind his back and forces the knife from his fingers. He throws the
knife into a far corner of the room--tauntingly.]

BURKE--Old men is getting childish shouldn't play with knives. [Holding
the struggling CHRIS at arm's length--with a sudden rush of anger,
drawing back his fist.] I've half a mind to hit you a great clout will
put sense in your square head. Kape off me now, I'm warning you! [He
gives CHRIS a push with the flat of his hand which sends the old Swede
staggering back against the cabin wall, where he remains standing,
panting heavily, his eyes fixed on BURKE with hatred, as if he were
only collecting his strength to rush at him again.]

BURKE--[Warningly.] Now don't be coming at me again, I'm saying, or
I'll flatten you on the floor with a blow, if 'tis Anna's father you
are itself! I've no patience left for you. [Then with an amused laugh.]
Well, 'tis a bold old man you are just the same, and I'd never think it
was in you to come tackling me alone. [A shadow crosses the cabin
windows. Both men start. ANNA appears in the doorway.]

ANNA--[With pleased surprise as she sees BURKE.] Hello, Mat. Are you
here already? I was down--[She stops, looking from one to the other,
sensing immediately that something has happened.] What's up? [Then
noticing the overturned chair--in alarm.] How'd that chair get knocked
over? [Turning on BURKE reproachfully.] You ain't been fighting with
him, Mat--after you promised?

BURKE--[His old self again.] I've not laid a hand on him, Anna. [He
goes and picks up the chair, then turning on the still questioning
ANNA--with a reassuring smile.] Let you not be worried at all. 'Twas
only a bit of an argument we was having to pass the time till you'd
come.

ANNA--It must have been some argument when you got to throwing chairs.
[She turns on CHRIS.] Why don't you say something? What was it about?

CHRIS--[Relaxing at last--avoiding her eyes--sheepishly.] Ve vas
talking about ships and fallars on sea.

ANNA--[With a relieved smile.] Oh--the old stuff, eh?

BURKE--[Suddenly seeming to come to a bold decision--with a defiant
grin at CHRIS.] He's not after telling you the whole of it. We was
arguing about you mostly.

ANNA--[With a frown.] About me?

BURKE--And we'll be finishing it out right here and now in your
presence if you're willing. [He sits down at the left of table.]

ANNA--[Uncertainly--looking from him to her father.] Sure. Tell me what
it's all about.

CHRIS--[Advancing toward the table--protesting to BURKE.] No! You don't
do dat, you! You tal him you don't vant for hear him talk, Anna.

ANNA--But I do. I want this cleared up.

CHRIS--[Miserably afraid now.] Vell, not now, anyvay. You vas going
ashore, yes? You ain't got time--

ANNA--[Firmly.] Yes, right here and now. [She turns to BURKE.] You tell
me, Mat, since he don't want to.

BURKE--[Draws a deep breath--then plunges in boldly.] The whole of it's
in a few words only. So's he'd make no mistake, and him hating the
sight of me, I told him in his teeth I loved you. [Passionately.] And
that's God truth, Anna, and well you know it!

CHRIS--[Scornfully--forcing a laugh.] Ho-ho! He tal same tang to gel
every port he go!

ANNA--[Shrinking from her father with repulsion--resentfully.] Shut up,
can't you? [Then to BURKE--feelingly.] I know it's true, Mat. I don't
mind what he says.

BURKE--[Humbly grateful.] God bless you!

ANNA--And then what?

BURKE--And then--[Hesitatingly.] And then I said--[He looks at her
pleadingly.] I said I was sure--I told him I thought you have a bit of
love for me, too. [Passionately.] Say you do, Anna! Let you not destroy
me entirely, for the love of God! [He grasps both her hands in his two.]

ANNA--[Deeply moved and troubled--forcing a trembling laugh.] So you
told him that, Mat? No wonder he was mad. [Forcing out the words.]
Well, maybe it's true, Mat. Maybe I do. I been thinking and thinking--I
didn't want to, Mat, I'll own up to that--I tried to cut it
out--but--[She laughs helplessly.] I guess I can't help it anyhow. So I
guess I do, Mat. [Then with a sudden joyous defiance.] Sure I do!
What's the use of kidding myself different? Sure I love you, Mat!

CHRIS--[With a cry of pain.] Anna! [He sits crushed.]

BURKE--[With a great depth of sincerity in his humble gratitude.] God
be praised!

ANNA--[Assertively.] And I ain't never loved a man in my life before,
you can always believe that--no matter what happens.

BURKE--[Goes over to her and puts his arms around her.] Sure I do be
believing ivery word you iver said or iver will say. And 'tis you and
me will be having a grand, beautiful life together to the end of our
days! [He tries to kiss her. At first she turns away her head--then,
overcome by a fierce impulse of passionate love, she takes his head in
both her hands and holds his face close to hers, staring into his eyes.
Then she kisses him full on the lips.]

ANNA--[Pushing him away from her--forcing a broken laugh.] Good-bye.
[She walks to the doorway in rear--stands with her back toward them,
looking out. Her shoulders quiver once or twice as if she were fighting
back her sobs.]

BURKE--[Too in the seventh heaven of bliss to get any correct
interpretation of her word--with a laugh.] Good-bye, is it? The divil
you say! I'll be coming back at you in a second for more of the same!
[To CHRIS, who has quickened to instant attention at his daughter's
good-bye, and has looked back at her with a stirring of foolish hope in
his eyes.] Now, me old bucko, what'll you be saying? You heard the
words from her own lips. Confess I've bate you. Own up like a man when
you're bate fair and square. And here's my hand to you--[Holds out his
hand.] And let you take it and we'll shake and forget what's over and
done, and be friends from this out.

CHRIS--[With implacable hatred.] Ay don't shake hands vith you
fallar--not vhile Ay live!

BURKE--[Offended.] The back of my hand to you then, if that suits you
better. [Growling.] 'Tis a rotten bad loser you are, divil mend you!

CHRIS--Ay don't lose--[Trying to be scornful and self-convincing.] Anna
say she like you little bit but you don't hear her say she marry you,
Ay bet. [At the sound of her name ANNA has turned round to them. Her
face is composed and calm again, but it is the dead calm of despair.]

BURKE--[Scornfully.] No, and I wasn't hearing her say the sun is
shining either.

CHRIS--[Doggedly.] Dat's all right. She don't say it, yust same.

ANNA--[Quietly--coming forward to them.] No, I didn't say it, Mat.

CHRIS--[Eagerly.] Dere! You hear!

BURKE--[Misunderstanding her--with a grin.] You're waiting till you do
be asked, you mane? Well, I'm asking you now. And we'll be married this
day, with the help of God!

ANNA--[Gently.] You heard what I said, Mat--after I kissed you?

BURKE--[Alarmed by something in her manner.] No--I disremember.

ANNA--I said good-bye. [Her voice trembling.] That kiss was for
good-bye, Mat.

BURKE--[Terrified.] What d'you mane?

ANNA--I can't marry you, Mat--and we've said good-bye. That's all.

CHRIS--[Unable to hold back his exultation.] Ay know it! Ay know dat
vas so!

BURKE--[Jumping to his feet--unable to believe his ears.] Anna! Is it
making game of me you'd be? 'Tis a quare time to joke with me, and
don't be doing it, for the love of God.

ANNA--[Looking him in the eyes--steadily.] D'you think I'd kid you now?
No, I'm not joking, Mat. I mean what I said.

BURKE--Ye don't! Ye can't! 'Tis mad you are. I'm telling you!

ANNA--[Fixedly.] No I'm not.

BURKE--[Desperately.] But what's come over you so sudden? You was
saying you loved me--

ANNA--I'll say that as often as you want me to. It's true.

BURKE--[Bewilderedly.] Then why--what, in the divil's name--Oh, God
help me, I can't make head or tail to it at all!

ANNA--Because it's the best way out I can figure, Mat. [Her voice
catching.] I been thinking it over and thinking it over day and night
all week. Don't think it ain't hard on me, too, Mat.

BURKE--For the love of God, tell me then, what is it that's preventing
you wedding me when the two of us has love? [Suddenly getting an idea
and pointing at CHRIS--exasperatedly.] Is it giving heed to the like of
that old fool ye are, and him hating me and filling your ears full of
bloody lies against me?

CHRIS--[Getting to his feet--raging triumphantly before ANNA has a
chance to get in a word.] Yes, Anna believe me, not you! She know her
old fa'der don't lie like you.

ANNA--[Turning on her father angrily.] You sit down, d'you hear? Where
do you come in butting in and making things worse? You're like a devil,
you are! [Harshly.] Good Lord, and I was beginning to like you,
beginning to forget all I've got held up against you!

CHRIS--[Crushed--feebly.] You ain't got nutting for hold against me,
Anna.

ANNA--Ain't I yust! Well, lemme tell you--[She glances at BURKE and
stops abruptly.] Say, Mat, I'm s'prised at you. You didn't think
anything he'd said--

BURKE--[Glumly.] Sure, what else would it be?

ANNA--Think I've ever paid any attention to all his crazy bull? Gee,
you must take me for a five-year-old kid.

BURKE--[Puzzled and beginning to be irritated at her too.] I don't know
how to take you, with your saying this one minute and that the next.

ANNA--Well, he has nothing to do with it.

BURKE--Then what is it has? Tell me, and don't keep me waiting and
sweating blood.

ANNA--[Resolutely] I can't tell you--and I won't. I got a good
reason--and that's all you need to know. I can't marry you, that's all
there is to it. [Distractedly.] So, for Gawd's sake, let's talk of
something else.

BURKE--I'll not! [Then fearfully.] Is it married to someone else you
are--in the West maybe?

ANNA--[Vehemently.] I should say not.

BURKE--[Regaining his courage.] To the divil with all other reasons
then. They don't matter with me at all. [He gets to his feet
confidently, assuming a masterful tone.] I'm thinking you're the like
of them women can't make up their mind till they're drove to it. Well,
then, I'll make up your mind for you bloody quick. [He takes her by the
arms, grinning to soften his serious bullying.] We've had enough of
talk! Let you be going into your room now and be dressing in your best
and we'll be going ashore.

CHRIS--[Aroused--angrily.] No, py God, she don't do that! [Takes hold
of her arm.]

ANNA--[Who has listened to BURKE in astonishment. She draws away from
him, instinctively repelled by his tone, but not exactly sure if he is
serious or not--a trace of resentment in her voice.] Say, where do you
get that stuff?

BURKE--[Imperiously.] Never mind, now! Let you go get dressed, I'm
saying, [Then turning to CHRIS.] We'll be seeing who'll win in the
end--me or you.

CHRIS--[To ANNA--also in an authoritative tone.] You stay right here,
Anna, you hear! [ANNA stands looking from one to the other of them as
if she thought they had both gone crazy. Then the expression of her
face freezes into the hardened sneer of her experience.]

BURKE--[Violently.] She'll not! She'll do what I say! You've had your
hold on her long enough. It's my turn now.

ANNA--[With a hard laugh.] Your turn? Say, what am I, anyway?

BURKE--'Tis not what you are, 'tis what you're going to be this
day--and that's wedded to me before night comes. Hurry up now with your
dressing.

CHRIS--[Commandingly.] You don't do one tang he say, Anna! [ANNA laughs
mockingly.]

BURKE--She will, so!

CHRIS--Ay tal you she don't! Ay'm her fa'der.

BURKE--She will in spite of you. She's taking my orders from this out,
not yours.

ANNA--[Laughing again.] Orders is good!

BURKE--[Turning to her impatiently.] Hurry up now, and shake a leg.
We've no time to be wasting. [Irritated as she doesn't move.] Do you
hear what I'm telling you?

CHRIS--You stay dere, Anna!

ANNA--[At the end of her patience--blazing out at them passionately.]
You can go to hell, both of you! [There is something in her tone that
makes them forget their quarrel and turn to her in a stunned amazement.
ANNA laughs wildly.] You're just like all the rest of them--you two!
Gawd, you'd think I was a piece of furniture! I'll show you! Sit down
now! [As they hesitate--furiously.] Sit down and let me talk for a
minute. You're all wrong, see? Listen to me! I'm going to tell you
something--and then I'm going to beat it. [To BURKE--with a harsh
laugh.] I'm going to tell you a funny story, so pay attention.
[Pointing to CHRIS.] I've been meaning to turn it loose on him every
time he'd get my goat with his bull about keeping me safe inland. I
wasn't going to tell you, but you've forced me into it. What's the dif?
It's all wrong anyway, and you might as well get cured that way as any
other. [With hard mocking.] Only don't forget what you said a minute
ago about it not mattering to you what other reason I got so long as I
wasn't married to no one else.

BURKE--[Manfully.] That's my word, and I'll stick to it!

ANNA--[Laughing bitterly.] What a chance! You make me laugh, honest!
Want to bet you will? Wait 'n see! [She stands at the table rear,
looking from one to the other of the two men with her hard, mocking
smile. Then she begins, fighting to control her emotion and speak
calmly.] First thing is, I want to tell you two guys something. You was
going on's if one of you had got to own me. But nobody owns me,
see?--'cepting myself. I'll do what I please and no man, I don't give a
hoot who he is, can tell me what to do! I ain't asking either of you
for a living. I can make it myself--one way or other. I'm my own boss.
So put that in your pipe and smoke it! You and your orders!

BURKE--[Protestingly.] I wasn't meaning it that way at all and well you
know it. You've no call to be raising this rumpus with me. [Pointing to
CHRIS.] 'Tis him you've a right--

ANNA--I'm coming to him. But you--you did mean it that way, too. You
sounded--yust like all the rest. [Hysterically.] But, damn it, shut up!
Let me talk for a change!

BURKE--'Tis quare, rough talk, that--for a dacent girl the like of you!

ANNA--[With a hard laugh.] Decent? Who told you I was? [CHRIS is
sitting with bowed shoulders, his head in his hands. She leans over in
exasperation and shakes him violently by the shoulder.] Don't go to
sleep, Old Man! Listen here, I'm talking to you now!

CHRIS--[Straightening up and looking about as if he were seeking a way
to escape--with frightened foreboding in his voice.] Ay don't vant for
hear it. You vas going out of head, Ay tank, Anna.

ANNA--[Violently.] Well, living with you is enough to drive anyone off
their nut. Your bunk about the farm being so fine! Didn't I write you
year after year how rotten it was and what a dirty slave them cousins
made of me? What'd you care? Nothing! Not even enough to come out and
see me! That crazy bull about wanting to keep me away from the sea
don't go down with me! You yust didn't want to be bothered with me!
You're like all the rest of 'em!

CHRIS--[Feebly.] Anna! It ain't so--

ANNA--[Not heeding his interruption--revengefully.] But one thing I
never wrote you. It was one of them cousins that you think is such nice
people--the youngest son--Paul--that started me wrong. [Loudly.] It
wasn't none of my fault. I hated him worse 'n hell and he knew it. But
he was big and strong--[Pointing to Burke]--like you!

BURKE--[Half springing to his feet--his fists clenched,] God blarst it!
[He sinks slowly back in his chair again, the knuckles showing white on
his clenched hands, his face tense with the effort to suppress his
grief and rage.]

CHRIS--[In a cry of horrified pain.] Anna!

ANNA--[To him--seeming not to have heard their interruptions.] That was
why I run away from the farm. That was what made me get a yob as nurse
girl in St. Paul. [With a hard, mocking laugh.] And you think that was
a nice yob for a girl, too, don't you? [Sarcastically.] With all them
nice inland fellers yust looking for a chance to marry me, I s'pose.
Marry me? What a chance! They wasn't looking for marrying. [As BURKE
lets a groan of fury escape him--desperately.] I'm owning up to
everything fair and square. I was caged in, I tell you--yust like in
yail--taking care of other people's kids--listening to 'em bawling and
crying day and night--when I wanted to be out--and I was
lonesome--lonesome as hell! [With a sudden weariness in her voice.] So
I give up finally. What was the use? [She stops and looks at the two
men. Both are motionless and silent. CHRIS seems in a stupor of
despair, his house of cards fallen about him. BURKE's face is livid
with the rage that is eating him up, but he is too stunned and
bewildered yet to find a vent for it. The condemnation she feels in
their silence goads ANNA into a harsh, strident defiance.] You don't
say nothing--either of you--but I know what you're thinking. You're
like all the rest! [To CHRIS--furiously.] And who's to blame for it, me
or you? If you'd even acted like a man--if you'd even been a regular
father and had me with you--maybe things would be different!

CHRIS--[In agony.] Don't talk dat vay, Anna! Ay go crazy! Ay von't
listen! [Puts his hands over his ears.]

ANNA--[Infuriated by his action--stridently.] You will too listen! [She
leans over and pulls his hands from his ears--with hysterical rage.]
You--keeping me safe inland--I wasn't no nurse girl the last two
years--I lied when I wrote you--I was in a house, that's what!--yes,
that kind of a house--the kind sailors like you and Mat goes to in
port--and your nice inland men, too--and all men, God damn 'em! I hate
'em! Hate 'em! [She breaks into hysterical sobbing, throwing herself
into the chair and hiding her face in her hands on the table. The two
men have sprung to their feet.]

CHRIS--[Whimpering like a child.] Anna! Anna! It's lie! It's lie! [He
stands wringing his hands together and begins to weep.]

BURKE--[His whole great body tense like a spring--dully and gropingly.]
So that's what's in it!

ANNA--[Raising her head at the sound of his voice--with extreme mocking
bitterness.] I s'pose you remember your promise, Mat? No other reason
was to count with you so long as I wasn't married already. So I s'pose
you want me to get dressed and go ashore, don't you? [She laughs.] Yes,
you do!

BURKE--[On the verge of his outbreak--stammeringly.] God stiffen you!

ANNA--[Trying to keep up her hard, bitter tone, but gradually letting a
note of pitiful pleading creep in.] I s'pose if I tried to tell you I
wasn't--that--no more you'd believe me, wouldn't you? Yes, you would!
And if I told you that yust getting out in this barge, and being on the
sea had changed me and made me feel different about things,'s if all
I'd been through wasn't me and didn't count and was yust like it never
happened--you'd laugh, wouldn't you? And you'd die laughing sure if I
said that meeting you that funny way that night in the fog, and
afterwards seeing that you was straight goods stuck on me, had got me
to thinking for the first time, and I sized you up as a different kind
of man--a sea man as different from the ones on land as water is from
mud--and that was why I got stuck on you, too. I wanted to marry you
and fool you, but I couldn't. Don't you see how I'd changed? I couldn't
marry you with you believing a lie--and I was shamed to tell you the
truth--till the both of you forced my hand, and I seen you was the same
as all the rest. And now, give me a bawling out and beat it, like I can
tell you're going to. [She stops, looking at BURKE. He is silent, his
face averted, his features beginning to work with fury. She pleads
passionately.] Will you believe it if I tell you that loving you has
made me--clean? It's the straight goods, honest! [Then as he doesn't
reply--bitterly.] Like hell you will! You're like all the rest!

BURKE--[Blazing out--turning on her in a perfect frenzy of rage--his
voice trembling with passion.] The rest, is it? God's curse on you!
Clane, is it? You slut, you, I'll be killing you now! [He picks up the
chair on which he has been sitting and, swinging it high over his
shoulder, springs toward her. CHRIS rushes forward with a cry of alarm,
trying to ward off the blow from his daughter. ANNA looks up into
BURKE'S eyes with the fearlessness of despair. BURKE checks himself,
the chair held in the air.]

CHRIS--[Wildly.] Stop, you crazy fool! You vant for murder her!

ANNA--[Pushing her father away brusquely, her eyes still holding
BURKE'S.] Keep out of this, you! [To BURKE--dully.] Well, ain't you got
the nerve to do it? Go ahead! I'll be thankful to you, honest. I'm sick
of the whole game.

BURKE--[Throwing the chair away into a corner of the room--helplessly.]
I can't do it, God help me, and your two eyes looking at me.
[Furiously.] Though I do be thinking I'd have a good right to smash
your skull like a rotten egg. Was there iver a woman in the world had
the rottenness in her that you have, and was there iver a man the like
of me was made the fool of the world, and me thinking thoughts about
you, and having great love for you, and dreaming dreams of the fine
life we'd have when we'd be wedded! [His voice high pitched in a
lamentation that is like a keen]. Yerra, God help me! I'm destroyed
entirely and my heart is broken in bits! I'm asking God Himself, was it
for this He'd have me roaming the earth since I was a lad only, to come
to black shame in the end, where I'd be giving a power of love to a
woman is the same as others you'd meet in any hooker-shanty in port,
with red gowns on them and paint on their grinning mugs, would be
sleeping with any man for a dollar or two!

ANNA--[In a scream.] Don't, Mat! For Gawd's sake! [Then raging and
pounding on the table with her hands.] Get out of here! Leave me alone!
Get out of here!

BURKE--[His anger rushing back on him.] I'll be going, surely! And I'll
be drinking sloos of whiskey will wash that black kiss of yours off my
lips; and I'll be getting dead rotten drunk so I'll not remember if
'twas iver born you was at all; and I'll be shipping away on some boat
will take me to the other end of the world where I'll never see your
face again! [He turns toward the door]

CHRIS--[Who has been standing in a stupor--suddenly grasping BURKE by
the arm--stupidly] No, you don't go. Ay tank maybe it's better Anna
marry you now.

BURKE--[Shaking CHRIS off--furiously] Lave go of me, ye old ape! Marry
her, is it? I'd see her roasting in hell first! I'm shipping away out
of this, I'm telling you! [Pointing to Anna--passionately] And my curse
on you and the curse of Almighty God and all the Saints! You've
destroyed me this day and may you lie awake in the long nights,
tormented with thoughts of Mat Burke and the great wrong you've done
him!

ANNA--[In anguish] Mat! [But he turns without another word and strides
out of the doorway. ANNA looks after him wildly, starts to run after
him, then hides her face in her outstretched arms, sobbing. CHRIS
stands in a stupor, staring at the floor.]

CHRIS--[After a pause, dully.] Ay tank Ay go ashore, too.

ANNA--[Looking up, wildly.] Not after him! Let him go! Don't you dare--

CHRIS--[Somberly.] Ay go for gat drink.

ANNA--[With a harsh laugh.] So I'm driving you to drink, too, eh? I
s'pose you want to get drunk so's you can forget--like him?

CHRIS--[Bursting out angrily.] Yes, Ay vant! You tank Ay like hear dem
tangs. [Breaking down--weeping.] Ay tank you vasn't dat kind of gel,
Anna.

ANNA--[Mockingly.] And I s'pose you want me to beat it, don't you? You
don't want me here disgracing you, I s'pose?

CHRIS--No, you stay here! [Goes over and pats her on the shoulder, the
tears running down his face.] Ain't your fault, Anna, Ay know dat. [She
looks up at him, softened. He bursts into rage.] It's dat ole davil,
sea, do this to me! [He shakes his fist at the door.] It's her dirty
tricks! It vas all right on barge with yust you and me. Den she bring
dat Irish fallar in fog, she make you like him, she make you fight with
me all time! If dat Irish fallar don't never come, you don't never tal
me dem tangs, Ay don't never know, and every tang's all right. [He
shakes his fist again,] Dirty ole davil!

ANNA--[With spent weariness.] Oh, what's the use? Go on ashore and get
drunk.

CHRIS--[Goes into room on left and gets his cap. He goes to the door,
silent and stupid--then turns.] You vait here, Anna?

ANNA--[Dully] Maybe--and maybe not. Maybe I'll get drunk, too. Maybe
I'll--But what the hell do you care what I do? Go on and beat it.
[CHRIS turns stupidly and goes out. ANNA sits at the table, staring
straight in front of her.]

[The Curtain Falls]




ACT IV


SCENE--Same as Act Three, about nine o'clock of a foggy night two days
later. The whistles of steamers in the harbor can be heard. The cabin
is lighted by a small lamp on the table. A suitcase stands in the
middle of the floor. ANNA is sitting in the rocking-chair. She wears a
hat, is all dressed up as in Act One. Her face is pale, looks terribly
tired and worn, as if the two days just past had been ones of suffering
and sleepless nights. She stares before her despondently, her chin in
her hands. There is a timid knock on the door in rear. ANNA jumps to
her feet with a startled exclamation and looks toward the door with an
expression of mingled hope and fear.

ANNA--[Faintly.] Come in. [Then summoning her courage--more
resolutely.] Come in. [The door is opened and CHRIS appears in the
doorway. He is in a very bleary, bedraggled condition, suffering from
the after effects of his drunk. A tin pail full of foaming beer is in
his hand. He comes forward, his eyes avoiding ANNA'S. He mutters
stupidly.] It's foggy.

ANNA--[Looking him over with contempt.] So you come back at last, did
you? You're a fine looking sight! [Then jeeringly.] I thought you'd
beaten it for good on account of the disgrace I'd brought on you.

CHRIS--[Wincing-faintly.] Don't say dat, Anna, please! [He sits in a
chair by the table, setting down the can of beer, holding his head in
his hands]

ANNA--[Looks at him with a certain sympathy.] What's the trouble?
Feeling sick?

CHRIS--[Dully.] Inside my head feel sick.

ANNA--Well, what d'you expect after being soused for two days?
[Resentfully.] It serves you right. A fine thing--you leaving me alone
on this barge all that time!

CHRIS--[Humbly.] Ay'm sorry, Anna.

ANNA--[Scornfully] Sorry!

CHRIS--But Ay'm not sick inside head vay you mean. Ay'm sick from tank
too much about you, about me.

ANNA--And how about me? D'you suppose I ain't been thinking, too?

CHRIS--Ay'm sorry, Anna. [He sees her bag and gives a start] You pack
your bag, Anna? You vas going--?

ANNA--[Forcibly.] Yes, I was going right back to what you think.

CHRIS--Anna!

ANNA--I went ashore to get a train for New York. I'd been waiting and
waiting 'till I was sick of it. Then I changed my mind and decided not
to go to-day. But I'm going first thing to-morrow, so it'll all be the
same in the end.

CHRIS--[Raising his head--pleadingly] No, you never do dat, Anna!

ANNA--[With a sneer.] Why not, I'd like to know?

CHRIS--You don't never gat to do--dat vay--no more, Ay tal you. Ay fix
dat up all right.

ANNA--[Suspiciously.] Fix what up?

CHRIS--[Not seeming to have heard her question--sadly.] You vas
vaiting, you say? You vasn't vaiting for me, Ay bet.

ANNA--[Callously.] You'd win.

CHRIS--For dat Irish fallar?

ANNA--[Defiantly.] Yes--if you want to know! [Then with a forlorn
laugh.] If he did come back it'd only because he wanted to beat me up
or kill me, I suppose. But even if he did, I'd rather have him come
than not show up at all. I wouldn't care what he did.

CHRIS--Ay guess it's true you vas in love with him all right.

ANNA--You guess!

CHRIS--[Turning to her earnestly.] And Ay'm sorry for you like hell he
don't come, Anna!

ANNA--[Softened.] Seems to me you've changed your tune a lot.

CHRIS--Ay've been tanking, and Ay guess it vas all my fault--all bad
tangs dat happen to you. [Pleadingly.] You try for not hate me, Anna.
Ay'm crazy ole fool, dat's all.

ANNA--Who said I hated you?

CHRIS--Ay'm sorry for everytang Ay do wrong for you, Anna. Ay vant for
you be happy all rest of your life for make up! It make you happy marry
dat Irish fallar, Ay vant it, too.

ANNA--[Dully.]--Well, there ain't no chance. But I'm glad you think
different about it, anyway.

CHRIS--[Supplicatingly.] And you tank--maybe--you forgive me sometime?

ANNA--[With a wan smile.] I'll forgive you right now.

CHRIS--[Seizing her hand and kissing it--brokenly.] Anna lilla! Anna
lilla!

ANNA--[Touched but a bit embarrassed.] Don't bawl about it. There ain't
nothing to forgive, anyway. It ain't your fault, and it ain't mine, and
it ain't his neither. We're all poor nuts, and things happen, and we
yust get mixed in wrong, that's all.

CHRIS--[Eagerly.] You say right tang, Anna, py golly! It ain't nobody's
fault! [Shaking his fist.] It's dat ole davil, sea!

ANNA--[With an exasperated laugh.] Gee, won't you ever can that stuff?
[CHRIS relapses into injured silence. After a pause ANNA continues
curiously.] You said a minute ago you'd fixed something up--about me.
What was it?

CHRIS--[After a hesitating pause.] Ay'm shipping avay on sea again,
Anna.

ANNA--[Astounded.] You're--what?

CHRIS--Ay sign on steamer sail to-morrow. Ay gat my ole yob--bo'sun.
[ANNA stares at him. As he goes on, a bitter smile comes over her
face.] Ay tank dat's best tang for you. Ay only bring you bad luck, Ay
tank. Ay make your mo'der's life sorry. Ay don't vant make yours dat
way, but Ay do yust same. Dat ole davil, sea, she make me Yonah man
ain't no good for nobody. And Ay tank now it ain't no use fight with
sea. No man dat live going to beat her, py yingo!

ANNA--[With a laugh of helpless bitterness.] So that's how you've fixed
me, is it?

CHRIS--Yes, Ay tank if dat ole davil gat me back she leave you alone
den.

ANNA--[Bitterly.] But, for Gawd's sake, don't you see, you're doing the
same thing you've always done? Don't you see--? [But she sees the look
of obsessed stubbornness on her father's face and gives it up
helplessly.] But what's the use of talking. You ain't right, that's
what. I'll never blame you for nothing no more. But how you could
figure out that was fixing me--!

CHRIS--Dat ain't all. Ay gat dem fallars in steam-ship office to pay
you all money coming to me every month vhile Ay'm avay.

ANNA--[With a hard laugh.] Thanks. But I guess I won't be hard up for
no small change.

CHRIS--[Hurt--humbly.] It ain't much, Ay know, but it's plenty for keep
you so you never gat go.

ANNA--[Shortly.] Shut up, will you? We'll talk about it later, see?

CHRIS--[After a pause--ingratiatingly.] You like Ay go ashore look for
dat Irish fallar, Anna?

ANNA--[Angrily.] Not much! Think I want to drag him back?

CHRIS--[After a pause--uncomfortably.] Py golly, dat booze don't go
veil. Give me fever, Ay tank, Ay feel hot like hell. [He takes off his
coat and lets it drop on the floor. There is a loud thud.]

ANNA--[With a start.] What you got in your pocket, for Pete's sake--a
ton of lead? [She reaches down, takes the coat and pulls out a
revolver--looks from it to him in amazement.] A gun? What were you
doing with this?

CHRIS--[Sheepishly.] Ay forgat. Ain't nutting. Ain't loaded, anyvay.

ANNA--[Breaking it open to make sure--then closing it again--looking at
him suspiciously.] That ain't telling me why you got it?

CHRIS--[Sheepishly.] Ay'm ole fool. Ay gat it vhen Ay go ashore first.
Ay tank den it's all fault of dat Irish fallar.

ANNA--[With a shudder.] Say, you're crazier than I thought. I never
dreamt you'd go that far.

CHRIS--[Quickly.] Ay don't. Ay gat better sense right avay. Ay don't
never buy bullets even. It ain't his fault, Ay know.

ANNA--[Still suspicious of him.] Well, I'll take care of this for a
while, loaded or not. [She puts it in the drawer of table and closes
the drawer.]

CHRIS--[Placatingly.] Throw it overboard if you vant. Ay don't care,
[Then after a pause.] Py golly, Ay tank Ay go lie down. Ay feel sick.
[ANNA takes a magazine from the table. CHRIS hesitates by her chair.]
Ve talk again before Ay go, yes?

ANNA--[Dully.] Where's this ship going to?

CHRIS--Cape Town. Dat's in South Africa. She's British steamer called
Londonderry. [He stands hesitatingly--finally blurts out.] Anna--you
forgive me sure?

ANNA--[Wearily.] Sure I do. You ain't to blame. You're yust--what you
are--like me.

CHRIS--[Pleadingly.] Den--you lat me kiss you again once?

ANNA--[Raising her face--forcing a wan smile.] Sure. No hard feelings.

CHRIS--[Kisses her--brokenly.] Anna lilla! Ay--[He fights for words to
express himself, but finds none--miserably--with a sob.] Ay can't say
it. Good-night, Anna.

ANNA--Good-night. [He picks up the can of beer and goes slowly into the
room on left, his shoulders bowed, his head sunk forward dejectedly. He
closes the door after him. ANNA turns over the pages of the magazine,
trying desperately to banish her thoughts by looking at the pictures.
This fails to distract her, and flinging the magazine back on the
table, she springs to her feet and walks about the cabin distractedly,
clenching and unclenching her hands. She speaks aloud to herself in a
tense, trembling voice.] Gawd, I can't stand this much longer! What am
I waiting for anyway?--like a damn fool! [She laughs helplessly, then
checks herself abruptly, as she hears the sound of heavy footsteps on
the deck outside. She appears to recognize these and her face lights up
with joy. She gasps:] Mat! [A strange terror seems suddenly to seize
her. She rushes to the table, takes the revolver out of drawer and
crouches down in the corner, left, behind the cupboard. A moment later
the door is flung open and MAT BURKE appears in the doorway. He is in
bad shape--his clothes torn and dirty, covered with sawdust as if he
had been grovelling or sleeping on barroom floors. There is a red
bruise on his forehead over one of his eyes, another over one
cheekbone, his knuckles are skinned and raw--plain evidence of the
fighting he has been through on his "bat." His eyes are bloodshot and
heavy-lidded, his face has a bloated look. But beyond these
appearances--the results of heavy drinking--there is an expression in
his eyes of wild mental turmoil, of impotent animal rage baffled by its
own abject misery.]

BURKE--[Peers blinkingly about the cabin--hoarsely.] Let you not be
hiding from me, whoever's here--though 'tis well you know I'd have a
right to come back and murder you. [He stops to listen. Hearing no
sound, he closes the door behind him and comes forward to the table. He
throws himself into the rocking-chair--despondently.] There's no one
here, I'm thinking, and 'tis a great fool I am to be coming. [With a
sort of dumb, uncomprehending anguish.] Yerra, Mat Burke, 'tis a great
jackass you've become and what's got into you at all, at all? She's
gone out of this long ago, I'm telling you, and you'll never see her
face again. [ANNA stands up, hesitating, struggling between joy and
fear. BURKE'S eyes fall on ANNA'S bag. He leans over to examine it.]
What's this? [Joyfully.] It's hers. She's not gone! But where is she?
Ashore? [Darkly.] What would she be doing ashore on this rotten night?
[His face suddenly convulsed with grief and rage.] 'Tis that, is it?
Oh, God's curse on her! [Raging.] I'll wait 'till she comes and choke
her dirty life out. [ANNA starts, her face grows hard. She steps into
the room, the revolver in her right hand by her side.]

ANNA--[In a cold, hard tone.] What are you doing here?

BURKE--[Wheeling about with a terrified gasp] Glory be to God! [They
remain motionless and silent for a moment, holding each other's eyes.]

ANNA--[In the same hard voice] Well, can't you talk?

BURKE--[Trying to fall into an easy, careless tone] You've a year's
growth scared out of me, coming at me so sudden and me thinking I was
alone.

ANNA--You've got your nerve butting in here without knocking or
nothing. What d'you want?

BURKE--[Airily] Oh, nothing much. I was wanting to have a last word
with you, that's all. [He moves a step toward her.]

ANNA--[Sharply--raising the revolver in her hand.] Careful now! Don't
try getting too close. I heard what you said you'd do to me.

BURKE--[Noticing the revolver for the first time.] Is it murdering me
you'd be now, God forgive you? [Then with a contemptuous laugh.] Or is
it thinking I'd be frightened by that old tin whistle? [He walks
straight for her.]

ANNA--[Wildly.] Look out, I tell you!

BURKE--[Who has come so close that the revolver is almost touching his
chest.] Let you shoot, then! [Then with sudden wild grief.] Let you
shoot, I'm saying, and be done with it! Let you end me with a shot and
I'll be thanking you, for it's a rotten dog's life I've lived the past
two days since I've known what you are, 'til I'm after wishing I was
never born at all!

ANNA--[Overcome--letting the revolver drop to the floor, as if her
fingers had no strength to hold it--hysterically.] What d'you want
coming here? Why don't you beat it? Go on! [She passes him and sinks
down in the rocking-chair.]

BURKE--[Following her--mournfully.] 'Tis right you'd be asking why did
I come. [Then angrily.] 'Tis because 'tis a great weak fool of the
world I am, and me tormented with the wickedness you'd told of
yourself, and drinking oceans of booze that'd make me forget. Forget?
Divil a word I'd forget, and your face grinning always in front of my
eyes, awake or asleep, 'til I do be thinking a madhouse is the proper
place for me.

ANNA--[Glancing at his hands and--face--scornfully] You look like you
ought to be put away some place. Wonder you wasn't pulled in. You been
scrapping, too, ain't you?

BURKE--I have--with every scut would take off his coat to me!
[Fiercely.] And each time I'd be hitting one a clout in the mug, it
wasn't his face I'd be seeing at all, but yours, and me wanting to
drive you a blow would knock you out of this world where I wouldn't be
seeing or thinking more of you.

ANNA--[Her lips trembling pitifully] Thanks!

BURKE--[Walking up and down--distractedly.] That's right, make game of
me! Oh, I'm a great coward surely, to be coming back to speak with you
at all. You've a right to laugh at me.

ANNA--I ain't laughing at you, Mat.

BURKE--[Unheeding.] You to be what you are, and me to be Mat Burke, and
me to be drove back to look at you again! 'Tis black shame is on me!

ANNA--[Resentfully.] Then get out. No one's holding you!

BURKE--[Bewilderedly] And me to listen to that talk from a woman like
you and be frightened to close her mouth with a slap! Oh, God help me,
I'm a yellow coward for all men to spit at! [Then furiously] But I'll
not be getting out of this 'till I've had me word. [Raising his fist
threateningly] And let you look out how you'd drive me! [Letting his
fist fall helplessly] Don't be angry now! I'm raving like a real
lunatic, I'm thinking, and the sorrow you put on me has my brains
drownded in grief. [Suddenly bending down to her and grasping her arm
intensely] Tell me it's a lie, I'm saying! That's what I'm after coming
to hear you say.

ANNA--[Dully] A lie? What?

BURKE--[With passionate entreaty] All the badness you told me two days
back. Sure it must be a lie! You was only making game of me, wasn't
you? Tell me 'twas a lie, Anna, and I'll be saying prayers of thanks on
my two knees to the Almighty God!

ANNA--[Terribly shaken--faintly.] I can't. Mat. [As he turns
away--imploringly.] Oh, Mat, won't you see that no matter what I was I
ain't that any more? Why, listen! I packed up my bag this afternoon and
went ashore. I'd been waiting here all alone for two days, thinking
maybe you'd come back--thinking maybe you'd think over all I'd
said--and maybe--oh, I don't know what I was hoping! But I was afraid
to even go out of the cabin for a second, honest--afraid you might come
and not find me here. Then I gave up hope when you didn't show up and I
went to the railroad station. I was going to New York. I was going
back--

BURKE--[Hoarsely.] God's curse on you!

ANNA--Listen, Mat! You hadn't come, and I'd gave up hope. But--in the
station--I couldn't go. I'd bought my ticket and everything. [She takes
the ticket from her dress and tries to hold it before his eyes.] But I
got to thinking about you--and I couldn't take the train--I couldn't!
So I come back here--to wait some more. Oh, Mat, don't you see I've
changed? Can't you forgive what's dead and gone--and forget it?

BURKE--[Turning on her--overcome by rage again.] Forget, is it? I'll
not forget 'til my dying day, I'm telling you, and me tormented with
thoughts. [In a frenzy.] Oh, I'm wishing I had wan of them fornenst me
this minute and I'd beat him with my fists 'till he'd be a bloody
corpse! I'm wishing the whole lot of them will roast in hell 'til the
Judgment Day--and yourself along with them, for you're as bad as they
are.

ANNA--[Shuddering.] Mat! [Then after a pause--in a voice of dead, stony
calm.] Well, you've had your say. Now you better beat it.

BURKE--[Starts slowly for the door--hesitates--then after a pause.] And
what'll you be doing?

ANNA--What difference does it make to you?

BURKE--I'm asking you!

ANNA--[In the same tone.] My bag's packed and I got my ticket. I'll go
to New York to-morrow.

BURKE--[Helplessly.] You mean--you'll be doing the same again?

ANNA--[Stonily.] Yes.

BURKE--[In anguish.] You'll not! Don't torment me with that talk! 'Tis
a she-divil you are sent to drive me mad entirely!

ANNA--[Her voice breaking.] Oh, for Gawd's sake, Mat, leave me alone!
Go away! Don't you see I'm licked? Why d'you want to keep on kicking me?

BURKE--[Indignantly.] And don't you deserve the worst I'd say, God
forgive you?

ANNA--All right. Maybe I do. But don't rub it in. Why ain't you done
what you said you was going to? Why ain't you got that ship was going
to take you to the other side of the earth where you'd never see me
again?

BURKE--I have.

ANNA--[Startled.] What--then you're going--honest?

BURKE--I signed on to-day at noon, drunk as I was--and she's sailing
to-morrow.

ANNA--And where's she going to?

BURKE--Cape Town.

ANNA--[The memory of having heard that name a little while before
coming to her--with a start, confusedly.] Cape Town? Where's that. Far
away?

BURKE--'Tis at the end of Africa. That's far for you.

ANNA--[Forcing a laugh.] You're keeping your word all right, ain't you?
[After a slight pause--curiously.] What's the boat's name?

BURKE--The Londonderry.

ANNA--[It suddenly comes to her that this is the same ship her father
is sailing on.] The Londonderry! It's the same--Oh, this is too much!
[With wild, ironical laughter.] Ha-ha-ha!

BURKE--What's up with you now?

ANNA--Ha-ha-ha! It's funny, funny! I'll die laughing!

BURKE--[Irritated.] Laughing at what?

ANNA--It's a secret. You'll know soon enough. It's funny. [Controlling
herself--after a pause--cynically.] What kind of a place is this Cape
Town? Plenty of dames there, I suppose?

BURKE--To hell with them! That I may never see another woman to my
dying hour!

ANNA--That's what you say now, but I'll bet by the time you get there
you'll have forgot all about me and start in talking the same old bull
you talked to me to the first one you meet.

BURKE--[Offended.] I'll not, then! God mend you, is it making me out to
be the like of yourself you are, and you taking up with this one and
that all the years of your life?

ANNA--[Angrily assertive.] Yes, that's yust what I do mean! You been
doing the same thing all your life, picking up a new girl in every
port. How're you any better than I was?

BURKE--[Thoroughly exasperated.] Is it no shame you have at all? I'm a
fool to be wasting talk on you and you hardened in badness. I'll go out
of this and lave you alone forever. [He starts for the door--then stops
to turn on her furiously] And I suppose 'tis the same lies you told
them all before that you told to me?

ANNA--[Indignantly.] That's a lie! I never did!

BURKE--[Miserably.] You'd be saying that, anyway.

ANNA--[Forcibly, with growing intensity.] Are you trying to accuse
me--of being in love--really in love--with them?

BURKE--I'm thinking you were, surely.

ANNA--[Furiously, as if this were the last insult--advancing on him
threateningly] You mutt, you! I've stood enough from you. Don't you
dare. [With scornful bitterness.] Love 'em! Oh, my Gawd! You damn
thick-head! Love 'em? [Savagely.] I hated 'em, I tell you! Hated 'em,
hated 'em, hated 'em! And may Gawd strike me dead this minute and my
mother, too, if she was alive, if I ain't telling you the honest truth!

BURKE--[Immensely pleased by her vehemence--a light beginning to break
over his face--but still uncertain, torn between doubt and the desire
to believe--helplessly.] If I could only be believing you now!

ANNA--[Distractedly.] Oh, what's the use? What's the use of me talking?
What's the use of anything? [Pleadingly.] Oh, Mat, you mustn't think
that for a second! You mustn't! Think all the other bad about me you
want to, and I won't kick, 'cause you've a right to. But don't think
that! [On the point of tears.] I couldn't bear it! It'd be yust too
much to know you was going away where I'd never see you again--thinking
that about me!

BURKE--[After an inward struggle--tensely--forcing out the words with
difficulty.] If I was believing--that you'd never had love for any
other man in the world but me--I could be forgetting the rest, maybe.

ANNA--[With a cry of joy.] Mat!

BURKE--[Slowly.] If 'tis truth you're after telling, I'd have a right,
maybe, to believe you'd changed--and that I'd changed you myself 'til
the thing you'd been all your life wouldn't be you any more at all.

ANNA--[Hanging on his words--breathlessly.] Oh, Mat! That's what I been
trying to tell you all along!

BURKE--[Simply.] For I've a power of strength in me to lead men the way
I want, and women, too, maybe, and I'm thinking I'd change you to a new
woman entirely, so I'd never know, or you either, what kind of woman
you'd been in the past at all.

ANNA--Yes, you could, Mat! I know you could!

BURKE--And I'm thinking 'twasn't your fault, maybe, but having that old
ape for a father that left you to grow up alone, made you what you was.
And if I could be believing 'tis only me you--

ANNA--[Distractedly.] You got to believe it. Mat! What can I do? I'll
do anything, anything you want to prove I'm not lying!

BURKE--[Suddenly seems to have a solution. He feels in the pocket of
his coat and grasps something--solemnly.] Would you be willing to swear
an oath, now--a terrible, fearful oath would send your soul to the
divils in hell if you was lying?

ANNA--[Eagerly.] Sure, I'll swear, Mat--on anything!

BURKE--[Takes a small, cheap old crucifix from his pocket and holds it
up for her to see.] Will you swear on this?

ANNA--[Reaching out for it.] Yes. Sure I will. Give it to me.

BURKE--[Holding it away.] 'Tis a cross was given me by my mother, God
rest her soul. [He makes the sign of the cross mechanically.] I was a
lad only, and she told me to keep it by me if I'd be waking or sleeping
and never lose it, and it'd bring me luck. She died soon after. But I'm
after keeping it with me from that day to this, and I'm telling you
there's great power in it, and 'tis great bad luck it's saved me from
and me roaming the seas, and I having it tied round my neck when my
last ship sunk, and it bringing me safe to land when the others went to
their death. [Very earnestly.] And I'm warning you now, if you'd swear
an oath on this, 'tis my old woman herself will be looking down from
Hivin above, and praying Almighty God and the Saints to put a great
curse on you if she'd hear you swearing a lie!

ANNA--[Awed by his manner--superstitiously] I wouldn't have the
nerve--honest--if it was a lie. But it's the truth and I ain't scared
to swear. Give it to me.

BURKE--[Handing it to her--almost frightenedly, as if he feared for her
safety.] Be careful what you'd swear, I'm saying.

ANNA--[Holding the cross gingerly.] Well--what do you want me to swear?
You say it.

BURKE--Swear I'm the only man in the world ivir you felt love for.

ANNA--[Looking into his eyes steadily] I swear it.

BURKE--And that you'll be forgetting from this day all the badness
you've done and never do the like of it again.

ANNA--[Forcibly.] I swear it! I swear it by God!

BURKE--And may the blackest curse of God strike you if you're lying.
Say it now!

ANNA--And may the blackest curse of God strike me if I'm lying!

BURKE--[With a stupendous sigh.] Oh, glory be to God, I'm after
believing you now! [He takes the cross from her hand, his face beaming
with joy, and puts it back in his pocket. He puts his arm about her
waist and is about to kiss her when he stops, appalled by some terrible
doubt.]

ANNA--[Alarmed.] What's the matter with you?

BURKE--[With sudden fierce questioning.] Is it Catholic ye are?

ANNA--[Confused.] No. Why?

BURKE--[Filled with a sort of bewildered foreboding.] Oh, God, help me!
[With a dark glance of suspicion at her.] There's some divil's trickery
in it, to be swearing an oath on a Catholic cross and you wan of the
others.

ANNA--[Distractedly.] Oh, Mat, don't you believe me?

BURKE--[Miserably.] If it isn't a Catholic you are--

ANNA--I ain't nothing. What's the difference? Didn't you hear me swear?

BURKE--[Passionately.] Oh, I'd a right to stay away from you--but I
couldn't! I was loving you in spite of it all and wanting to be with
you, God forgive me, no matter what you are. I'd go mad if I'd not have
you! I'd be killing the world--[He seizes her in his arms and kisses
her fiercely.]

ANNA--[With a gasp of joy.] Mat!

BURKE--[Suddenly holding her away from him and staring into her eyes as
if to probe into her soul--slowly.] If your oath is no proper oath at
all, I'll have to be taking your naked word for it and have you anyway,
I'm thinking--I'm needing you that bad!

ANNA--[Hurt--reproachfully.] Mat! I swore, didn't I?

BURKE--[Defiantly, as if challenging fate.] Oath or no oath, 'tis no
matter. We'll be wedded in the morning, with the help of God. [Still
more defiantly.] We'll be happy now, the two of us, in spite of the
divil! [He crushes her to him and kisses her again. The door on the
left is pushed open and CHRIS appears in the doorway. He stands
blinking at them. At first the old expression of hatred of BURKE comes
into his eyes instinctively. Then a look of resignation and relief
takes its place. His face lights up with a sudden happy thought. He
turns back into the bedroom--reappears immediately with the tin can of
beer in his hand grinning.]

CHRIS--Me have drink on this, py golly! [They break away from each
other with startled exclamations.]

BURKE--[Explosively.] God stiffen it! [He takes a step toward CHRIS
threateningly.]

ANNA--[Happily--to her father.] That's the way to talk! [With a laugh.]
And say, it's about time for you and Mat to kiss and make up. You're
going to be shipmates on the Londonderry, did you know it?

BURKE--[Astounded.] Shipmates--Has himself--

CHRIS--[Equally astounded.] Ay vas bo'sun on her.

BURKE--The divil! [Then angrily.] You'd be going back to sea and
leaving her alone, would you?

ANNA--[Quickly.] It's all right, Mat. That's where he belongs, and I
want him to go. You got to go, too; we'll need the money. [With a
laugh, as she gets the glasses.] And as for me being alone, that runs
in the family, and I'll get used to it. [Pouring out their glasses.]
I'll get a little house somewhere and I'll make a regular place for you
two to come back to,--wait and see. And now you drink up and be friends.

BURKE--[Happily--but still a bit resentful against the old man.] Sure!
[Clinking his glass against CHRIS'.] Here's luck to you! [He drinks.]

CHRIS--[Subdued--his face melancholy.] Skoal. [He drinks.]

BURKE--[To Anna, with a wink.] You'll not be lonesome long. I'll see to
that, with the help of God. 'Tis himself here will be having a
grandchild to ride on his foot, I'm telling you!

ANNA--[Turning away in embarrassment.] Quit the kidding, now. [She
picks up her bag and goes into the room on left. As soon as she is gone
BURKE relapses into an attitude of gloomy thought. CHRIS stares at his
beer absent-mindedly. Finally BURKE turns on him.]

BURKE--Is it any religion at all you have, you and your Anna?

CHRIS--[Surprised.] Vhy yes. Ve vas Lutheran in ole country.

BURKE--[Horrified.] Luthers, is it? [Then with a grim resignation,
slowly, aloud to himself.] Well, damned then surely. Yerra, what's the
difference? 'Tis the will of God, anyway.

CHRIS--[Moodily preoccupied with his own thoughts--speaks with somber
premonition as ANNA re-enters from the left.] It's funny. It's queer,
yes--you and me shipping on same boat dat vay. It ain't right. Ay don't
know--it's dat funny vay ole davil sea do her vorst dirty tricks, yes.
It's so. [He gets up and goes back and, opening the door, stares out
into the darkness.]

BURKE--[Nodding his head in gloomy acquiescence--with a great sigh.]
I'm fearing maybe you have the right of it for once, divil take you.

ANNA--[Forcing a laugh.] Gee, Mat, you ain't agreeing with him, are
you? [She comes forward and puts her arm about his shoulder--with a
determined gaiety.] Aw say, what's the matter? Cut out the gloom. We're
all fixed now, ain't we, me and you? [Pours out more beer into his
glass and fills one for herself--slaps him on the back.] Come on!
Here's to the sea, no matter what! Be a game sport and drink to that!
Come on! [She gulps down her glass. Burke banishes his superstitious
premonitions with a defiant jerk of his head, grins up at her, and
drinks to her toast.]

CHRIS--[Looking out into the night--lost in his somber
preoccupation--shakes his head and mutters.] Fog, fog, fog, all bloody
time. You can't see vhere you vas going, no. Only dat ole davil,
sea--she knows! [The two stare at him. From the harbor comes the
muffled, mournful wail of steamers' whistles.]

[The Curtain Falls]










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Anna Christie, by Eugene O'Neill

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANNA CHRISTIE ***

***** This file should be named 4025.txt or 4025.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/0/2/4025/

Produced by Charles Franks, Robert Rowe and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team. HTML version by Al Haines.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
ILE

Eugene O'Neill


SCENE: CAPTAIN KEENEY'S cabin on board the steam whaling ship
Atlantic Queen--a small, square compartment, about eight feet
high, with a skylight in the centre looking out on the poop deck.
On the left (_the stern of the ship_) a long bench with rough
cushions is built in against the wall. In front of the bench, a
table. Over the bench, several curtained portholes.

In the rear, left, a door leading to the captain's
sleeping-quarters. To the right of the door a small organ,
looking as if it were brand-new, is placed against the wall.

On the right, to the rear, a marble-topped, sideboard. On the
sideboard, a woman's sewing-basket. Farther forward, a doorway
leading to the companion way, and past the officers' quarters to
the main deck.

In the centre of the room, a stove. From the middle of the
ceiling a hanging lamp is suspended. The walls of the cabin are
painted white.

There is no rolling of the ship, and the light which comes
through the skylight is sickly and faint, indicating one of those
gray days of calm when ocean and sky are alike dead. The silence
is unbroken except for the measured tread of someone walking up
and down on the poop deck overhead.

It is nearing two bells--one o'clock--in the afternoon of a day
in the year 1895.

At the rise of the curtain there is a moment of intense silence.
Then the STEWARD enters and commences to clear the table of the
few dishes which still remain on it after the CAPTAIN'S dinner.
He is an old, grizzled man dressed in dungaree pants, a sweater,
and a woolen cap with ear-flaps. His manner is sullen and angry.
He stops stacking up the plates and casts a quick glance upward
at the skylight; then tiptoes over to the closed door in rear and
listens with his ear pressed to the crack. What he hears makes
his face darken and he mutters a furious curse. There is a noise
from the doorway on the right, and he darts back to the table.

BEN enters. He is an over-grown, gawky boy with a long, pinched
face. He is dressed in sweater, fur cap, etc. His teeth are
chattering with the cold and he hurries to the stove, where he
stands for a moment shivering, blowing on his hands, slapping
them against his sides, on the verge of crying.

THE STEWARD (_in relieved tones--seeing who it is_). Oh, 'tis you,
is it? What're ye shiverin' 'bout? Stay by the stove where ye
belong and ye'll find no need of chatterin'.

BEN. It's c-c-old. (_Trying to control his chattering
teeth--derisively_) Who d' ye think it were--the Old Man?

THE STEWARD. (_He makes a threatening move--BEN shrinks away._)
None o' your lip, young un, or I'll learn ye. (_More kindly_) Where
was it ye've been all o' the time--the fo'c's'le?

BEN. Yes.

THE STEWARD. Let the Old Man see ye up for'ard monkey-shinin'
with the handstand ye'll get a hidin' ye'll not forget in a
hurry.

BEN. Aw, he don't see nothin'. (_A trace of awe in his tones--he
glances upward._) He just walks up and down like he didn't notice
nobody--and stares at the ice to the no'th'ard.

THE STEWARD (_the same tone of awe creeping into his voice_). He's
always starin' at the ice. (_In a sudden rage, shaking his fist at
the skylight_) Ice, ice, ice! Damn him and damn the ice! Holdin'
us in for nigh on a year--nothin' to see but ice--stuck in it
like a fly in molasses!

BEN (_apprehensively_). Ssshh! He'll hear ye.

THE STEWARD (_raging_). Aye, damn him, and damn the Arctic seas,
and damn this stinkin' whalin' ship of his, and damn me for a
fool to ever ship on it! (_Subsiding, as if realizing the
uselessness of this outburst--shaking his head--slowly, with deep
conviction_) He's a hard man--as hard a man as ever sailed the
seas.

BEN (_solemnly_). Aye.

THE STEWARD. The two years we all signed up for are done this
day. Blessed Christ! Two years o' this dog's life, and no luck in
the fishin', and the hands half starved with the food runnin'
low, rotten as it is; and not a sign of him turnin' back for
home! (_Bitterly_) Home! I begin to doubt if ever I'll set foot on
land again. (_Excitedly_) What is it he thinks he's goin' to do?
Keep us all up here after our time is worked out till the last
man of us is starved to death or frozen? We've grub enough hardly
to last out the voyage back if we started now. What are the men
goin' to do 'bout it? Did ye hear any talk in the fo'c's'le?

BEN (_going over to him--in a half-whisper_). They said if he don't
put back south for home to-day they're goin' to mutiny.

THE STEWARD (_with grim satisfaction_). Mutiny? Aye, 'tis the only
thing they can do; and serve him right after the manner he's
treated them--'s if they weren't no better nor dogs.

BEN. The ice is all broke up to s'uth'rd. They's clear water's
far's you can see. He ain't got no excuse for not turnin' back
for home, the men says.

THE STEWARD (_bitterly_). He won't look nowheres but no'th'rd where
they's only the ice to see. He don't want to see no clear water.
All he thinks on is gittin' the ile--'s if it was our fault he
ain't had good luck with the whales. (_Shaking his head_) I think
the man's mighty nigh losin' his senses.

BEN (_awed_). D' you really think he's crazy?

THE STEWARD. Aye, it's the punishment o' God on him. Did ye hear
ever of a man who wasn't crazy do the things he does? (_Pointing
to the door in rear_) Who but a man that's mad would take his
woman--and as sweet a woman as ever was--on a stinkin' whalin'
ship to the Arctic seas to be locked in by the rotten ice for
nigh on a year, and maybe lose her senses forever--for it's sure
she'll never be the same again.

BEN (_sadly_). She useter be awful nice to me before--(_his eyes
grow wide and frightened_) she got--like she is.

THE STEWARD. Aye, she was good to all of us. 'T would have been
hell on board without her; for he's a hard man--a hard, hard
man--a driver if there ever was one. (_With a grim laugh_) I hope
he's satisfied now--drivin' her on till she's near lost her mind.
And who could blame her? 'T is a God's wonder we're not a ship
full of crazed people--with the damned ice all the time, and the
quiet so thick you're afraid to hear your own voice.

BEN (_with a frightened glance toward the door on right_). She
don't never speak to me no more--jest looks at me's if she didn't
know me.

THE STEWARD. She don't know no one--but him. She talks to
him--when she does talk--right enough.

BEN. She does nothin' all day long now but sit and sew--and then
she cries to herself without makin' no noise. I've seen her.

THE STEWARD. Aye, I could hear her through the door a while back.

BEN (_tiptoes over to the door and listens_). She's cryin' now.

THE STEWARD (_furiously--shaking his fist_). God send his soul to
hell for the devil he is!

(_There is the noise of someone coming slowly down the
companionway stairs._ THE STEWARD _hurries to his stacked-up
dishes. He is so nervous from fright that he knocks off the top
one, which falls and breaks on the floor. He stands aghast,
trembling with dread. BEN is violently rubbing off the organ with
a piece of cloth which he has snatched from his pocket_, CAPTAIN
KEENEY _appears in the doorway on right and comes into the cabin,
removing his fur cap as he does so. He is a man of about forty,
around five-ten in height, but looking much shorter on account of
the enormous proportions of his shoulders and chest. His face is
massive and deeply lined, with gray-blue eyes of a bleak
hardness, and a tightly clenched, thin-lipped mouth. His thick
hair is long and gray. He is dressed in a heavy blue jacket and
blue pants stuffed into his sea-boots._

_He is followed into the cabin by the_ SECOND MATE, _a rangy
six-footer with a lean, weatherbeaten face._ The MATE _is dressed
about the same as the captain. He is a man of thirty or so._)

KEENEY. (_Comes toward the_ STEWARD--_with a stern look on his
face. The_ STEWARD _is visibly frightened and the stack of dishes
rattles in his trembling hands._ KEENEY _draws back his fist and
the_ STEWARD _shrinks away. The fist is gradually lowered and_
KEENEY _speaks slowly._) 'T would be like hitting a worm. It Is
nigh on two bells, Mr. Steward, and this truck not cleared yet.

THE STEWARD (_stammering_). Y-y-yes, sir.

KEENEY. Instead of doin' your rightful work ye've been below here
gossipin' old woman's talk with that boy. (_To_ BEN _fiercely_) Get
out o' this, you! Clean up the chartroom. (BEN _darts past the_
MATE _to the open doorway._) Pick up that dish, Mr. Steward!

THE STEWARD (_doing so with difficulty_). Yes, sir.

KEENEY. The next dish you break, Mr. Steward, you take a bath in
the Bering Sea at the end of a rope.

THE STEWARD (_tremblingly_). Yes, sir.

(_He hurries out. The_ SECOND MATE _walks slowly over to the_
CAPTAIN.)

MATE. I warn't 'specially anxious the man at the wheel should
catch what I wanted to say to you, sir. That's why I asked you to
come below.

KEENEY (_impatiently_). Speak your say, Mr. Slocum.

MATE (_unconsciously lowering his voice_). I'm afeard there'll be
trouble with the hands by the look o' things. They'll likely turn
ugly, every blessed one o' them, if you don't put back. The two
years they signed up for is up to-day.

KEENEY. And d'you think you're tellin' me somethin' new, Mr.
Slocum? I've felt it in the air this long time past. D'you think
I've not seen their ugly looks and the grudgin' way they worked?

(_The door in rear is opened and_ MRS. KEENEY _stands in the
doorway. She is a slight, sweet-faced little woman primly dressed
in black. Her eyes are red from weeping and her face drawn and
pale. She takes in the cabin with a frightened glance and stands
as if fixed to the spot by some nameless dread, clasping and
unclasping her hands nervously. The two men turn and look at
her._)

KEENEY (_with rough tenderness_). Well, Annie?

MRS. KEENEY (_as if awakening from a dream_). David, I--(_She is
silent. The_ MATE _starts for the doorway._)

KEENEY (_turning to him--sharply_). Wait!

MATE. Yes, sir.

KEENEY. D'you want anything, Annie?

MRS. KEENEY (_after a pause, during which she seems to be
endeavoring to collect her thoughts_). I thought maybe--I'd go up
on deck, David, to get a breath of fresh air.

(_She stand's humbly awaiting his permission. He and the_ MATE
_exchange a significant glance._)

KEENEY. It's too cold, Annie. You'd best stay below to-day.
There's nothing to look at on deck--but ice.

MRS. KEENEY (_monotonously_). I know--ice, ice, ice! But there's
nothing to see down here but these walls.

(_She makes a gesture of loathing._)

KEENEY. You can play the organ, Annie.

MRS. KEENEY (_dully_). I hate the organ. It puts me in mind of
home.

KEENEY (_a touch of resentment in his voice_). I got it jest for
you.

MRS. KEENEY (_dully_). I know. (_She turns away from them and walks
slowly to the bench on left. She lifts up one of the curtains and
looks through a porthole; then utters an exclamation of joy._) Ah,
water! Clear water! As far as I can see! How good it looks after
all these months of ice! (_She turns round to them, her face
transfigured with joy._) Ah, now I must go upon deck and look at
it, David.

KEENEY (_frowning_). Best not to-day, Annie. Best wait for a day
when the sun shines.

MRS. KEENEY (_desperately_). But the sun never shines in this
terrible place.

KEENEY (_a tone of command in his voice_). Best not to-day, Annie.

MRS. KEENEY (_crumbling before this command--abjectly_). Very well,
David.

(_She stands there staring straight before her as if in a daze.
The two men look at her uneasily._)

KEENEY (_sharply_). Annie!

MRS. KEENEY (_dully_). Yes, David.

KEENEY. Me and Mr. Slocum has business to talk about--ship's
business.

MRS. KEENEY. Very well, David.

(_She goes slowly out, rear, and leaves the door three quarters
shut behind her._)

KEENEY. Best not have her on deck if they's goin' to be any
trouble.

MATE. Yes, sir.

KEENEY. And trouble they's goin' to be. I feel it in my bones.

(_Takes a revolver from the pocket of his coat and examines it._)

Got yourn?

MATE. Yes, sir.

KEENEY. Not that we'll have to use 'em--not if I know their breed
of dog--jest to frighten 'em up a bit. (_Grimly_) I ain't never
been forced to use one yit; and trouble I've had by land and by
sea's long as I kin remember, and will have till my dyin' day, I
reckon.

MATE (_hesitatingly_). Then you ain't goin'--to turn back?

KEENEY. Turn back! Mr. Slocum, did you ever hear o' me pointin'
s'uth for home with only a measly four hundred barrel of ile in
the hold?

MATE (_hastily_). No, sir--but the grub's gittin' low.

KEENEY. They's enough to last a long time yit, if they're careful
with it; and they's plenty o' water.

MATE. They say it's not fit to eat--what's left; and the two
years they signed on fur is up to-day. They might make trouble
for you in the courts when we git home.

KEENEY. To hell with 'em! Let them make what law trouble they
kin. I don't give a damn 'bout the money. I've got to git the
ile! (_Glancing sharply at the_ MATE) You ain't turnin' no damned
sea lawyer, be you, Mr. Slocum?

MATE (_flushing_). Not by a hell of a sight, sir.

KEENEY. What do the fools want to go home fur now? Their share o'
the four hundred barrel wouldn't keep 'em in chewin' terbacco.

MATE (_slowly_). They wants to git back to their folks an' things,
I s'pose.

KEENEY (_looking at him searchingly_). 'N' you want to turn back,
too. (THE MATE _looks down confusedly before his sharp gaze._)
Don't lie, Mr. Slocum. It's writ down plain in your eyes. (_With
grim sarcasm_) I hope, Mr. Slocum, you ain't agoin' to jine the
men agin me.

MATE (_indignantly_). That ain't fair, sir, to say sich things.

KEENEY (_with satisfaction_). I warn't much afeard o' that, Tom.
You been with me nigh on ten year and I've learned ye whalin'. No
man kin say I ain't a good master, if I be a hard one.

MATE. I warn't thinkin' of myself, sir--'bout turnin' home, I
mean. (_Desperately_) But Mrs. Keeney, sir--seems like she ain't
jest satisfied up here, ailin' like--what with the cold an' bad
luck an' the ice an' all.

KEENEY (_his face butting--rebukingly but not severely_). That's
my business, Mr. Slocum. I'll thank you to steer a clear course o'
that. (_A pause._) The ice'll break up soon to no'th'rd. I could
see it startin' to-day. And when it goes and we git some sun,
Annie'll perk up. (_Another pause--then he bursts forth_) It ain't
the damned money what's keepin' me up in the Northern seas, Tom.
But I can't go back to Homeport with a measly four hundred barrel
of ile. I'd die fust. I ain't never come back home in all my days
without a full ship. Ain't that truth?

MATE. Yes, sir; but this voyage you been ice-bound, an'--

KEENEY (_scornfully_). And d' you s'pose any of 'em would believe
that--any o' them skippers I've beaten voyage after voyage? Can't
you hear 'em laughin' and sneerin'--Tibbots 'n' Harris 'n' Simms
and the rest--and all o' Homeport makin' fun o' me? "Dave Keeney
what boasts he's the best whalin' skipper out o' Homeport comin'
back with a measly four hundred barrel of ile?" (_The thought of
this drives him into a frenzy, and he smashes his fist down on
the marble top of the sideboard._) Hell! I got to git the ile, I
tell you. How could I figger on this ice? It's never been so bad
before in the thirty year I been a-comin' here. And now it's
breakin'up. In a couple o'days it'll be all gone. And they's
whale here, plenty of 'em. I know they is and I ain't never gone
wrong yit. I got to git the ile! I got to git it in spite of all
hell, and by God, I ain't a-goin' home till I do git it!

(_There is the sound of subdued sobbing from the door in rear. The
two men stand silent for a moment, listening. Then_ KEENEY _goes
over to the door and looks in. He hesitates for a moment as if he
were going to enter--then closes the door softly._ JOE, _the
harpooner, an enormous six-footer with a battered, ugly face,
enters from right and stands waiting for the captain to notice
him._)

KEENEY (_turning and seeing him_). Don't be standin' there like a
gawk, Harpooner. Speak up!

JOE (_confusedly_). We want--the men, sir--they want send a
depitation aft to have a word with you.

KEENEY (_furiously_). Tell 'em to go to--(_checks himself and
continues grimly_) Tell'em to come. I'll see'em.

JOE. Aye, aye, sir.

(_He goes out._)

KEENEY (_with a grim smile_). Here it comes, the trouble you spoke
of, Mr. Slocum, and we'll make short shift of it. It's better to
crush such things at the start than let them make headway.

MATE (_worriedly_). Shall I wake up the First and Fourth, sir? We
might need their help.

KEENEY. No, let them sleep. I'm well able to handle this alone,
Mr. Slocum.

(_There is the shuffling of footsteps from outside and five of the
crew crowd into the cabin, led by_ JOE. _All are dressed
alike--sweaters, sea-boots, etc. They glance uneasily at the_
CAPTAIN, _twirling their fur caps in their hands._)

KEENEY (_after a pause_). Well? Who's to speak fur ye?

JOE (_stepping forward with an air of bravado_). I be.

KEENEY (_eyeing him up and down coldly_). So you be. Then speak
your say and be quick about it.

JOE (_trying not to wilt before the CAPTAIN'S glance and avoiding
his eyes_). The time we signed up for is done to-day.

KEENEY (_icily_). You're tellin' me nothin' I don't know.

JOE. You ain't p'intin' fur home yit, far's we kin see.

KEENEY. No, and I ain't agoin' to till this ship is full of ile.

JOE. You can't go no further no'the with the ice afore ye.

KEENEY. The ice is breaking up.

JOB (_after a slight pause during which the others mumble angrily
to one another_). The grub we're gittin' now is rotten.

KEENEY. It's good enough fur ye. Better men than ye are have
eaten worse.

(_There is a chorus of angry exclamations from the crowd._)

JOE (_encouraged by this support_). We ain'ta-goin' to work no more
'less you puts back fur home.

KEENEY (_fiercely_). You ain't, ain't you?

JOE. No; and the law courts 'll say we was right.

KEENEY. To hell with your law courts! We're at sea now and I'm
the law on this ship. (_Edging up toward the harpooner._) And every
mother's son of you what don't obey orders goes in irons.

(_There are more angry exclamations from the crew._ MRS. KEENEY
_appears in the doorway in rear and looks on with startled eyes.
None of the men notices her._)

JOE (_with bravado_). Then we're a-goin' to mutiny and take the
old hooker home ourselves. Ain't we, boys?

(_As he turns his head to look at the others_, KEENEY'S _fist
shoots out to the side of his jaw._ JOE _goes down in a heap and
lies there._ MRS. KEENEY _gives a shriek and hides her face in
her hands. The men pull out their sheath knives and start a rush,
but stop when they find themselves confronted by the revolvers
of_ KEENEY _and the_ MATE.)

KEENEY (_his eyes and voice snapping_). Hold still! (_The men
stand huddled together in a sullen silence._ KEENEY'S _voice is
full of mockery._) You've found out it ain't safe to mutiny on
this ship, ain't you? And now git for'ard where ye belong, and
(_he gives_ JOE'S _body a contemptuous kick_) drag him with you.
And remember, the first man of ye I see shirkin' I'll shoot dead
as sure as there's a sea under us, and you can tell the rest the
same. Git for'ard now! Quick! (_The men leave in cowed silence,
carrying_ JOE _with them._ KEENEY _turns to the_ MATE _with a
short laugh and puts his revolver back in his pocket._) Best get
up on deck, Mr. Slocum, and see to it they don't try none of
their skulkin' tricks. We'll have to keep an eye peeled from now
on. I know 'em.

MATE. Yes, sir.

(_He goes out, right._ KEENEY _hears his wife's hysterical
weeping and turns around in surprise--then walks slowly to her
side._)

KEENEY (_putting an arm around her shoulder--with gruff
tenderness_). There, there, Annie. Don't be afeard. It's all past
and gone.

MRS. KEENEY (_shrinking away from, him_). Oh, I can't bear it! I
can't bear it any longer!

KEENEY (_gently_). Can't bear what, Annie?

MRS. KEENEY (_hysterically_). All this horrible brutality, and
these brutes of men, and this terrible ship, and this prison cell
of a room, and the ice all around, and the silence.

(_After this outburst she calms down and wipes her eyes with her
handkerchief._)

KEENEY (_after a pause during which he looks down at her with a
puzzled frown_). Remember, I warn't hankerin' to have you come on
this voyage, Annie.

MRS. KEENEY. I wanted to be with you, David, don't you see? I
didn't want to wait back there in the house all alone as I've
been doing these last six years since we were married--waiting,
and watching, and fearing--with nothing to keep my mind
occupied--not able to go back teaching school on account of being
Dave Keeney's wife. I used to dream of sailing on the great,
wide, glorious ocean. I wanted to be by your side in the danger
and vigorous life of it all. I wanted to see you the hero they
make you out to be in Homeport. And instead--(_her voice grows
tremulous_) all I find is ice--and cold--and brutality!

(_Her voice breaks._)

KEENEY. I warned you what it'd be, Annie. "Whalin' ain't no
ladies' tea party," I says to you, "and you better stay to home
where you've got all your woman's comforts." (_Shaking his head_)
But you was so set on it.

MRS. KEENEY (_wearily_). Oh, I know it isn't your fault, David. You
see, I didn't believe you. I guess I was dreaming about the old
Vikings in the story-books and I thought you were one of them.

KEENEY (_protestingly_). I done my best to make it as cozy and
comfortable as could be. (MRS. KEENEY _looks around her in wild
scorn._) I even sent to the city for that organ for ye, thinkin'
it might be soothin' to ye to be playin' it times when they was
calms and things was dull like.

MRS. KEENEY (_wearily_). Yes, you were very kind, David. I know
that. (_She goes to left and lifts the curtains from the porthole
and looks out--then suddenly bursts forth._) I won't stand it--I
can't stand it--pent up by these walls like a prisoner. (_She runs
over to him and throws her arms around him, weeping. He puts his
arm protectingly over her shoulders._) Take me away from here,
David! If I don't get away from here, out of this terrible ship,
I'll go mad! Take me home, David! I can't think any more. I feel
as if the cold and the silence were crushing down on my brain.
I'm afraid. Take me home!

KEENEY (_holds her at arm's length and looks at her face
anxiously_). Best go to bed, Annie. You ain't yourself. You got
fever. Your eyes look so strange like. I ain't never seen you
look this way before.

MRS. KEENEY (_laughing hysterically_). It's the ice and the cold
and the silence--they'd make anyone look strange.

KEENEY (_soothingly_). In a month or two, with good luck, three at
the most, I'll have her filled with ile and then we'll give her
everything she'll stand and p'int for home.

MRS. KEENEY. But we can't wait for that--I can't wait. I want to
get home. And the men won't wait. They want to get home. It's
cruel, it's brutal for you to keep them. You must sail back.
You've got no excuse. There's clear water to the south now. If
you've a heart at all, you've got to turn back.

KEENEY (_harshly_). I can't, Annie.

MRS. KEENEY. Why can't you?

KEENEY. A woman couldn't rightly understand my reason.

MRS. KEENEY (_wildly_). Because it's a stupid, stubborn reason. Oh,
I heard you talking with the second mate. You're afraid the other
captains will sneer at you because you didn't come back with a
full ship. You want to live up to our silly reputation even if
you do have to beat and starve men and drive me mad to do it.

KEENEY (_his jaw set stubbornly_). It ain't that, Annie. Them
skippers would never dare sneer to my face. It ain't so much what
anyone'd say--but--(_He hesitates, struggling to express his
meaning._) You see--I've always done it--since my first voyage as
skipper. I always come back--with a full ship--and--it don't seem
right not to--somehow. I been always first whalin' skipper out o'
Homeport, and--Don't you see my meanin', Annie? (_He glances at
her. She is not looking at him but staring dully in front of her,
not hearing a word he is saying._) Annie! (_She comes to herself
with a start._) Best turn in, Annie, there's a good woman. You
ain't well.

MRS. KEENEY (_resisting his attempts to guide her to the door in
rear_). David! Won't you please turn back?

KEENEY (_gently_). I can't, Annie--not yet awhile. You don't see my
meanin'. I got to git the ile.

MRS. KEENEY. It'd be different if you needed the money, but you
don't. You've got more than plenty.

KEENEY (_impatiently_). It ain't the money I'm thinkin' of. D'you
think I'm as mean as that?

MRS. KEENEY (_dully_). No--I don't know--I can't
understand--(_Intensely_) Oh, I want to be home in the old house
once more and see my own kitchen again, and hear a woman's voice
talking to me and be able to talk to her. Two years! It seems so
long ago--as if I'd been dead and could never go back.

KEENEY (_worried by her strange tone and the far-away look in her
eyes_). Best go to bed, Annie. You ain't well.

MRS. KEENEY (_not appearing to hear him_). I used to be lonely when
you were away. I used to think Homeport was a stupid, monotonous
place. Then I used to go down on the beach, especially when it
was windy and the breakers were rolling in, and I'd dream of the
fine free life you must be leading. (_She gives a laugh which is
half a sob._) I used to love the sea then. (_She pauses; then
continues with slow intensity._) But now--I don't ever want to see
the sea again.

KEENEY (_thinking to humor her_). 'Tis no fit place for a woman,
that's sure. I was a fool to bring ye.

MRS. KEENEY (_after a pause--passing her hand over her eyes with a
gesture of pathetic weariness_). How long would it take us to
reach home--if we started now?

KEENEY (_frowning_). 'Bout two months, I reckon, Annie, with fair
luck.

MRS. KEENEY (_counts on her fingers--then murmurs with a rapt
smile_). That would be August, the latter part of August, wouldn't
it? It was on the twenty-fifth of August we were married, David,
wasn't it?

KEENEY (_trying to conceal the fact that her memories have moved
him--gruffly_). Don't you remember?

MRS. KEENEY (_vaguely--again passes her hand over her eyes_). My
memory is leaving me--up here in the ice. It was so long ago. (_A
pause--then she smiles dreamily._) It's June now. The lilacs will
be all in bloom in the front yard--and the climbing roses on the
trellis to the side of the house--they're budding.

(_She suddenly covers her face with her hands and commences to
sob._)

KEENEY (_disturbed_). Go in and rest, Annie. You're all wore out
cryin' over what can't be helped.

MRS. KEENEY (_suddenly throwing her arms around his neck and
clinging to him_). You love me, don't you, David?

KEENEY (_in amazed embarrassment at this outburst_) Love you? Why
d'you ask me such a question, Annie?

MRS. KEENEY (_shaking him--fiercely_). But you do, don't you,
David? Tell me!

KEENEY. I'm your husband, Annie, and you're my wife. Could there
be aught but love between us after all these years?

MRS. KEENEY (_shaking him again--still more fiercely_). Then you do
love me. Say it!

KEENEY (_simply_). I do, Annie.

MRS. KEENEY. (_Gives a sigh of relief--her hands drop to her
sides._ KEENEY _regards her anxiously. She passes her hand across
her eyes and murmurs half to herself._) I sometimes think if we
could only have had a child. (KEENEY _turns away from her, deeply
moved. She grabs his arm and turns him around to face
her--intensely._) And I've always been a good wife to you,
haven't I, David?

KEENEY (_his voice betraying his emotion_). No man ever had a
better, Annie.

MRS. KEENEY. And I've never asked for much from you, have I,
David? Have I?

KEENEY. You know you could have all I got the power to give ye,
Annie.

MRS. KEENEY (_wildly_). Then do this, this once, for my sake, for
God's sake--take me home! It's killing me, this life--the
brutality and cold and horror of it. I'm going mad. I can feel
the threat in the air. I can hear the silence threatening me--day
after gray day and every day the same. I can't bear it.
(_Sobbing._) I'll go mad, I know I will. Take me home, David, if
you love me as you say. I'm afraid. For the love of God, take me
home!

(_She throws her arms around him, weeping against his shoulder.
His face betrays the tremendous struggle going on within him. He
holds her out at arm's length, his expression softening. For a
moment his shoulders sag, he becomes old, his iron spirit weakens
as he looks at her tear-stained face._)

KEENEY (_dragging out the words with an effort_). I'll do it,
Annie--for your sake--if you say it's needful for ye.

MRS. KEENEY (_with wild joy--kissing him_). God bless you for that,
David!

(_He turns away from her silently and walks toward the
companionway. Just at that moment there is a clatter of footsteps
on the stairs and the_ SECOND MATE _enters the cabin._)

MATE (_excitedly_). The ice is breakin' up to no'th'rd, sir.
There's a clear passage through the floe, and clear water beyond,
the lookout says.

(KEENEY _straightens himself like a man coming out of a trance._
MRS. KEENEY _looks at the_ MATE _with terrified eyes._)

KEENEY (_dazedly--trying to collect his thoughts_). A clear
passage? To no'th'rd?

MATE. Yes, sir.

KEENEY (_his voice suddenly grim with determination_). Then get her
ready and we'll drive her through.

MATE. Aye, aye, sir.

MRS. KEENEY (_appealingly_). David!

KEENEY (_not heeding her_). Will the men turn to willin' or must we
drag 'em out?

MATE. They 'll turn to willin' enough. You put the fear o' God
into 'em, sir. They're meek as lambs.

KEENEY. Then drive 'em--both watches. (_With grim determination_)
They's whale t' other side o' this floe and we're going to git
'em.

MATE. Aye, aye, sir.

(_He goes out hurriedly. A moment later there is the sound of
scuffing feet from the deck outside and the_ MATE'S _voice shouting
orders._)

KEENEY (_speaking aloud to himself--derisively_). And I was a-goin'
home like a yaller dog!

MRS. KEENEY (_imploringly_). David!

KEENEY (_sternly_). Woman, you ain't a-doin' right when you meddle
in men's business and weaken 'em. You can't know my feelin's. I
got to prove a man to be a good husband for ye to take pride in.
I got to git the ile, I tell ye.

MRS. KEENEY (_supplicatingly_). David! Aren't you going home?

KEENEY (_ignoring this question--commandingly_). You ain't well. Go
and lay down a mite. (_He starts for the door._) I got to git on
deck.

(_He goes out. She cries after him in anguish, "David!" A pause.
She passes her hand across her eyes--then commences to laugh
hysterically and goes to the organ. She sits down and starts to
play wildly an old hymn._ KEENEY _reënters from the doorway to the
deck and stands looking at her angrily. He comes over and grabs
her roughly by the shoulder._)

KEENEY. Woman, what foolish mockin' is this? (_She laughs wildly,
and he starts back from her in alarm._) Annie! What is it? (_She
doesn't answer him._ KEENEY'S _voice trembles._) Don't you know me,
Annie?

(_He puts both hands on her shoulders and turns her around so that
he can look into her eyes. She stares up at him with a stupid
expression, a vague smile on her lips. He stumbles away from her,
and she commences softly to play the organ again._)

KEENEY (_swallowing hard--in a hoarse whisper, as if he had
difficulty in speaking_). You said--you was agoin' mad--God!

(_A long wail is heard from the deck above: "Ah bl-o-o-o-ow!" A
moment later the_ MATE'S _face appears through the skylight. He
cannot see_ MRS. KEENEY.)

MATE (_in great excitement_). Whales, sir--a whole school of
'em--off the starb'd quarter 'bout five mile away--big ones!

KEENEY (_galvanized into action_). Are you lowerin' the boats?

MATE. Yes, sir.

KEENEY (_with grim decision_). I'm a-comin' with ye.

MATE. Aye, aye, sir. (_Jubilantly_) You'll git the ile now right
enough, sir.

(_His head is withdrawn and he can be heard shouting orders._)

KEENEY (_turning to his wife_). Annie! Did you hear him? I'll git
the ile. (_She doesn't answer or seem to know he is there. He
gives a hard laugh, which is almost a groan._) I know you're
foolin' me, Annie. You ain't out of your mind--(_anxiously_) be
you? I'll git the ile now right enough--jest a little while
longer, Annie--then we'll turn hom'ard. I can't turn back now,
you see that, don't ye? I've got to git the ile. (_In sudden
terror_) Answer me! You ain't mad, be you?

(_She keeps on playing the organ, but makes no reply. The_ MATE'S
_face appears again through the skylight._)

MATE. All ready, sir.

(KEENEY _turns his back on his wife and strides to the doorway,
where he stands for a moment and looks back at her in anguish,
fighting to control his feelings._)

MATE. Comin', sir?

KEENEY (_his face suddenly grown hard with determination_). Aye.

(_He turns abruptly and goes out._ MRS. KEENEY _does not appear to
notice his departure. Her whole attention seems centred in the
organ. She sits with half-closed eyes, her body swaying a little
from side to side to the rhythm of the hymn. Her fingers move
faster and faster and she is playing wildly and discordantly as
the Curtain falls._)"THE FIRST MAN"

A PLAY IN FOUR ACTS


BY

EUGENE O'NEILL





CHARACTERS


  CURTIS JAYSON
    MARTHA, his wife
      JOHN JAYSON, his father, a banker
        JOHN, JR., his brother
          RICHARD, his brother
            ESTHEE (MRS. MARK SHEFFIELD), his sister
              LILY, his sister
                MRS. DAVIDSON, his father's aunt
	  MARK SHEFFIELD, a lawyer
	    EMILY, JOHN JR.'S wife
	      RICHARD BIGELOW
	        A MAID
	          A TRAINED NURSE

TIME--The Present





SCENES


ACT I

Living-room in the house of CURTIS JAYSON, Bridgetown, Conn.--an
afternoon in early Fall.

ACT II

CURTIS' study--morning of the following day.

ACT III

The same--three o'clock in the morning of a day in early spring of the
next year.

ACT IV

Same as Act I--three days later.





ACT I


SCENE--Living-room of CURTIS JAYSON'S house in Bridgetown, Conn. A
large, comfortable room. On the left, an arm-chair, a big open
fireplace, a writing desk with chair in far left corner. On this side
there is also a door leading into CURTIS' study. In the rear, center, a
double doorway opening on the hall and the entryway. Bookcases are
built into the wall on both sides of this doorway. In the far right
corner, a grand piano. Three large windows looking out on the lawn, and
another arm-chair, front, are on this right side of the room. Opposite
the fireplace is a couch, facing front. Opposite the windows on the
right is a long table with magazines, reading lamp, etc. Four chairs
are grouped about the table. The walls and ceiling are in a French gray
color. A great rug covers most of the hardwood floor.

It is around four o'clock of a fine afternoon in early fall.

As the curtain rises, MARTHA, CURTIS and BIGELOW are discovered. MARTHA
is a healthy, fine-looking woman of thirty-eight. She does not appear
this age for her strenuous life in the open has kept her young and
fresh. She possesses the frank, clear, direct quality of outdoors,
outspoken and generous. Her wavy hair is a dark brown, her eyes
blue-gray. CURTIS JAYSON is a tall, rangy, broad-shouldered man of
thirty-seven. While spare, his figure has an appearance of rugged
health, of great nervous strength held in reserve. His square-jawed,
large-featured face retains an eager boyish enthusiasm in spite of its
prevailing expression of thoughtful, preoccupied aloofness. His crisp
dark hair is graying at the temples. EDWARD BIGELOW is a large,
handsome man of thirty-nine. His face shows culture and tolerance, a
sense of humor, a lazy unambitious contentment. CURTIS is reading an
article in some scientific periodical, seated by the table. MARTHA and
BIGELOW are sitting nearby, laughing and chatting.

BIGELOW--[Is talking with a comically worried but earnest air.] Do you
know, I'm getting so I'm actually afraid to leave them alone with that
governess. She's too romantic. I'll wager she's got a whole book full
of ghost stories, superstitions, and yellow-journal horrors up her
sleeve.

MARTHA--Oh, pooh! Don't go milling around for trouble. When I was a kid
I used to get fun out of my horrors.

BIGELOW--But I imagine you were more courageous than most of us.

MARTHA--Why?

BIGELOW--Well, Nevada--the Far West at that time--I should think a
child would have grown so accustomed to violent scenes--

MARTHA--[Smiling.] Oh, in the mining camps; but you don't suppose my
father lugged me along on his prospecting trips, do you? Why, I never
saw any rough scenes until I'd finished with school and went to live
with father in Goldfield.

BIGELOW--[Smiling.] And then you met Curt.

MARTHA--Yes--but I didn't mean he was a rough scene. He was very mild
even in those days. Do tell me what he was like at Cornell.

BIGELOW--A romanticist--and he still is!

MARTHA--[Pointing at CURTIS with gay mischief.] What! That sedate man!
Never!

CURTIS--[Looking up and smiling at them both affectionately--lazily.]
Don't mind him, Martha. He always was crazy.

BIGELOW--[To CURT--accusingly.] Why did you elect to take up mining
engineering at Cornell instead of a classical degree at the Yale of
your fathers and brothers? Because you had been reading Bret Harte in
prep. school and mistaken him for a modern realist. You devoted four
years to grooming yourself for another outcast of Poker Flat. [MARTHA
laughs.]

CURTIS--[Grinning.] It was you who were hypnotized by Harte--so much so
that his West of the past is still your blinded New England-movie idea
of the West at present. But go on. What next?

BIGELOW--Next? You get a job as engineer in that Goldfield mine--but
you are soon disillusioned by a laborious life where six-shooters are
as rare as nuggets. You try prospecting. You find nothing but different
varieties of pebbles. But it is necessary to your nature to project
romance into these stones, so you go in strong for geology. As a
geologist, you become a slave to the Romance of the Rocks. It is but a
step from that to anthropology--the last romance of all. There you find
yourself--because there is no further to go. You win fame as the most
proficient of young skull-hunters--and wander over the face of the
globe, digging up bones like an old dog.

CURTIS--[With a laugh.] The man is mad, Martha.

BIGELOW--Mad! What an accusation to come from one who is even now
considering setting forth on a five-year excavating contest in search
of the remains of our gibbering ancestor, the First Man!

CURTIS--[With sudden seriousness.] I'm not considering it any longer.
I've decided to go.

MARTHA--[Starting--the hurt showing in her voice.] When did you decide?

CURTIS--I only really came to a decision this morning. [With a
seriousness that forces BIGELOW'S interested attention.] It's a case of
got to go. It's a tremendous opportunity that it would be a crime for
me to neglect.

BIGELOW--And a big honor, too, isn't it, to be picked as a member of
such a large affair?

CURTIS--[With a smile.] I guess it's just that they want all the men
with considerable practical experience they can get. There are bound to
be hardships and they know I'm hardened to them. [Turning to his wife
with an affectionate smile.] We haven't roughed it in the queer corners
for the last ten years without knowing how it's done, have we, Martha?

MARTHA--[Dully.] No, Curt.

CURTIS--[With an earnest enthusiasm.] And this expedition IS what you
call a large affair, Big. It's the largest thing of its kind ever
undertaken. The possibilities, from the standpoint of anthropology, are
limitless.

BIGELOW--[With a grin.] Aha! Now we come to the Missing Link!

CURTIS--[Frowning.] Darn your Barnum and Bailey circus lingo, Big. This
isn't a thing to mock at. I should think the origin of man would be
something that would appeal even to your hothouse imagination. Modern
science believes--knows--that Asia was the first home of the human
race. That's where we're going, to the great Central Asian plateau
north of the Himalayas.

BIGELOW--[More soberly.] And there you hope to dig up--our first
ancestor?

CURTIS--It's a chance in a million, but I believe we may, myself--at
least find authentic traces of him so that we can reconstruct his life
and habits. I was up in that country a lot while I was mining advisor
to the Chinese government--did some of my own work on the side. The
extraordinary results I obtained with the little means at my disposal
convinced me of the riches yet to be uncovered. The First Man may be
among them.

BIGELOW--[Turning to MARTHA.] And you were with him on that Asian
plateau?

MARTHA--Yes, I've always been with him.

CURTIS--You bet she has. [He goes over and puts his hand on his wife's
shoulder affectionately.] Martha's more efficient than a whole staff of
assistants and secretaries. She knows more about what I'm doing than I
do half the time. [He turns toward his study.] Well, I guess I'll go in
and work some.

MARTHA--[Quietly.] Do you need me now, Curt?

BIGELOW--[Starting up.] Yes, if you two want to work together, why just
shoo me--

CURTIS--[Puts both hands on his shoulders and forces him to his seat
again.] No. Sit down, Big. I don't need Martha now. [Coming over to
her, bends down and kisses her--rather mockingly.] I couldn't deprive
Big of an audience for his confessions of a fond parent.

BIGELOW--Aha! Now it's you who are mocking at something you know
nothing about. [An awkward silence follows this remark.]

CURTIS--[Frowning.] I guess you're forgetting, aren't you, Big? [He
turns and walks into his study, closing the door gently behind him.]

MARTHA--[After a pause--sadly.] Poor Curt.

BIGELOW--[Ashamed and confused.] I had forgotten--

MARTHA--The years have made me reconciled. They haven't Curt. [She
sighs--then turns to BIGELOW with a forced smile.] I suppose it's hard
for any of you back here to realize that Curt and I ever had any
children.

BIGELOW--[After a pause.] How old were they when--?

MARTHA--Three years and two--both girls. [She goes on sadly.] We had a
nice little house in Goldfield. [Forcing a smile.] We were very
respectable home folks then. The wandering came later, after--It was a
Sunday in winter when Curt and I had gone visiting some friends. The
nurse girl fell asleep--or something--and the children sneaked out in
their underclothes and played in the snow. Pneumonia set in--and a week
later they were both dead.

BIGELOW--[Shocked.] Good heavens!

MARTHA--We were real lunatics for a time. And then when we'd calmed
down enough to realize--how things stood with us--we swore we'd never
have children again--to steal away their memory. It wasn't what you
thought--romanticism--that set Curt wandering--and me with him. It was
a longing to lose ourselves--to forget. He flung himself with all his
power into every new study that interested him. He couldn't keep still,
mentally or bodily--and I followed. He needed me--then--so dreadfully!

BIGELOW--And is it that keeps driving him on now?

MARTHA--Oh, no. He's found himself. His work has taken the place of the
children.

BIGELOW--And with you, too?

MARTHA--[With a wan smile.] Well, I've helped--all I could. His work
has me in it, I like to think--and I have him.

BIGELOW--[Shaking his head.] I think people are foolish to stand by
such an oath as you took--forever. [With a smile.] Children are a great
comfort in one's old age, I've tritely found.

MARTHA--[Smiling.] Old age!

BIGELOW--I'm knocking at the door of fatal forty.

MARTHA--[With forced gaiety.] You're not very tactful, I must say.
Don't you know I'm thirty-eight?

BIGELOW--[Gallantly.] A woman is as old as she looks. You're not thirty
yet.

MARTHA--[Laughing.] After that nice remark I'll have to forgive you
everything, won't I? [LILY JAYSON comes in from the rear. She is a
slender, rather pretty girl of twenty-five. The stamp of college
student is still very much about her. She rather insists on a superior,
intellectual air, is full of nervous, thwarted energy. At the sight of
them sitting on the couch together, her eyebrows are raised.]

LILY--[Coming into the room--breezily.] Hello, Martha. Hello, Big.
[They both get up with answering "Hellos."] I walked right in
regardless. Hope I'm not interrupting.

MARTHA--Not at all.

LILY--[Sitting down by the table as MARTHA and BIGELOW resume their
seats on the lounge.] I must say it sounded serious. I heard you tell
Big you'd forgive him everything, Martha. [Dryly--with a mocking glance
at BIGELOW.] You're letting yourself in for a large proposition.

BIGELOW--[Displeased but trying to smile it off.] The past is never
past for a dog with a bad name, eh, Lily? [LILY laughs. BIGELOW gets
up.] If you want to reward me for my truthfulness, Mrs. Jayson, help me
take the kids for an airing in the car. I know it's an imposition but
they've grown to expect you. [Glancing at his watch.] By Jove, I'll
have to run along. I'll get them and then pick you up here. Is that all
right?

MARTHA--Fine.

BIGELOW--I'll run, then. Good-by, Lily. [She nods. BIGELOW goes out
rear.]

MARTHA--[Cordially.] Come on over here, Lily.

LILY--[Sits on couch with MARTHA--after a pause--with a smile.] You
were forgetting, weren't you?

MARTHA--What?

LILY--That you'd invited all the family over here to tea this
afternoon. I'm the advance guard.

MARTHA--[Embarrassed.] So I was! How stupid!

LILY--[With an inquisitive glance at MARTHA'S face but with studied
carelessness.] Do you like Bigelow?

MARTHA--Yes, very much. And Curt thinks the world of him.

LILY--Oh, Curt is the last one to be bothered by anyone's morals. Curt
and I are the unconventional ones of the family. The trouble with
Bigelow, Martha, is that he was too careless to conceal his sins--and
that won't go down in this Philistine small town. You have to hide and
be a fellow hypocrite or they revenge themselves on you. Bigelow
didn't. He flaunted his love-affairs in everyone's face. I used to
admire him for it. No one exactly blamed him, in their secret hearts.
His wife was a terrible, straitlaced creature. No man could have
endured her. [Disgustedly.] After her death he suddenly acquired a bad
conscience. He'd never noticed the children before. I'll bet he didn't
even know their names. And then, presto, he's about in our midst giving
an imitation of a wet hen with a brood of ducks. It's a bore, if you
ask me.

MARTHA--[Flushing.] I think it's very fine of him.

LILY--[Shaking her head.] His reform is too sudden. He's joined the
hypocrites, I think.

MARTHA--I'm sure he's no hypocrite. When you see him with the children--

LILY--Oh, I know he's a good actor. Lots of women have been in love
with him. [Then suddenly.] You won't be furious if I'm very, very
frank, will you, Martha?

MARTHA--[Surprised.] No, of course not, Lily.

LILY--Well, I'm the bearer of a message from the Jayson family.

MARTHA--[Astonished.] A message? For me?

LILY--Don't think that I have anything to do with it. I'm only a Victor
record of their misgivings. Shall I switch it going? Well, then, father
thinks, brother John and wife, sister Esther and husband all think that
you are unwisely intimate with this same Bigelow.

MARTHA--[Stunned.] I? Unwisely intimate--? [Suddenly laughing with
amusement.] Well, you sure are funny people!

LILY--No, we're not funny. We'd be all right if we were. On the
contrary, we're very dull and deadly. Bigelow really has a villainous
rep. for philandering. But, of course, you didn't know that.

MARTHA--[Beginning to feel resentful--coldly.] No, I didn't--and I
don't care to know it now.

LILY--[Calmly.] I told them you wouldn't relish their silly advice. [In
a very confidential, friendly tone.] Oh, I hate their narrow small-town
ethics as much as you do, Martha. I sympathize with you, indeed I do.
But I have to live with them and so, for comfort's sake, I've had to
make compromises. And you're going to live in our midst from now on,
aren't you? Well then, you'll have to make compromises, too--if you
want any peace.

MARTHA--But-compromises about what? [Forcing a laugh.] I refuse to take
it seriously. How anyone could think--it's too absurd.

LILY--What set them going was Big's being around such an awful lot the
weeks Curt was in New York, just after you'd settled down here. You
must acknowledge he was-very much present then, Martha.

MARTHA--But it was on account of his children. They were always with
him.

LILY--The town doesn't trust this sudden fond parenthood, Martha. We've
known him too long, you see.

MARTHA--But he's Curt's oldest and best friend.

LILY--We've found they always are.

MARTHA--[Springing to her feet--indignantly.] It's a case of evil
minds, it seems to me--and it would be extremely insulting if I didn't
have a sense of humor. [Resentfully.] You can tell your family, that as
far as I'm concerned, the town may--

LILY--Go to the devil. I knew you'd say that. Well, fight the good
fight. You have all my best wishes. [With a sigh.] I wish I had
something worth fighting for. Now that I'm through with college, my
occupation's gone. All I do is read book after book. The only live
people are the ones in books, I find, and the only live life.

MARTHA--[Immediately sympathetic.] You're lonely, that's what, Lily.

LILY--[Drily.] Don't pity me, Martha--or I'll join the enemy.

MARTHA--I'm not. But I'd like to help you if I could. [After a pause.]
Have you ever thought of marrying?

LILY--[With a laugh.] Martha! How banal! The men I see are enough to
banish that thought if I ever had it.

MARTHA--Marriage isn't only the man. It's children. Wouldn't you like
to have children?

LILY--[Turning to her bluntly.] Wouldn't you?

MARTHA--[ Confused. ] But--Lily--

LILY--Oh, I know it wasn't practicable as long as you elected to wander
with Curt--but why not now when you've definitely settled down here? I
think that would solve things all round. If you could present Father
with a grandson, I'm sure he'd fall on your neck. He feels piqued at
the John and Esther families because they've had a run of girls. A male
Jayson! Aunt Davidson would weep with joy. [Suddenly.] You're
thirty-eight, aren't you, Martha?

MARTHA--Yes. LILY--Then why don't you--before it's too late? [MARTHA,
struggling with herself, does not answer. LILY goes on slowly.] You
won't want to tag along with Curt to the ends of the earth forever,
will you? [Curiously.] Wasn't that queer life like any other? I mean,
didn't it get to pall on you?

MARTHA--[As if confessing it reluctantly.] Yes--perhaps--in the last
two years.

LILY--[Decisively.] It's time for both of you to rest on your laurels.
Why can't Curt keep on with what he's doing now--stay home and write
his books?

MARTHA--Curt isn't that kind. The actual work--the romance of
it--that's his life.

LILY--But if he goes and you have to stay, you'll be lonesome--
[meaningly] alone.

MARTHA--Horribly. I don't know what I'll do.

LILY--Then why--why? Think, Martha. If Curt knew--that was to
happen--he'd want to stay here with you. I'm sure he would.

MARTHA--[Shaking her head sadly.] No. Curt has grown to dislike
children. They remind him of--ours that were taken. He adored them
so--he's never become reconciled.

LILY--If you confronted Curt with the actual fact, he'd be reconciled
soon enough, and happy in the bargain.

MARTHA--[Eagerly.] Do you really think so?

LILY--And you, Martha--I can tell from the way you've talked that you'd
like to.

MARTHA--[Excitedly.] Yes, I--I never thought I'd ever want to again.
For many years after they died I never once dreamed of it-- But
lately--the last years--I've felt--and when we came to live here--and I
saw all around me--homes--and children, I--[She hesitates as if ashamed
at having confessed so much.]

LILY--[Putting an arm around her--affectionately.] I know.
[Vigorously.] You must, that's all there is to it! If you want my
advice, you go right ahead and don't tell Curt until it's a fact he'll
have to learn to like, willy-nilly. You'll find, in his inmost heart,
he'll be tickled to death.

MARTHA--[Forcing a smile.] Yes, I--I'll confess I thought of that. In
spite of my fear, I--I've--I mean--I--[She flushes in a shamed
confusion.]

LILY--[Looking at her searchingly.] Why, Martha, what--[Then suddenly
understanding--with excited pleasure.] Martha! I know! It is so, isn't
it? It is!

MARTHA--[In a whisper.] Yes.

LILY--[Kissing her affectionately.] You dear, you! [Then after a
pause.] How long have you known?

MARTHA--For over two months. [There is a ring from the front door bell
in the hall.]

LILY--[Jumping up.] I'll bet that's we Jaysons now. [She runs to the
door in the rear and looks down the hall to the right.] Yes, it's
Esther and husband and Aunt Davidson. [She comes back to MARTHA
laughing excitedly. The MAID is seen going to the door.] The first wave
of attack, Martha! Be brave! The Young Guard dies but never surrenders!

MARTHA--[Displeased but forcing a smile.] You make me feel terribly ill
at ease when you put it that way, Lily. [She rises now and goes to
greet the visitors, who enter. MRS. DAVIDSON is seventy-five years
old--a thin, sinewy old lady, old-fashioned, unbending and rigorous in
manner. She is dressed aggressively in the fashion of a bygone age.
ESTHER is a stout, middle-aged woman with the round, unmarked,
sentimentally--contented face of one who lives unthinkingly from day to
day, sheltered in an assured position in her little world. MARK, her
husband, is a lean, tall, stooping man of about forty-five. His long
face is alert, shrewd, cautious, full of the superficial craftiness of
the lawyer mind. MARTHA kisses the two women, shakes hands with MARK,
uttering the usual meaningless greetings in a forced tone. They reply
in much the same spirit. There is the buzz of this empty chatter while
MARTHA gets them seated. LILY stands looking on with a cynical smile of
amusement. MRS. DAVIDSON is in the chair at the end of table, left,
ESTHER sits by MARTHA on couch, MARK in chair at front of table.] Will
you have tea now or shall we wait for the others?

ESTHER--Let's wait. They ought to be here any moment.

LILY--[Maliciously.] Just think, Martha had forgotten you were coming.
She was going motoring with Bigelow. [There is a dead silence at
this--broken diplomatically by SHEFFIELD.]

SHEFFIELD--Where is Curt, Martha?

MARTHA--Hard at work in his study. I'm afraid he's there for the day.
SHEFFIELD--[Condescendingly.] Still plugging away at his book, I
suppose. Well, I hope it will be a big success.

LILY--[Irritated by his smugness.] As big a success as the brief you're
writing to restrain the citizens from preventing the Traction Company
robbing them, eh Mark? [Before anyone can reply, she turns suddenly on
her aunt who is sitting rigidly on her chair, staring before her
stonily like some old lady in a daguerreotype--in a loud challenging
tone.] You don't mind if I smoke, Aunt? [She takes a cigarette out of
case and lights it.]

ESTHER--[Smiling.] Lily!

MRS. DAVIDSON--[Fixes LILY with her stare--in a tone of irrevocable
decision.] We'll get you married, young lady, and that very soon. What
you need to bring you down to earth is a husband and the responsibility
of children. [Turning her glance to MARTHA, a challenge in her
question.] Every woman who is able should have children. Don't you
believe that, Martha Jayson? [She accentuates the full name.]

MARTHA--[Taken aback for a moment but restraining her
resentment--gently.] Yes, I do, Mrs. Davidson.

MRS. DAVIDSON--[Seemingly placated by this reply--in a milder tone.]
You must call me aunt, my dear. [Meaningly.] All the Jaysons do.

MARTHA--[Simply.] Thank you, aunt.

LILY--[As if all of this aroused her irritation--in a nervous fuming.]
Why don't the others come, darn 'em? I'm dying for my tea. [The door
from the study is opened and CURT appears. They all greet him.]

CURTIS--[Absent-mindedly.] Hello, everybody. [Then with a preoccupied
air to MARTHA.] Martha, I don't want to interrupt you--but--

MARTHA--[Getting up briskly.] You want my help?

CURTIS--[With the same absent-minded air.] Yes--not for long--just a
few notes before I forget them. [He goes back into the study.]

MARTHA--[Seemingly relieved by this interruption and glad of the chance
it gives to show them her importance to CURT.] You'll excuse me for a
few moments, all of you, won't you? [They all nod.]

MRS. DAVIDSON--[Rather harshly.] Why doesn't Curt hire a secretary?
That is no work for his wife.

MARTHA--[Quietly.] A paid secretary could hardly give the sympathy and
understanding Curt needs, Mrs. Davidson. [Proudly.] And she would have
to study for years, as I have done, in order to take my place. [To
LILY.] If I am not here by the time the others arrive, will you see
about the tea, Lily--?

LILY--[Eagerly.] Sure. I love to serve drinks. If I were a man, I'd be
a bartender--in Mexico or Canada.

MARTHA--[Going toward the study.] I'll be with you again in a minute, I
hope. [She goes in and shuts the door behind her.]

ESTHER--[Pettishly.] Even people touched by a smattering of science
seem to get rude, don't they?

MRS. DAVIDSON--[Harshly.] I have heard much silly talk of this being an
age of free women, and I have always said it was tommyrot. [Pointing to
the study.] She is an example. She is more of a slave to Curt's hobbies
than any of my generation were to anything but their children. [Still
more harshly.] Where are her children?

LILY--They died, Aunt, as children have a bad habit of doing. [Then
meaningly.] However, I wouldn't despair if I were you. [MRS. DAVIDSON
stares at her fixedly.]

ESTHER--[Betraying a sudden frightened jealousy.] What do you mean,
Lily? What are you so mysterious about? What did she say? What--?

LILY--[Mockingly.] Mark, your frau seems to have me on the stand. Can I
refuse to answer? [There is a ring at the bell. LILY jumps to her feet
excitedly.] Here comes the rest of our Grand Fleet. Now I'll have my
tea. [She darts out to the hallway.]

ESTHER--[Shaking her head.] Goodness, Lily is trying on the nerves.
[JAYSON, his two sons, JOHN and DICK, and JOHN's wife, EMILY, enter
from hallway in rear. JAYSON, the father, is a short, stout,
bald-headed man of sixty. A typical, small-town, New England
best-family banker, reserved in pose, unobtrusively important--a placid
exterior hiding querulousness and a fussy temper. JOHN JUNIOR is his
father over again in appearance, but pompous, obtrusive,
purse-and-family-proud, extremely irritating in his self-complacent air
of authority, emptily assertive and loud. He is about forty. RICHARD,
the other brother, is a typical young Casino and country club member,
college-bred, good looking, not unlikable. He has been an officer in
the war and has not forgotten it. EMILY, JOHN JR.'s wife, is one of
those small, mouse-like women who conceal beneath an outward aspect of
gentle, unprotected innocence a very active envy, a silly pride, and a
mean malice. The people in the room with the exception of MRS. DAVIDSON
rise to greet them. All exchange familiar, perfunctory greetings.
SHEFFIELD relinquishes his seat in front of the table to JAYSON, going
to the chair, right front, himself. JOHN and DICK take the two chairs
to the rear of table. EMILY joins ESTHER on the couch and they whisper
together excitedly, ESTHER doing most of the talking. The men remain in
uncomfortable silence for a moment.]

DICK--[With gay mockery.] Well, the gang's all here. Looks like the
League of Nations. [Then with impatience.] Let's get down to cases,
folks. I want to know why I've been summoned here. I'm due for
tournament mixed-doubles at the Casino at five. Where's the tea--and
has Curt a stick in the cellar to put in it?

LILY--[Appearing in the doorway.] Here's tea--but no stick for you,
sot. [The MAID brings in tray with tea things.]

JOHN--[Heavily.] It seems it would be more to the point to inquire
where our hostess--

JAYSON--[Rousing himself again.] Yes. And where is Curt?

LILY--Working at his book. He called Martha to take notes on something.

ESTHER--[With a trace of resentment.] She left us as if she were glad
of the excuse.

LILY--Stuff, Esther! She knows how much Curt depends on her--and we
don't.

EMILY--[In her quiet, lisping voice--with the most innocent air.]
Martha seems to be a model wife. [But there is some quality to the way
she says it that makes them all stare at her uneasily.]

LILY--[Insultingly.] How well you say what you don't mean, Emily!
Twinkle, twinkle, little bat! But I'm forgetting to do the honors. Tea,
everybody? [Without waiting for any answer.] Tea, everybody! [The tea
is served.]

JAYSON--[Impatiently.] Stop fooling, Lily. Let's get to our muttons.
Did you talk with Martha?

LILY--[Briskly.] I did, sir.

JAYSON--[In a lowered voice.] What did she say?

LILY--She said you could all go to the devil! [They all look shocked
and insulted. LILY enjoys this, then adds quietly.] Oh, not in those
words. Martha is a perfect lady. But she made it plain she will thank
you to mind your own business.

ESTHER--[Volubly.] And just imagine, she'd even forgotten she'd asked
us here this afternoon and was going motoring with Bigelow.

LILY--With his three children, too, don't forget.

EMILY--[Softly.] They have become such well-behaved and intelligent
children, they say. [Again all the others hesitate, staring at her
suspiciously.]

LILY--[Sharply.] You'd better let Martha train yours for a while,
Emily. I'm sure she'd improve their manners--though, of course, she
couldn't give them any intelligence.

EMILY--[With the pathos of outraged innocence.] Oh!

DICK--[Interrupting.] So it's Bigelow you're up in the air about? [He
gives a low whistle--then frowns angrily.] The deuce you say!

LILY--[Mockingly.] Look at our soldier boy home from the wars getting
serious about the family honor! It's too bad this is a rough, untutored
country where they don't permit dueling, isn't it, Dick?

DICK--[His pose crumbling--angrily.] Go to the devil!

SHEFFIELD--[With a calm, judicious air.] This wrangling is getting us
nowhere. You say she was resentful about our well-meant word to the
wise? JAYSON--[Testily.] Surely she must realize that some
consideration is due the position she occupies in Bridgetown as Curt's
wife.

LILY--Martha is properly unimpressed by big frogs in tiny puddles. And
there you are.

MRS. DAVIDSON--[Outraged.] The idea! She takes a lot upon herself--the
daughter of a Wild Western coal-miner.

LILY--[Mockingly.] Gold miner, Aunt.

MRS. DAVIDSON--It makes no difference--a common miner! SHEFFIELD--
[Keenly inquisitive.] Just before the others came, Lily, you gave out
some hints--very definite hints, I should say--

ESTHER--[Excitedly.] Yes, you did, Lily. What did you mean?

LILY--[Uncertainly.] Perhaps I shouldn't have. It's not my secret.
[Enjoying herself immensely now that she holds the spotlight--after a
pause, in a stage whisper.] Shall I tell you? Yes, I can't help
telling. Well, Martha is going to have a son. [They are all stunned and
flabbergasted and stare at her speechlessly.]

MRS. DAVIDSON--[Her face lighting up--joyously.] A son! Curt's son!

JAYSON--[Pleased by the idea but bewildered.] A son?

DICK--[Smartly.] Lily's kidding you. How can she know it's a
son--unless she's a clairvoyant.

ESTHER--[With glad relief.] Yes, how stupid!

LILY--I am clairvoyant in this case. Allah is great and it will be a
son--if only to make you and Emily burst with envy among your daughters.

ESTHER--Lily!

EMILY--Oh!

JAYSON--[Testily.] Keep still for a moment, Lily, for God's sake. This
is no subject to joke about, remember.

LILY--Martha told me. I know that.

JAYSON--And does Curt know this?

LILY--No, not yet. Martha has been afraid to tell him.

JAYSON--Ah, that explains matters. You know I asked Curt some time
ago--and he said it was impossible.

EMILY--[With a lift of her eyebrows.] Impossible? Why, what a funny
thing to say.

SHEFFIELD--[Keenly lawyer-like.] And why is Martha afraid to tell him,
Lily?

LILY--It's all very simple. When the two died years ago, they said they
would never have one again. Martha thinks Curt is still haunted by
their memory and is afraid he will resent another as an intruder. I
told her that was all foolishness--that a child was the one thing to
make Curt settle down for good at home here and write his books.

JAYSON--[Eagerly.] Yes, I believe that myself. [Pleased.] Well, this is
fine news.

EMILY--Still it was her duty to tell Curt, don't you think? I don't see
how she could be afraid of Curt--for those reasons. [They all stare at
her.]

ESTHER--[Resentfully.] I don't, either. Why, Curt's the biggest-hearted
and kindest--

EMILY--I wonder how long she's known--this?

LILY--[Sharply.] Two months, she said.

EMILY--Two months? [She lets this sink in.]

JOHN--[Quickly scenting something--eagerly.] What do you mean, Emily?
[Then as if he read her mind.] Two months? But before that--Curt was
away in New York almost a month!

LILY--[Turning on EMILY fiercely.] So! You got someone to say it for
you as you always do, Poison Mind! Oh, I wish the ducking stool had
never been abolished!

EMILY--[Growing crimson--falteringly.] I--I didn't mean--

JOHN--[Furiously.] Where the honor of the family is at stake--

LILY--[Fiercely.] Ssshh, you empty barrel! I think I hear-- [The door
from the study is opened and MARTHA comes in in the midst of a heavy
silence. All the gentlemen rise stiffly. MARTHA is made immediately
self-conscious and resentful by the feeling that they have been
discussing her unfavorably.]

MARTHA--[Coming forward--with a forced cordiality.] How do you do,
everybody? So sorry I wasn't here when you came. I hope Lily made
proper excuses for me. [She goes from one to the other of the four
latest comers with "So glad you came," etc. They reply formally and
perfunctorily. MARTHA finally finds a seat on the couch between EMILY
and ESTHER.] I hope Lily--but I see you've all had tea.

LILY--[Trying to save the situation--gayly.] Yes. You can trust me as
understudy for the part of hostess any time.

MARTHA--[Forcing a smile.] Well, I'm glad to know I wasn't missed.

EMILY--[Sweetly.] We were talking about you--at least, we were
listening to Lily talk about you.

MARTHA--[Stiffening defensively.] About me?

EMILY--Yes--about how devoted you were to Curt's work. [LILY gives her
a venomous glance of scorn.]

MARTHA--[Pleased but inwardly uneasy.] Oh, but you see I consider it my
work, too, I've helped him with it so long now.

JAYSON--[In a forced tone.] And how is Curt's book coming, Martha?

MARTHA--[More and more stung by their strained attitudes and
inquisitive glances. Coldly and cuttingly.] Finely, thank you. The book
will cause quite a stir, I believe. It will make the name of Jayson
famous in the big world outside of Bridgetown.

MRS. DAVIDSON--[Indignantly.] The name of Jayson has been--

JAYSON--[Pleadingly.] Aunt Elizabeth!

LILY--Aunt means it's world famous already, Martha. [Pointing to the
sullen JOHN.] John was once a substitute on the Yale Freshman soccer
team, you know. If it wasn't for his weak shins he would have made the
team, fancy!

DICK--[This tickles his sense of humor and he bursts into laughter.]
Lily wins! [As his brother glares at him--looking at his watch.]
Heavens, I'll have to hustle! [Gets to his feet.] I'm due at the
Casino. [Comes and shakes MARTHA's hand formally.] I'm sorry I can't
stay.

MARTHA--So glad you came. Do come in again any time. We keep open
house, you know--Western fashion. [She accentuates this.]

DICK--[Hurriedly.] Delighted to. [He starts for the door in rear.]

LILY--[As if suddenly making up her mind.] Wait a second! I'm coming
with you--

DICK--Sure thing--only hurry, darn you! [He goes out.]

LILY--[Stops at the door in rear and catching MARTHA's eye, looks
meaningly at the others.] Phew! I need fresh air! [She makes an
encouraging motion as if pummeling someone to MARTHA, indicating her
assembled family as the victim--then goes out laughing. A motor is
heard starting--running off.]

ESTHER--[With a huge sigh of relief.] Thank goodness, she's gone. What
a vixen! What would you do if you had a sister like that, Martha?

MARTHA--I'd love her--and try to understand her.

SHEFFIELD--[Meaningly.] She's a bad ally to rely on--this side of the
fence one day, and that the next.

MARTHA--Is that why you advised her to become a lawyer, Mr. Sheffield?

SHEFFIELD--[Stung, but maintaining an unruffled front.] Now, now, that
remark must be catalogued as catty.

MARTHA--[Defiantly.] It seems to be in the Bridgetown atmosphere. I
never was--not the least bit--in the open air.

JAYSON--[Conciliatingly.] Oh, Bridgetown isn't so bad, Martha, once you
get used to us.

JOHN--It's one of the most prosperous and wealthy towns in the
U.S.--and that means in the world, nowadays.

EMILY--[With her sugary smile.] That isn't what Martha means, you
silly. I know what she's thinking about us, and I'm not sure that I
don't agree with her--partly. She feels that we're so awfully
strict--about certain things. It must be so different in the Far
West--I suppose--so much freer.

MARTHA--[Acidly.] Then you believe broad-mindedness and clean thinking
are a question of locality? I can't agree with you. I know nothing of
the present Far West, not having lived there for ten years, but Curt
and I have lived in the Far East and I'm sure he'd agree with me in
saying that Chinese ancestor worship is far more dignified than ours.
After all, you know, theirs is religion, not snobbery. [There is a loud
honking of an auto horn before the house. MARTHA starts, seems to come
to a quick decision, and announces with studied carelessness.] That
must be Mr. Bigelow. I suppose Lily told you I had an engagement to go
motoring with him. So sorry I must leave. But I'm like Lily. I need
fresh air. [She walks to the study door as she is talking.] I'll call
Curt. [She raps loudly on the door and calls.] Curt! Come out! It's
important. [She turns and goes to the door, smiling fixedly.] He'll be
out when he's through swearing. [She goes out, rear.]

JOHN--[Exploding.] Well, of all the damned cheek!

ESTHER--She shows her breeding, I must say.

EMILY--[With horror.] Oh, how rude--and insulting.

MRS. DAVIDSON--[Rising rigidly to her feet.] I will never set foot in
this house again! JAYSON--[Jumping up to restrain her--worriedly.] Now,
Aunt Elizabeth, do keep your head! We must have no scandal of any sort.
Remember there are servants about. Do sit down. [The old lady refuses
in stubborn silence.]

SHEFFIELD--[Judiciously.] One must make allowances for one in her
condition, Aunt.

JAYSON--[Snatching at this.] Exactly. Remember her condition. Aunt
[testily] and do sit down. [The old lady plumps herself down again
angrily.]

EMILY--[In her lisp of hidden meanings.] Yes, the family mustn't
forget--her condition. [The door from the study is opened and CURT
appears. His face shows his annoyance at being interrupted, his eyes
are preoccupied. They all turn and greet him embarrassedly. He nods
silently and comes slowly down front.]

CURTIS--[Looking around.] Where's Martha? What's the important thing
she called me out for?

ESTHER--[Forcing gaiety.] To play host, you big bear, you! Don't you
think we came to see you, too? Sit down here and be good. [He sits on
sofa.]

EMILY--[Softly.] Martha had to leave us to go motoring with Mr. Bigelow.

ESTHER--[Hastily.] And the three children.

CURTIS--[Frowning grumpily.] Hm! Big and his eternal kids. [He sighs.
They exchange meaning glances. CURT seems to feel ashamed of his
grumpiness and tries to fling it off--with a cheerful smile.] But what
the deuce! I must be getting selfish to grudge Martha her bit of fresh
air. You don't know what it means to outdoor animals like us to be pent
up. [He springs to his feet and paces back and forth nervously.] We're
used to living with the sky for a roof--[Then interestedly.] Did Martha
tell you I'd definitely decided to go on the five year Asian expedition?

ESTHER--Curt! You're not!

EMILY--And leave Martha here--all alone--for five years?

JAYSON--Yes, you can't take Martha with you this time, you know.

CURTIS--[With a laugh.] No? What makes you so sure of that? [As they
look mystified, he continues confidentially.] I'll let you in on the
secret--only you must all promise not to breathe a word to
Martha--until to-morrow. To-morrow is her birthday, you know, and this
is a surprise I've saved for her. [They all nod.] I've been intriguing
my damnedest for the past month to get permission for Martha to go with
me. It was difficult because women are supposed to be barred.
[Happily.] But I've succeeded. The letter came this morning. How
tickled to death she'll be when she hears! I know she's given up hope.
[Thoughtfully.] I suppose it's that has been making her act so
out-of-sorts lately.

JAYSON--[Worriedly.] Hmm! But would you persist in going--alone--if you
knew it was impossible for her--?

CURTIS--[Frowning.] I can't imagine it without her. You people can't
have any idea what a help--a chum--she's been. You can't believe that a
woman could be--so much that--in a life of that kind--how I've grown to
depend on her. The thousand details--she attends to them all. She
remembers everything. Why, I'd be lost. I wouldn't know how to start.
[With a laugh.] I know this sounds like a confession of weakness but
it's true just the same. [Frowning again.] However, naturally my work
must always be the first consideration. Yes, absolutely! [Then with
glad relief.] But what's the use of rambling on this way? We can both
go, thank heaven!

MRS. DAVIDSON--[Sternly.] No. SHE cannot go. And it is YOUR duty--

CURTIS--[Interrupting her with a trace of impatience.] Oh, come! That's
all nonsense, Aunt. You don't understand the kind of woman Martha is.

MRS. DAVIDSON--[Harshly.] The women I understand prefer rearing their
children to selfish gallivanting over the world.

CURTIS--[Impatiently.] But we have no children now, Aunt.

MRS. DAVIDSON--I know that, more's the pity. But later--

CURTIS--[Emphatically.] No, I tell you! It's impossible!

MRS. DAVIDSON--[Grimly.] I have said my last word. Go your own road and
work your own ruin.

CURTIS--[Brusquely.] I think I'll change my togs and go for a walk.
Excuse me for a second. I'll be right down again. [He goes out, rear.]

EMILY--[With her false air of innocence.] Curt acts so funny, doesn't
he? Did you notice how emphatic he was about its being impossible? And
he said Martha seemed to him to be acting queer lately--with him, I
suppose he meant.

ESTHER--He certainly appeared put out when he heard she'd gone motoring
with Big.

JAYSON--[Moodily.] This dislike of the very mention of children. It
isn't like Curt, not a bit.

JOHN--There's something rotten in Denmark somewhere. This family will
yet live to regret having accepted a stranger--

SHEFFIELD--[Mollifyingly--with a judicial air.] Come now! This is all
only suspicion. There is no evidence; you have no case; and the
defendant is innocent until you have proved her guilty, remember.
[Getting to his feet.] Well, let's break up. Esther, you and I ought to
be getting home. [They all rise.]

JAYSON--[Testily.] Well, if I were sure it would all blow over without
any open scandal, I'd offer up a prayer of thanks. [The Curtain Falls]





ACT II


SCENE--CURTIS JAYSON'S study. On the left, forward, a gun rack in which
are displayed several varieties of rifles and shotguns. Farther back,
three windows looking out on the garden. In the rear wall, an open
fireplace with two leather arm-chairs in front of it. To right of
fireplace, a door leading into the living-room. In the far right
corner, another chair. In the right wall, three windows looking out on
the lawn and garden. On this side, front, a typewriting table with
machine and chair. Opposite the windows on the right, a bulky leather
couch, facing front. In front of the windows on the left, a long table
with stacks of paper piled here and there on it, reference books, etc.
On the left of table, a swivel chair. Gray oak bookcases are built into
the cream rough plaster walls which are otherwise almost hidden from
view by a collection of all sorts of hunter's trophies, animal heads of
all kinds. The floor is covered with animal skins--tiger, polar bear,
leopard, lion, etc. Skins are also thrown over the backs of the chairs.
The sections of the bookcase not occupied by scientific volumes have
been turned into a specimen case for all sorts of zoological,
geological, anthropological oddities.

It is mid-morning, sunny and bright, of the following day.

CURTIS and BIGELOW are discovered. CURTIS is half-sitting on the corner
of the table, left, smoking a pipe. BIGELOW is lying sprawled on the
couch. Through the open windows on the right come the shouts of
children playing. MARTHA's voice joins in with theirs.

BIGELOW--Listen to that rumpus, will you! The kids are having the time
of their lives. [He goes to the window and looks out--delightedly.]
Your wife is playing hide and seek with them. Come and look.

CURTIS--[With a trace of annoyance.] Oh, I can see well enough from
here.

BIGELOW--[With a laugh.] She seems to get as much fun out of it as they
do. [As a shriek comes from outside--excitedly.] Ah, Eddy discovered
her behind the tree. Isn't he tickled now! [He turns back from the
window and lights a cigarette--enthusiastically.] Jove, what a hand she
is with children!

CURTIS--[As if the subject bored him.] Oh, Martha gets along well with
anyone.

BIGELOW--[Sits on the couch again--with a sceptical smile.] You think
so? With everyone?

CURTIS--[Surprised.] Yes--with everyone we've ever come in contact
with--even aboriginal natives.

BIGELOW--With the aboriginal natives of Bridgetown? With the well-known
Jayson family, for example?

CURTIS--[Getting to his feet--frowning.] Why, everything's all right
between Martha and them, isn't it? What do you mean, Big? I certainly
imagined--but I'll confess this damn book has had me so preoccupied--

BIGELOW--Too darn preoccupied, if you'll pardon my saying so. It's not
fair to leave her to fight it alone.

CURTIS--[Impatiently.] Fight what? Martha has a sense of humor. I'm
sure their petty prejudices merely amuse her.

BIGELOW--[Sententiously.] A mosquito is a ridiculous, amusing creature,
seen under a microscope; but when a swarm has been stinging you all
night--

CURTIS--[A broad grin coming over his face.] You speak from experience,
eh?

BIGELOW--[Smiling.] You bet I do. Touch me anywhere and you'll find a
bite. This, my native town, did me the honor of devoting its entire
leisure attention for years to stinging me to death.

CURTIS--Well, if I am to believe one-tenth of the family letters I used
to receive on the subject of my old friend, Bigelow, they sure had just
cause.

BIGELOW--Oh, I'll play fair. I'll admit they did--then. But it's
exasperating to know they never give you credit for changing--I almost
said, reforming, One ought to be above the gossip of a town like
this--but say what you like, it does get under your skin.

CURTIS--[With an indulgent smile.] So you'd like to be known as a
reformed character, eh?

BIGELOW--[Rather ruefully.] Et tu! Your tone is sceptical. But I swear
to you, Curt, I'm an absolutely new man since my wife's death, since
I've grown to love the children. Before that I hardly knew them. They
were hers, not mine, it seemed. [His face lighting up.] Now we're the
best of pals, and I've commenced to appreciate life from a different
angle. I've found a career at last--the children--the finest career a
man could have, I believe.

CURTIS--[Indifferently.] Yes, I suppose so--if you're made that way.

BIGELOW--Meaning you're not?

CURTIS--Not any more. [Frowning.] I tried that once.

BIGELOW--[After a pause--with a smile.] But we're wandering from the
subject of Martha versus the mosquitoes.

CURTIS--[With a short laugh.] Oh, to the deuce with that! Trust Martha
to take care of herself. Besides, I'll have her out of this stagnant
hole before so very long--six months, to be exact.

BIGELOW--Where do you think of settling her then?

CURTIS--No settling about it. I'm going to take her with me.

BIGELOW--[Surprised.] On the Asian expedition?

CURTIS--Yes. I haven't told her yet but I'm going to to-day. It's her
birthday--and I've been saving the news to surprise her with.

BIGELOW--Her birthday? I wish the children and I had known--but it's
not too late yet.

CURTIS--[With a grin.] Thirty-nine candles, if you're thinking of
baking a cake!

BIGELOW--[Meaningly.] That's not old--but it's not young either, Curt.

CURTIS--[Disgustedly.] You talk like an old woman, Big. What have years
to do with it? Martha is young in spirit and always will be. [There is
a knock at the door and MARTHA's voice calling: "May I come in,
people?"] Sure thing! [BIGELOW jumps to open the door and MARTHA
enters. She is flushed, excited, full of the joy of life, panting from
her exertions.]

MARTHA--[Laughing.] I've had to run away and leave them with the
governess. They're too active for me. [She throws herself on the
couch.] Phew! I'm all tired out. I must be getting old.

CURTIS--[With a grin.] Big was just this minute remarking that, Martha.
[BIGELOW looks embarrassed.]

MARTHA--[Laughing at him.] Well, I declare! Of all the horrid things to
hear--

BIGELOW--[Still embarrassed but forcing a joking tone.]
He--prevaricates, Mrs. Jayson.

MARTHA--There now, Curt! I'm sure it was you who said it. It sounds
just like one of your horrid facts.

BIGELOW--And how can I offer my felicitations now? But I do, despite
your husband's calumny. May your shadow never grow less!

MARTHA--Thank you. [She shakes his proffered hand heartily.]

BIGELOW--And now I'll collect my flock and go home.

CURTIS--So long, Big. Be sure you don't mislay one of your heirs!

BIGELOW--No fear--but they might mislay me. [He goes. CURT sits down on
couch. MARTHA goes to the window right, and looks out--after a pause,
waving her hand.]

MARTHA--There they go. What darlings they are! [CURTIS grunts
perfunctorily. MARTHA comes back and sits beside CURT on the
couch--with a sigh.] Whoever did say it was right, Curt, I am getting
old.

CURTIS--[Taking one of her hands and patting it.] Nonsense!

MARTHA--[Shaking her head and smiling with a touch of sadness.] No. I
feel it.

CURTIS--[Puts his arms around her protectingly.] Nonsense! You're not
the sort that ever grows old.

MARTHA--[Nestling up to him.] I'm afraid we're all that sort, dear.
Even you. [She touches the white hair about his temples playfully.]
Circumstantial evidence. I'll have to dye it when you're asleep some
time--and then nobody'll know.

CURTIS--[Looking at her.] You haven't any silver threads. [Jokingly.]
Am I to suspect--?

MARTHA--No, I don't. Honest, cross my heart, I wouldn't even conceal
that from you, if I did. But gray hairs prove nothing. I am actually
older than you, don't forget.

CURTIS--One whole year! That's frightful, isn't it?

MARTHA--I'm a woman, remember; so that one means at least six. Ugh!
Let's not talk about it. Do you know, it really fills me with a queer
panic sometimes?

CURTIS--[Squeezing her.] Silly girl!

MARTHA--[Snuggling close to him.] Will you always love me--even when
I'm old and ugly and feeble and you're still young and strong and
handsome?

CURTIS--[Kisses her--tenderly.] Martha! What a foolish question,
sweetheart. If we ever have to grow old, we'll do it together just as
we've always done everything.

MARTHA--[With a happy sigh.] That's my dream of happiness, Curt.
[Enthusiastically.] Oh, it has been a wonderful, strange life we've
lived together, Curt, hasn't it? You're sure you've never
regretted--never had the weest doubt that it might have been better
with--someone else?

CURTIS--[Kisses her again--tenderly reproachful.] Martha!

MARTHA--And I have helped--really helped you, haven't I?

CURTIS--[Much moved.] You've been the best wife a man could ever wish
for, Martha. You've been--you are wonderful. I owe everything to
you--your sympathy and encouragement. Don't you know I realize that?
[She kisses him gratefully.]

MARTHA--[Musing happily.] Yes, it's been a wonderful, glorious life.
I'd live it over again if I could, every single second of it--even the
terrible suffering--the children.

CURTIS--[Wincing.] Don't. I wouldn't want that over again. [Then
changing the subject abruptly.] But why have you been putting all our
life into the past tense? It seems to me the most interesting part is
still ahead of us.

MARTHA--[Softly.] I mean--together--Curt.

CURTIS--So do I!

MARTHA--But you're going away--and I can't go with you this time.

CURTIS--[Smiling to himself over her head.] Yes, that does complicate
matters, doesn't it?

MARTHA--[Hurt--looking up at him.] Curt! How indifferently you say
that--as if you didn't care!

CURTIS--[Avoiding her eyes--teasingly.] What do you think you'll do all
the time I'm gone?

MARTHA--Oh, I'll be lost--dead--I won't know what to do. I'll die of
loneliness--[yearning creeping into her voice] unless--

CURTIS--[Inquisitively.] Unless what?

MARTHA--[Burying her face on his shoulder--passionately.] Oh, Curt, I
love you so! Swear that you'll always love me no matter what I do--no
matter what I ask--

CURTIS--[Vaguely uneasy now, trying to peer into her face.] But,
sweetheart--

MARTHA--[Giving way weakly to her feelings for a moment--entreatingly.]
Then don't go!

CURTIS--[Astonished.] Why, I've got to go. You know that.

MARTHA--Yes, I suppose you have. [Vigorously, as if flinging off a
weakness.] Of course you have!

CURTIS--But, Martha--you said you'd be lonely unless--unless what?

Martha--Unless I--[She hesitates, blushing and confused.] I mean
we--oh, I'm so afraid of what you'll--hold me close, very close to you
and I'll whisper it. [She pulls his head down and whispers in his ear.
A look of disappointment and aversion forces itself on his face.]

CURTIS--[Almost indignantly.] But that's impossible, Martha!

MARTHA--[Pleadingly.] Now don't be angry with me, Curt--not till you've
heard everything. [With a trace of defiance.] It isn't impossible,
Curt. It's so! It's happened! I was saving it as a secret--to tell you
to-day--on my birthday.

CURTIS--[Stunned.] You mean it--is a fact?

MARTHA--Yes. [Then pitifully.] Oh, Curt, don't look that way! You seem
so cold--so far away from me. [Straining her arms about him.] Why don't
you hold me close to you? Why don't you say you're glad--for my sake?

CURTIS--[Agitatedly.] But Martha--you don't understand. How can I
pretend gladness when--[Vehemently.] Why, it would spoil all our plans!

MARTHA--Plans? OUR plans? What do you mean?

CURTIS--[Excitedly.] Why, you're going with me, of course! I've
obtained official permission. I've been working for it for months. The
letter came yesterday morning.

MARTHA--[Stunned.] Permission--to go with you--

CURTIS--[Excitedly.] Yes. I couldn't conceive going without you. And I
knew how you must be wishing--

MARTHA--[In pain.] Oh!

CURTIS--[Distractedly--jumping to his feet and staring at her
bewilderedly.] Martha! You don't mean to tell me you weren't!

MARTHA--[In a crushed voice.] I was wishing you would finally decide
not to go--to stay at home.

CURTIS--[Betraying exasperation.] But you must realize that's
impossible. Martha, are you sure you've clearly understood what I've
told you? You can go with me, do you hear? Everything is arranged. And
I've had to fight so hard--I was running the risk of losing my own
chance by my insistence that I couldn't go without you.

MARTHA--[Weakly and helplessly.] I understand all that, Curt.

CURTIS--[Indignantly.] And yet--you hesitate! Why, this is the greatest
thing of its kind ever attempted! There are unprecedented
possibilities! A whole new world of knowledge may be opened up--the
very origin of Man himself! And you will be the only woman--

MARTHA--I realize all that, Curt.

CURTIS--You can't--and hesitate! And then--think, Martha!--it will mean
that you and I won't have to be separated. We can go on living the old,
free life together.

MARTHA--[Growing calm now.] You are forgetting--what I told you, Curt.
You must face the fact. I cannot go.

CURTIS--[Overwhelmed by the finality of her tone--after a pause.] How
long have you known--this?

MARTHA--Two months, about.

CURTIS--But why didn't you tell me before?

MARTHA--I was afraid you wouldn't understand--and you haven't, Curt.
But why didn't you tell me before--what you were planning?

CURTIS--[Eagerly.] You mean--then--you would have been glad to
go--before this had happened?

MARTHA--I would have accepted it.

CURTIS--[Despairingly.] Martha, how could you ever have allowed this to
happen? Oh, I suppose I'm talking foolishness. It wasn't your seeking,
I know.

MARTHA--Yes it was, Curt. I wished it. I sought it.

CURTIS--[Indignantly.] Martha! [Then in a hurt tone.] You have broken
the promise we made when they died. We were to keep their memories
inviolate. They were to be always--our only children.

MARTHA--[Gently.] They forgive me, Curt. And you will forgive me,
too--when you see him--and love him.

CURTIS--Him?

MARTHA--I know it will be a boy.

CURTIS--[Sinking down on the couch beside her--dully.] Martha! You have
blown my world to bits.

MARTHA--[Taking one of his hands in hers--gently.] You must make
allowances for me. Curt, and forgive me. I AM getting old. No, it's the
truth. I've reached the turning point. Will you listen to my side of
it, Curt, and try to see it--with sympathy--with true
understanding--[With a trace of bitterness.]--forgetting your work for
the moment?

CURTIS--[Miserably.] That's unfair, Martha. I think of it as OUR
work--and I have always believed you did, too.

MARTHA--[Quickly.] I did, Curt! I do! All in the past is our work. It's
my greatest pride to think so. But, Curt, I'll have to confess
frankly--during the past two years I've felt myself--feeling as if I
wasn't complete--with that alone.

CURTIS--Martha! [Bitterly.] And all the time I believed that more and
more it was becoming the aim of your life, too.

MARTHA--[With a sad smile.] I'm glad of that, dear. I tried my best to
conceal it from you. It would have been so unfair to let you guess
while we were still in harness. But oh, how I kept looking forward to
the time when we would come back--and rest--in our own home! You
know--you said that was your plan--to stay here and write your
books--and I was hoping--

CURTIS--[With a gesture of aversion.] I loathe this book-writing. It
isn't my part, I realize now. But when I made the plans you speak of,
how could I know that then?

MARTHA--[Decisively.] You've got to go. I won't try to stop you. I'll
help all in my power--as I've always done. Only--I can't go with you
any more. And you must help me--to do my work--by understanding it. [He
is silent, frowning, his face agitated, preoccupied. She goes on
intensely.] Oh, Curt, I wish I could tell you what I feel, make you
feel with me the longing for a child. If you had just the tiniest bit
of feminine in you--! [Forcing a smile.] But you're so utterly
masculine, dear! That's what has made me love you, I suppose--so I've
no right to complain of it. [Intensely.] I don't. I wouldn't have you
changed one bit! I love you! And I love the things you love--your
work--because it's a part of you. And that's what I want you to do--to
reciprocate--to love the creator in me--to desire that I, too, should
complete myself with the thing nearest my heart!

CURTIS--[Intensely preoccupied with his own struggle--vaguely.] But I
thought--

MARTHA--I know; but, after all, your work is yours, not mine. I have
been only a helper, a good comrade, too, I hope, but--somehow--outside
of it all. Do you remember two years ago when we were camped in Yunnan,
among the aboriginal tribes? It was one night there when we were lying
out in our sleeping-bags up in the mountains along the Tibetan
frontier. I couldn't sleep. Suddenly I felt oh, so tired--utterly
alone--out of harmony with you--with the earth under me. I became
horribly despondent--like an outcast who suddenly realizes the whole
world is alien. And all the wandering about the world, and all the
romance and excitement I'd enjoyed in it, appeared an aimless, futile
business, chasing around in a circle in an effort to avoid touching
reality. Forgive me, Curt. I meant myself, not you, of course. Oh, it
was horrible, I tell you, to feel that way. I tried to laugh at myself,
to fight it off, but it stayed and grew worse. It seemed as if I were
the only creature alive--who was not alive. And all at once the picture
came of a tribeswoman who stood looking at us in a little mountain
village as we rode by. She was nursing her child. Her eyes were so
curiously sure of herself. She was horribly ugly, poor woman, and
yet--as the picture came back to me--I appeared to myself the ugly one
while she was beautiful. And I thought of our children who had
died--and such a longing for another child came to me that I began
sobbing. You were asleep. You didn't hear. [She pauses--then proceeds
slowly.] And when we came back here--to have a home at last, I was so
happy because I saw my chance of fulfillment--before it was too late.
[In a gentle, pleading voice.] Now can you understand, dear? [She puts
her hand on his arm.]

CURTIS--[Starting as if awaking from a sleep.] Understand? No, I can't
understand, Martha.

MARTHA--[In a gasp of unbearable hurt.] Curt! I don't believe you heard
a word I was saying.

CURTIS--[Bursting forth as if releasing all the pent-up struggle that
has been gathering within him.] No, I can't understand. I cannot,
cannot! It seems like treachery to me.

MARTHA--Curt!

CURTIS--I've depended on you. This is the crucial point--the biggest
thing of my life--and you desert me!

MARTHA--[Resentment gathering in her eyes.] If you had listened to
me--if you had even tried to feel--

CURTIS--I feel that you are deliberately ruining my highest hope. How
can I go on without you? I've been trying to imagine myself alone. I
can't! Even with my work--who can I get to take your place? Oh, Martha,
why do you have to bring this new element into our lives at this late
day? Haven't we been sufficient, you and I together? Isn't that a more
difficult, beautiful happiness to achieve than--children? Everyone has
children. Don't I love you as much as any man could love a woman? Isn't
that enough for you? Doesn't it mean anything to you that I need you so
terribly--for myself, for my work--for everything that is best and
worthiest in me? Can you expect me to be glad when you propose to
introduce a stranger who will steal away your love, your interest--who
will separate us and deprive me of you! No, no, I cannot! It's asking
the impossible. I am only human.

MARTHA--If you were human you would think of my life as well as yours.

CURTIS--I do! It is OUR life I am fighting for, not mine--OUR life that
you want to destroy.

MARTHA--Our life seems to mean your life to you, Curt--and only your
life. I have devoted fifteen years to that. Now I must fight for my own.

CURTIS--[Aghast.] You talk as if we were enemies, Martha! [Striding
forward and seizing her in his arms.] No, you don't mean it! I love you
so, Martha! You've made yourself part of my life, my work--I need you
so! I can't share you with anyone! I won't! Martha, my own! Say that
you won't, dear? [He kisses her passionately again and again.]

MARTHA--[All her love and tenderness aroused by his kisses and
passionate sincerity--weakening.] Curt! Curt! [Pitiably.] It won't
separate us, dear. Can't you see he will be a link between us--even
when we are away from each other--that he will bring us together all
the closer?

CURTIS--But I can't be away from you!

MARTHA--[Miserably.] Oh, Curt, why won't you look the fact in the
face--and learn to accept it with joy? Why can't you for my sake? I
would do that for you.

CURTIS--[Breaking away from her--passionately.] You will not do what I
have implored you--for me! And I am looking the fact in the face--the
fact that there must be no fact! [Avoiding her eyes--as if defying his
own finer feelings.] There are doctors who--

MARTHA--[Shrinking back from him.] Curt! You propose that--to me! [With
overwhelming sorrow.] Oh, Curt! When I feel him--his life within
me--like a budding of my deepest soul--to flower and continue me--you
say what you have just said! [Grief-stricken.] Oh, you never, never,
never will understand!

CURTIS--[Shamefacedly.] Martha, I--[Distractedly.] I don't know what
I'm saying! This whole situation is so unbearable! Why, why does it
have to happen now?

MARTHA--[Gently.] It must be now--or not at all--at my age, dear. [Then
after a pause--staring at him frightenedly--sadly.] You have changed,
Curt. I remember it used to be your happiness to sacrifice yourself for
me.

CURTIS--I had no work then--no purpose beyond myself. To sacrifice
oneself is easy. But when your only meaning becomes as a searcher for
knowledge--you cannot sacrifice that, Martha. You must sacrifice
everything for that--or lose all sincerity.

MARTHA--I wonder where your work leaves off and you begin. Hasn't your
work become you?

CURTIS--Yes and no. [Helplessly.] You can't understand, Martha! ...

MARTHA--Nor you.

CURTIS--[With a trace of bitter irony.] And you and your work? Aren't
they one and the same?

MARTHA--So you think mine is selfish, too? [After a pause--sadly.] I
can't blame you, Curt. It's all my fault. I've spoiled you by giving up
my life so completely to yours. You've forgotten I have one. Oh, I
don't mean that I was a martyr. I know that in you alone lay my
happiness and fulfillment in those years--after the children died. But
we are no longer what we were then. We must, both of us, relearn to
love and respect--what we have become.

CURTIS--[Violently.] Nonsense! You talk as if love were an intellectual
process--[Taking her into his arms--passionately.] I love you--always
and forever! You are me and I am you. What use is all this vivisecting?
[He kisses her fiercely. They look into each other's eyes for a
second--then instinctively fall back from one another.]

MARTHA--[In a whisper.] Yes, you love me. But who am I? There is no
recognition in your eyes. You don't know.

CURTIS--[Frightenedly.] Martha! Stop! This is terrible! [They continue
to be held by each other's fearfully questioning eyes.]

[The Curtain Falls]





ACT III

SCENE--Same as Act II. As the curtain rises, JAYSON is discovered
sitting in an armchair by the fireplace, in which a log fire is burning
fitfully. He is staring into the flames, a strained, expectant
expression on his face. It is about three o'clock in the morning. There
is no light but that furnished by the fire which fills the room with
shifting shadows. The door in the rear is opened and RICHARD appears,
his face harried by the stress of unusual emotion. Through the opened
doorway, a low, muffled moan of anguish sounds from the upper part of
the house. JAYSON and RICHARD both shudder. The latter closes the door
behind him quickly as if anxious to shut out the noise.

JAYSON--[Looking up anxiously.] Well?

RICHARD--[Involuntarily straightening up as if about to salute and
report to a superior officer.] No change, sir. [Then, as if remembering
himself, comes to the fireplace and slumps down in a
chair--agitatedly.] God, Dad, I can't stand her moaning and screaming!
It's got my nerves shot to pieces. I thought I was hardened. I've heard
them out in No Man's Land--dying by inches--when you couldn't get to
them or help--but this is worse--a million times! After all, that was
war--and they were men--

JAYSON--Martha is having an exceptionally hard ordeal.

RICHARD--Since three o'clock this morning--yesterday morning, I should
say. It's a wonder she isn't dead.

JAYSON--[After a pause.] Where is Curt?

RICHARD--[Harshly.] Still out in the garden, walking around bareheaded
in the cold like a lunatic.

JAYSON--Why didn't you make him come in?

RICHARD--Make him! It's easy to say. He's in a queer state, Dad, I can
tell you! There's something torturing him besides her pain--

JAYSON--[After a pause.] Yes, there's a lot in all this we don't know
about.

RICHARD--I suppose the reason he's so down on the family is because
we've rather cut her since that tea affair.

JAYSON--He shouldn't blame us. She acted abominably and has certainly
caused enough talk since then--always about with Bigelow--

RICHARD--[With a sardonic laugh.] And yet he keeps asking everyone to
send for Bigelow--says he wants to talk to him--not us. WE can't
understand! [He laughs bitterly.]

JAYSON--I'm afraid Curt knows we understand too much. [Agitatedly.] But
why does he want Bigelow, in God's name? In his present state--with the
suspicions he must have--there's liable to be a frightful scene.

RICHARD--Don't be afraid of a scene. [With pitying scorn.] The hell of
it is he seems to regard Bigelow as his best friend. Damned if I can
make it out.

JAYSON--I gave orders that they were always to tell Curt Bigelow was
out of town and couldn't be reached. [With a sigh.] What a frightful
situation for all of us! [After a pause.] It may sound cruel of
me--but--I can't help wishing for all our sakes that this child will
never--

RICHARD--Yes, Dad, I know what you're thinking. It would be the best
thing for it, too--although I hate myself for saying it. [There is a
pause. Then the door in rear is opened and LILY appears. She is pale
and agitated. Leaving the door open behind her she comes forward and
flings herself on the lounge.]

JAYSON--[Anxiously.] Well?

LILY--[Irritably, getting up and switching on the lights.] Isn't
everything gloomy enough? [Sits down.] I couldn't bear it upstairs one
second longer. Esther and Emily are coming down, too. It's too much for
them--and they've had personal experience. [Trying to mask her
agitation by a pretense at flippancy.] I hereby become a life-member of
the birth-control league. Let's let humanity cease--if God can't manage
its continuance any better than that!

RICHARD--[Seriously.] Second the motion.

JAYSON--[Peevishly.] You're young idiots. Keep your blasphemous
nonsense to yourself, Lily!

LILY--[Jumping up and stamping her foot--hysterically.] I can't stand
it. Take me home, Dick, won't you? We're doing no good waiting here.
I'll have a fit--or something--if I stay.

RICHARD--[Glad of the excuse to go himself--briskly.] That's how I
feel. I'll drive you home. Come along. [ESTHER and EMILY enter,
followed by JOHN.]

LILY--[Excitedly.] I'll never marry or have a child! Never, never! I'll
go into Mark's office to-morrow and make myself independent of marriage.

ESTHER--Sssh! Lily! Don't you know you're shouting? And what silly talk!

LILY--I'll show you whether it's silly! I'll--

RICHARD--[Impatiently.] Are you coming or not?

LILY--[Quickly.] Yes--wait--here I am. [She pushes past the others and
follows RICHARD out rear. ESTHER and EMILY sit on couch--JOHN on chair,
right rear.]

ESTHER--[With a sigh.] I thought I went through something when mine
were born--but this is too awful.

EMILY--And, according to John, Curt actually says he hates it! Isn't
that terrible? [After a pause--meaningly.] It's almost as if her
suffering was a punishment, don't you think?

ESTHER--If it is, she's being punished enough, Heaven knows. It can't
go on this way much longer or something dreadful will happen.

EMILY--Do you think the baby--

ESTHER--I don't know. I shouldn't say it but perhaps it would be better
if--

EMILY--That's what I think.

ESTHER--Oh, I wish I didn't have such evil suspicions--but the way Curt
goes on--how can you help feeling there's something wrong?

JAYSON--[Suddenly.] How is Curt?

EMILY--John just came in from the garden. [Turning around to where JOHN
is dozing in his chair--sharply.] John! Well I never! If he isn't
falling asleep! John! [He jerks up his head and stares at her, blinking
stupidly. She continues irritably.] A nice time to pick out for a nap,
I must say.

JOHN--[Surlily.] Don't forget I have to be at the bank in the morning.

JAYSON--[Testily.] I have to be at the bank, too--and you don't notice
me sleeping. Tell me about Curt. You just left him, didn't you?

JOHN--[Irritably.] Yes, and I've been walking around that damned garden
half the night watching over him. Isn't that enough to wear anyone out?
I can feel I've got a terrible cold coming on--

ESTHER--[Impatiently.] For goodness sake, don't you start to pity
yourself!

JOHN--[Indignantly.] I'm not. I think I've showed my willingness to do
everything I could. If Curt was only the least bit grateful! He isn't.
He hates us all and wishes we were out of his home. I would have left
long ago if I didn't want to do my part in saving the family name from
disgrace.

JAYSON--[Impatiently.] Has he quieted down, that's what I want to know?

JOHN--[Harshly.] Not the least bit. He's out of his head--and I'd be
out of mine if a child was being born to my wife that--

JAYSON--[Angrily.] Keep that to yourself! Remember you have no proof.
[Morosely.] Think all you want--but don't talk.

EMILY--[Pettishly.] The whole town knows it, anyway; I'm sure they must.

JAYSON--There's only been gossip--no real scandal. Let's do our united
best to keep it at that. [After a pause.] Where's Aunt Elizabeth? We'll
have to keep an eye on her, too, or she's quite liable to blurt out the
whole business before all comers.

ESTHER--You needn't be afraid. She's forgotten all about the scandalous
part. No word of it has come to her out in the country and she hasn't
set foot in town since that unfortunate tea, remember. And at present
she's so busy wishing the child will be a boy, that she hasn't a
thought for another thing. [The door in the rear is opened and MARK
SHEFFIELD enters. He comes up to the fire to warm himself. The others
watch him in silence for a moment.]

JAYSON--[Impatiently.] Well, Mark? Where's Curt?

SHEFFIELD--[Frowning.] Inside. I think he'll be with us in a minute.
[With a scornful smile.] Just now he's 'phoning to Bigelow. [The others
gasp.]

JAYSON--[Furiously.] For God's sake, couldn't you stop him?

SHEFFIELD--Not without a scene. Your Aunt persuaded him to come into
the house--and he rushed for the 'phone. I think he guessed we had been
lying to him--

JAYSON--[After a pause.] Then he--Bigelow will be here soon?

SHEFFIELD--[Drily.] It depends on his sense of decency. As he seems
lacking in that quality, I've no doubt he'll come.

JOHN--[Rising to his feet--pompously.] Then I, for one, will go. Come,
Emily. Since Curt seems bound to disgrace everyone concerned, I want it
thoroughly understood that we wash our hands of the whole disgraceful
affair.

EMILY--[Snappishly.] Go if you want to! I won't! [Then with a
sacrificing air.] I think it is our duty to stay.

JAYSON--[Exasperated.] Sit down. Wash your hands indeed! Aren't you as
much concerned as any of us?

SHEFFIELD--[Sharply.] Sshh! I think I hear Curt now. [JOHN sits down
abruptly. All stiffen into stony attitudes. The door is opened and CURT
enters. He is incredibly drawn and haggard, a tortured, bewildered
expression in his eyes. His hair is dishevelled, his boots caked with
mud. He stands at the door staring from one to the other of his family
with a wild, contemptuous scorn and mutters.]

CURTIS--Liars! Well, he's coming now. [Then bewilderedly.] Why didn't
you want him to come, eh? He's my oldest friend. I've got to talk to
someone--and I can't to you. [Wildly.] What do you want here, anyway?
Why don't you go? [A scream of MARTHA's is heard through the doorway.
CURT shudders violently, slams the door to with a crash, putting his
shoulders against it as if to bar out the sound inexorably--in
anguish.] God, why must she go through such agony? Why? Why? [He goes
to the fireplace as MARK makes way for him, flings himself exhaustedly
on a chair, his shoulders bowed, his face hidden in his hands. The
others stare at him pityingly. There is a long silence. Then the two
women whisper together, get up and tiptoe out of the room, motioning
for the others to follow them. JOHN does so. SHEFFIELD starts to go,
then notices the preoccupied JAYSON who is staring moodily into the
fire.]

SHEFFIELD--Sstt! [As JAYSON looks up--in a whisper.] Let's go out and
leave him alone. Perhaps he'll sleep.

JAYSON--[Starting to follow SHEFFIELD, hesitates and puts a hand on his
son's shoulder.] Curt. Remember I'm your father. Can't you confide in
me? I'll do anything to help.

CURTIS--[Harshly.] No, Dad. Leave me alone.

JAYSON--[Piqued.] As you wish. [He starts to go.]

CURTIS--And send Big in to me as soon as he comes.

JAYSON--[Stops, appears about to object--then remarks coldly.] Very
well--if you insist. [He switches off the lights. He hesitates at the
door uncertainly, then opens it and goes out. There is a pause. Then
CURT lifts his head and peers about the room. Seeing he is alone he
springs to his feet and begins to pace back and forth, his teeth
clenched, his features working convulsively. Then, as if attracted by
an irresistible impulse, he goes to the closed door and puts his ear to
the crack. He evidently hears his wife's moans for he starts away--in
agony.]

CURTIS--Oh, Martha, Martha! Martha, darling! [He flings himself in the
chair by the fireplace--hides his face in his hands and sobs bitterly.
There is a ring from somewhere in the house. Soon after there is a
knock at the door. CURTIS doesn't hear at first but when it is repeated
he mutters huskily.] Come in. [BIGELOW enters. CURT looks up at him.]
Close that door, Big, for God's sake!

BIGELOW--[Does so--then taking off his overcoat, hat, and throwing them
on the lounge comes quickly over to CURT.] I got over as soon as I
could. [As he sees CURT's face he starts and says sympathetically.] By
Jove, old man, you look as though you'd been through hell!

CURTIS--[Grimly.] I have. I am.

BIGELOW--[Slapping his back.] Buck up! [Then anxiously.] How's Martha?

CURTIS--She's in hell, too--

BIGELOW--[Attempting consolation.] You're surely not worrying, are you?
Martha is so strong and healthy there's no doubt of her pulling through
in fine shape.

CURTIS--She should never have attempted this. [After a pause.] I've a
grudge against you, Big. It was you bringing your children over here
that first planted this in her mind.

BIGELOW--[After a pause.] I've guessed you thought that. That's why you
haven't noticed me--or them--over here so much lately. I'll confess
that I felt you--[Angrily.] And the infernal gossip--I'll admit I
thought that you--oh, damn this rotten town, anyway!

CURTIS--[Impatiently.] Oh, for God's sake! [Bitterly.] I didn't want
you here to discuss Bridgetown gossip.

BIGELOW--I know, old man, forgive me. [In spite of the closed door one
of MARTHA's agonized moans is heard. They both shudder.]

CURTIS--[In a dead, monotonous tone.] She has been moaning like that
hour after hour. I shall have those sounds in my ears until the day I
die. Nothing can ever make me forget--nothing.

BIGELOW--[Trying to distract him.] Deuce take it, Curt, what's the
matter with you? I never thought you'd turn morbid.

CURTIS--[Darkly.] I've changed, Big--I hardly know myself any more.

BIGELOW--Once you're back on the job again, you'll be all right. You're
still determined to go on this expedition, aren't you?

CURTIS--Yes. I was supposed to join them this week in New York but I've
arranged to catch up with them in China--as soon as it's possible for
us to go.

BIGELOW--Us? You mean you still plan to take--

CURTIS--[Angrily aggressive.] Yes, certainly! Why not? Martha ought to
be able to travel in a month or so.

BIGELOW--Yes, but--do you think it would be safe to take the child?

CURTIS--[With a bitter laugh.] Yes--I was forgetting the child, wasn't
I? [Viciously.] But perhaps--[Then catching himself with a groan.] Oh,
damn all children, Big!

BIGELOW--[Astonished.] Curt!

CURTIS--[In anguish.] I can't help it--I've fought against it. But it's
there--deep down in me--and I can't drive it out. I can't!

BIGELOW--[Bewildered.] What, Curt?

CURTIS--Hatred! Yes, hatred! What's the use of denying it? I must tell
someone and you're the only one who might understand. [With a wild
laugh.] For you--hated your wife, didn't you?

BIGELOW--[Stunned.] Good God, you don't mean you hate--Martha?

CURTIS--[Raging.] Hate Martha? How dare you, you fool! I love
Martha--love her with every miserable drop of blood in me--with all my
life--all my soul! She is my whole world--everything! Hate Martha! God,
man, have you gone crazy to say such a mad thing? [Savagely.] No. I
hate it. It!

BIGELOW--[Shocked.] Curt! Don't you know you can't talk like
that--now--when--CURTIS-- [Harshly.] It has made us both suffer
torments--not only now--every day, every hour, for months and months.
Why shouldn't I hate it, eh?

BIGELOW--[Staring at his friend's wild, distorted face with growing
horror.] Curt! Can't you realize how horrible--

CURTIS--Yes, it's horrible. I've told myself that a million times.
[With emphasis.] But it's true!

BIGELOW--[Severely.] Shut up! You're not yourself. Come, think for a
moment. What would Martha feel if she heard you going on this way?
Why--it would kill her!

CURTIS--[With a sobbing groan.] Oh, I know, I know! [After a pause.]
She read it in my eyes. Yes, it's horrible, but when I saw her there
suffering so frightfully--I couldn't keep it out of my eyes. I tried to
force it back--for her sake--but I couldn't. I was holding her hands
and her eyes searched mine with such a longing question in them--and
she read only my hatred there, not my love for her. And she screamed
and seemed to try to push me away. I wanted to kneel down and pray for
forgiveness--to tell her it was only my love for her--that I couldn't
help it. And then the doctors told me to leave--and now the door is
locked against me--[He sobs.]

BIGELOW--[Greatly moved.] This is only your damned imagination. They
put you out because you were in their way, that's all. And as for
Martha, she was probably suffering so much--

CURTIS--No. She read it in my eyes. I saw that look in hers--of
horror--horror of me!

BIGELOW--[Gruffly.] You're raving, damn it!

CURTIS--[Unheeding.] It came home to her then--the undeniable truth.
[With a groan.] Isn't it fiendish that I should be the one to add to
her torture--in spite of myself--in spite of all my will to conceal it!
She will never forgive me, never! And how can I forgive myself?

BIGELOW--[Distractedly.] For God's sake, don't think about it! It's
absurd--ridiculous!

CURTIS--[Growing more calm--in a tone of obsession.] She's guessed it
ever since that day when we quarreled--her birthday. Oh, you can have
no idea of the misery there has been in our lives since then. You
haven't seen or guessed the reason. No one has. It has been--the
thought of IT.

BIGELOW--Curt!

CURTIS--[Unheeding.] For years we had welded our lives together so that
we two were sufficient, each to each. There was no room for a third.
And it was a fine, free life we had made--a life of new worlds, of
discovery, of knowledge invaluable to mankind. Isn't such a life worth
all the sacrifice it must entail?

BIGELOW--But that life was your life, Curt--

CURTIS--[Vehemently.] No, it was her life, too--her work as well as
mine. She had made the life, our life--the work, our work. Had she the
right to repudiate what she had built because she suddenly has a fancy
for a home, children, a miserable ease! I had thought I was her home,
her children. I had tried to make my life worthy of being that to her.
And I had failed. I was not enough.

BIGELOW--Curt!

CURTIS--Oh, I tried to become reconciled. I tried my damnedest. I tried
to love this child as I had loved those that died. But I couldn't. And
so, this being estranged us. We loved as intensely as ever but IT
pushed us apart. I grew to dread the idea of this intruder. She saw
this in me. I denied it--but she knew. There was something in each of
us the other grew to hate. And still we loved as never before, perhaps,
for we grew to pity each other's helplessness.

BIGELOW--Curt! Are you sure you ought to tell anyone this?

CURTIS--[Waving his remark aside.] One day, when I was trying to
imagine myself without her, and finding nothing but hopelessness--yet
knowing I must go--a thought suddenly struck me--a horrible but
fascinating possibility that had never occurred to me before. [With
feverish intensity.] Can you guess what it was?

BIGELOW--No. And I think you've done enough morbid raving, if you ask
me.

CURTIS--The thought that came to me was that if a certain thing
happened, Martha could still go with me. And I knew, if it did happen,
that she would want to go, that she would fling herself into the spirit
of our work to forget, that she would be mine more than ever.

BIGELOW--[Afraid to believe the obvious answer.] Curt!

CURTIS--Yes. My thought was that the child might be born dead.

BIGELOW--[Repelled--sternly.] Damn it, man, do you know what you're
saying? [Relentingly.] No, Curt, old boy, do stop talking. If you don't
I'll send for a doctor, damned if I won't. That talk belongs in an
asylum. God, man, can't you realize this is your child--yours as well
as hers?

CURTIS--I've tried. I cannot. There is some inexorable force in me--

BIGELOW--[Coldly.] Do you realize how contemptible this confession
makes you out? [Angrily.] Why, if you had one trace of human kindness
in you--one bit of unselfish love for your wife--one particle of pity
for her suffering--

CURTIS--[Anguished.] I have--all the love and pity in the world for
her! That's why I can't help hating--the cause of her suffering.

BIGELOW--Have you never thought that you might repay Martha for giving
up all her life to you by devoting the rest of yours to her?

CURTIS--[Bitterly.] She can be happy without me. She will have this
child--to take my place. [Intensely.] You think I would not give up my
work for her? But I would! I will stay here--do anything she wishes--if
only we can make a new beginning again--together--ALONE!

BIGELOW--[Agitated.] Curt, for God's sake, don't return to that! Why,
good God, man--even now--while you're speaking--don't you realize what
may be happening? And you can talk as if you were wishing--

CURTIS--[Fiercely.] I can't help but wish it!

BIGELOW--[Distractedly.] For the love of God, if you have such
thoughts, keep them to yourself. I won't listen! You make me despise
life!

CURTIS--And would you have me love life? [The door in the rear is
opened and JAYSON enters, pale and unnerved. A succession of quick,
piercing shrieks is heard before he can close the door behind him.
Shuddering.] My God! My God! [With a fierce cry.]
Will--this--never--end!

JAYSON--[Tremblingly.] Sh-h-h, they say this is the crisis. [Puts his
arm around CURT.] Bear up, my boy, it will soon be over now. [He sits
down in the chair BIGELOW has vacated, pointedly ignoring the latter.
The door is opened again and EMILY, ESTHER, JOHN and SHEFFIELD file in
quickly as if escaping from the cries of the woman upstairs. They are
all greatly agitated. CURT groans, pressing his clenched fists against
his ears. The two women sit on the lounge. MARK comes forward and
stands by JAYSON'S chair, JOHN sits by the door as before. BIGELOW
retreats behind CURT's chair, aware of their hostility. There is a long
pause.]

ESTHER--[Suddenly.] She has stopped--[They all listen.]

JAYSON--[Huskily.] Thank God, it's over at last. [The door is opened
and MRS. DAVIDSON enters. The old lady is radiant, weeping tears of
joy.]

MRS. DAVIDSON--[Calls out exultantly between sobs.] A son, Curt--a son.
[With rapt fervor--falling on her knees.] Let us all give thanks to God!

CURTIS--[In a horrible cry of rage and anguish.] No! No! You lie! [They
all cry out in fright and amazement: "CURT!" The door is opened and the
NURSE appears.]

NURSE--[Looking at CURTIS, in a low voice.] Mr. Jayson, your wife is
asking for you.

BIGELOW--[Promptly slapping CURT on the back.] There! What did I tell
you? Run, you chump!

CURTIS--[With a gasp of joy.] Martha! Darling, I'm coming--[He rushes
out after the NURSE.]

BIGELOW--[Comes forward to get his hat and coat from the sofa--coldly.]
Pardon me, please. [They shrink away from him.]

EMILY--[As he goes to the door--cuttingly.] Some people seem to have no
sense of decency!

BIGELOW--[Stung, stops at the door and looks from one to the other of
them--bitingly.] No, I quite agree with you. [He goes out, shutting the
door. They all gasp angrily.]

JOHN--Scoundrel!

JAYSON--[Testily--going to MRS. D., who is still on her knees praying.]
Do get up, Aunt Elizabeth! How ridiculous! What a scene if anyone
should see you like that. [He raises her to her feet and leads her to a
chair by the fire. She obeys unresistingly, seemingly unaware of what
she is doing.]

ESTHER--[Unable to restrain her jealousy.] So it's a boy.

EMILY--Did you hear Curt--how he yelled out "No"? It's plain as the
nose on your face he didn't want--

ESTHER--How awful!

JOHN--Well, can you blame him?

EMILY--And the awful cheek of that Bigelow person--coming here--

ESTHER--They appeared as friendly as ever when we came in.

JOHN--[Scornfully.] Curt is a blind simpleton--and that man is a
dyed-in-the-wool scoundrel.

JAYSON--[Frightenedly.] Shhh! Suppose we were overheard!

EMILY--When Curt leaves we can put her in her proper place. I'll soon
let her know she hasn't fooled me, for one. [While she is speaking MRS.
D. has gotten up and is going silently toward the door.]

JAYSON--[Testily.] Aunt Elizabeth, where are you going?

MRS. D.--[Tenderly.] I must see him again, the dear! [She goes out.]

ESTHER--[Devoured by curiosity--hesitatingly.] I think I--come on,
Emily. Let's go up and see--

EMILY--Not I! I never want to lay eyes on it.

JOHN--Nor I.

ESTHER--I was only thinking--everyone will think it funny if we don't.

JAYSON--[Hastily.] Yes, yes. We must keep up appearances. [Getting to
his feet.] Yes, I think we had better all go up--make some sort of
inquiry about Martha, you know. It's expected of us and--[They are all
standing, hesitating, when the door in the rear is opened and the NURSE
appears, supporting CURT. The latter is like a corpse. His face is
petrified with grief, his body seems limp and half-paralyzed.]

NURSE--[Her eyes flashing, indignantly.] It's a wonder some of you
wouldn't come up--here, help me! Take him, can't you? I've got to run
back!

[JAYSON and SHEFFIELD spring forward and lead CURT to a chair by the
fire.]

JAYSON--[Anxious.] Curt! Curt, my boy! What is it, son?

EMILY--[Catching the NURSE as she tries to go.] Nurse! What is the
matter?

NURSE--[Slowly.] His wife is dead. [They are all still, stunned.] She
lived just long enough to recognize him.

EMILY--And--the baby?

NURSE--[With a professional air.] Oh, it's a fine, healthy baby--eleven
pounds--that's what made it so difficult. [She goes. The others all
stand in silence.]

ESTHER--[Suddenly sinking on the couch and bursting into tears.] Oh,
I'm so sorry I said--or thought--anything wrong about her. Forgive me,
Martha!

SHEFFIELD--[Honestly moved but unable to resist this opportunity for
Latin--solemnly.] De mortuis nil nisi bonum.

JAYSON--[Who has been giving all his attention to his son.] Curt! Curt!
EMILY--Hadn't the doctor better--

JAYSON--Shhh! He begins to recognize me. Curt!

CURTIS--[Looking around him bewilderedly.] Yes. [Suddenly remembrance
comes and a spasm of intolerable pain contracts his features. He
presses his hands to the side of his head and groans brokenly.] Martha!
Gone! Dead! Oh! [He appeals wildly to the others.] Her eyes--she knew
me--she smiled--she whispered--forgive me, Curt,--forgive her--when it
was I who should have said forgive me--but before I could--she--[He
falters brokenly.]

EMILY--[Looking from one to the other meaningly as if this justified
all their suspicions.] Oh!

CURTIS--[A sudden triumph in his voice.] But she loved me again--only
me--I saw it in her eyes! She had forgotten--IT. [Raging.] Never let me
see it! Never let it come near me! It has murdered her! [Springing to
his feet.] I hate it from the bottom of my soul--I will never see
it--never--never--I take my oath! [As his father takes his arm--shaking
him off.] Let me go! I am going back to her! [He strides out of the
door in a frenzy of grief and rage. They all stand transfixed, looking
at each other bewilderedly.]

EMILY--[Putting all her venomous gratification into one word.] Well!

[The Curtain Falls]





ACT IV


SCENE--Same as Act I. It is afternoon of a fine day three days later.
Motors are heard coming up the drive in front of the house. There is
the muffled sound of voices. The MAID is seen going along the hall to
the front door. Then the family enter from the rear. First come JAYSON
and ESTHER with MRS. DAVIDSON--then LILY, DICK and SHEFFIELD--then JOHN
and his wife. All are dressed in mourning. The only one who betrays any
signs of sincere grief is MRS. DAVIDSON. The others all have a strained
look, irritated, worried, or merely gloomy. They seem to be thinking
"The worst is yet to come."

JAYSON--[Leading MRS. D., who is weeping softly, to the chair at left
of table--fretfully.] Please do sit down, Aunt. [She does so
mechanically.] And do stop crying. [He sits down in front of table.
ESTHER goes to couch where she is joined by EMILY. MARK goes over and
stands in back of them. DICK and JOHN sit at rear of table. LILY comes
down front and walks about nervously. She seems in a particularly
fretful, upset mood.]

LILY--[Trying to conceal her feelings under a forced flippancy.] What
ridiculous things funerals are, anyway! That stupid minister--whining
away through his nose! Why does the Lord show such a partiality for men
with adenoids, I wonder.

JAYSON--[Testily.] Sshhh! Have you no respect for anything?

LILY--[Resentfully.] If I had, I'd have lost it when I saw all of you
pulling such long faces in the church where you knew you were under
observation. Pah! Such hypocrisy! And then, to cap it all, Emily has to
force out a few crocodile tears at the grave!

EMILY--[Indignantly.] When I saw Curt--that's why I cried--not for her!

JAYSON--What a scene Curt made! I actually believe he wanted to throw
himself into the grave!

DICK--You BELIEVE he wanted to! Why, it was all Mark and I could do to
hold him, wasn't it, Mark? [SHEFFIELD nods.]

JAYSON--Intolerable! I never expected he'd turn violent like that. He's
seemed calm enough the past three days.

LILY--Calm! Yes, just like a corpse is calm!

JAYSON--[Distractedly.] And now this perfectly mad idea of going away
to-day to join that infernal expedition--leaving that child on our
hands--the child he has never even looked at! Why, it's too monstrously
flagrant! He's deliberately flaunting this scandal in everyone's face!

JOHN--[Firmly.] He must be brought to time.

SHEFFIELD--Yes, we must talk to him--quite openly, if we're forced to.
After all, I guess he realizes the situation more keenly than any of us.

LILY--[Who has wandered to window on right.] You mean you think he
believes--Well, I don't. And you had better be careful not to let him
guess what you think. [Pointing outside.] There's my proof. There he is
walking about with Bigelow. Can you imagine Curt doing that--if he
thought for a moment--

DICK--Oh, I guess Curt isn't all fool. He knows that's the very best
way to keep people from suspecting.

ESTHER--[Indignantly.] But wouldn't you think that Bigelow person--It's
disgusting, his sticking to Curt like this.

SHEFFIELD--Well, for one, I'm becoming quite resigned to Bigelow's
presence. In the first place, he seems to be the only one who can bring
Curt to reason. Then again, I feel that it is to Bigelow's own interest
to convince Curt that he mustn't provoke an open scandal by running
away without acknowledging this child.

LILY--[Suddenly bursting forth hysterically.] Oh, I hate you, all of
you! I loathe your suspicions--and I loathe myself because I'm
beginning to be poisoned by them, too.

EMILY--Really, Lily, at this late hour--after the way Curt has
acted--and her last words when she was dying--

LILY--[Distractedly.] I know! Shut up! Haven't you told it a million
times already? [MRS. DAVIDSON gets up and walks to the door, rear. She
has been crying softly during this scene, oblivious to the talk around
her.]

JAYSON--[Testily.] Aunt Elizabeth! Where are you going? [As she doesn't
answer but goes out into the hall.] Esther, go with her and see that
she doesn't--

ESTHER--[Gets up with a jealous irritation.] She's only going up to see
the baby. She's simply forgotten everything else in the world!

LILY--[Indignantly.] She probably realizes what we are too mean to
remember--that the baby, at least, is innocent. Wait, Esther. I'll come
with you.

JAYSON--Yes, hurry, she shouldn't be left alone. [ESTHER and LILY
follow the old lady out, rear.]

DICK--[After a pause--impatiently.] Well, what next? I don't see what
good we are accomplishing. May I run along? [He gets up restlessly as
he is speaking and goes to the window.]

JAYSON--[Severely.] You will stay, if you please. There's to be no
shirking on anyone's part. It may take all of us to induce Curt--

SHEFFIELD--I wouldn't worry. Bigelow is taking that job off our hands,
I imagine.

DICK--[Looking out of the window.] He certainly seems to be doing his
damnedest. [With a sneer.] The stage missed a great actor in him.

JAYSON--[Worriedly.] But, if Bigelow should fail--

SHEFFIELD--Then we'll succeed. [With a grim smile.] By God, we'll have
to.

JAYSON--Curt has already packed his trunks and had them taken down to
the station--told me he was leaving on the five o'clock train.

SHEFFIELD--But didn't you hint to him there was now this matter of the
child to be considered in making his plans?

JAYSON--[Lamely.] I started to. He simply flared up at me with insane
rage.

DICK--[Looking out the window.] Say, I believe they're coming in.

JAYSON--Bigelow?

DICK--Yes, they're both making for the front door.

SHEFFIELD--I suggest we beat a retreat to Curt's study and wait there.

JAYSON--Yes, let's do that--come on, all of you. [They all retire
grumblingly but precipitately to the study, closing the door behind
them. The front door is heard opening and a moment later CURT and
BIGELOW enter the room. CURT's face is set in an expression of stony
grief. BIGELOW is flushed, excited, indignant.]

BIGELOW--[As CURT sinks down on the couch--pleading indignantly.] Curt,
damn it, wake up! Are you made of stone? Has everything I've said gone
in one ear and out the other? I know it's hell for me to torment you at
this particular time but it's your own incredibly unreasonable actions
that force me to. I know how terribly you must feel but--damn it, man,
postpone this going away! Face this situation like a man! Be reconciled
to your child, stay with him at least until you can make suitable
arrangements--

CURTIS--[Fixedly.] I will never see it! Never!

BIGELOW--How can you keep repeating that--with Martha hardly cold in
her grave! I ask you again, what would she think, how would she
feel--If you would only consent to see this baby, I know you'd realize
how damnably mad and cruel you are. Won't you--just for a second?

CURTIS--No. [Then raging.] If I saw it I'd be tempted to--[Then
brokenly.] No more of that talk, Big. I've heard enough. I've reached
the limit.

BIGELOW--[Restraining his anger with difficulty--coldly.] That's your
final answer, eh? Well, I'm through. I've done all I could. If you want
to play the brute--to forget all that was most dear in the world to
Martha--to go your own damn selfish way--well, there's nothing more to
be said. You will be punished for it, believe me! [He takes a step
toward the door.] And I--I want you to understand that all friendship
ceases between us from this day. You are not the Curt I thought I
knew--and I have nothing but a feeling of repulsion--good-by. [He
starts for the door.]

CURTIS--[Dully.] Good-by, Big.

BIGELOW--[Stops, his features working with grief and looks back at his
friend--then suddenly goes back to him--penitently.] Curt! Forgive me!
I ought to know better. This isn't you. You'll come to yourself when
you've had time to think it over. The memory of Martha--she'll tell you
what you must do. [He wrings CURT's hand.] Good-by, old scout!

CURTIS--[Dully.] Good-by. [BIGELOW hurries out, rear. CURT sits in a
dumb apathy for a while--then groans heart-brokenly.] Martha! Martha!
[He springs to his feet distractedly. The door of the study is slowly
opened and SHEFFIELD peers out cautiously--then comes into the room,
followed by the others. They all take seats as before. CURT ignores
them.]

SHEFFIELD--[Clearing his throat.] Curt--

CURTIS--[Suddenly.] What time is it, do you know!

SHEFFIELD--[Looking at his watch.] Two minutes to four.

CURTIS--[Impatiently.] Still an hour more of this!

JAYSON--[Clearing his throat.] Curt--[Before he starts what he intends
to say, there is the sound of voices from the hall. ESTHER and LILY
help in MRS. DAVIDSON to her former chair. The old lady's face is again
transformed with joy. ESTHER joins EMILY on the couch. LILY sits in
chair--front right. There is a long, uncomfortable pause during which
CURT paces up and down.]

MRS. DAVIDSON--[Suddenly murmuring aloud to herself--happily.] He's
such a dear! I could stay watching him forever.

JAYSON--[Testily.] Sshhh! Aunt! [Then clearing his throat again.]
Surely you're not still thinking of going on the five o'clock train,
are you, Curt?

CURTIS--Yes.

SHEFFIELD--[Drily.] Then Mr. Bigelow didn't persuade you--

CURTIS--[Coldly and impatiently.] I'm not to be persuaded by Big or
anyone else. And I'll thank you not to talk any more about it. [They
all stiffen resentfully at his tone.]

JAYSON--[To CURT--in a pleading tone.] You mustn't be unreasonable,
Curt. After all we are your family--your best friends in the world--and
we are only trying to help you--

CURTIS--[With nervous vehemence.] I don't want your help. You will help
me most by keeping silent.

EMILY--[ With a meaning look at the others--sneeringly.] Yes, no doubt.

ESTHER--Sshhh, Emily!

JAYSON--[Helplessly.] But, you see, Curt--

SHEFFIELD--[With his best judicial air.] If you'll all allow me to be
the spokesman, I think perhaps that I--[They all nod and signify their
acquiescence. ] Well, then, will you listen to me, Curt? [This last
somewhat impatiently as CURT continues to pace, eyes on the floor.]

CURTIS--[Without looking at him--harshly.] Yes, I'm listening. What
else can I do when you've got me cornered? Say what you like and let's
get this over.

SHEFFIELD--First of all, Curt, I hope it is needless for me to express
how very deeply we all feel for you in your sorrow. But we sincerely
trust that you are aware of our heartfelt sympathy. [They all nod. A
bitter, cynical smile comes over LILY's face.]

ESTHER--[Suddenly breaking down and beginning to weep.] Poor Martha!
[SHEFFIELD glances at his wife, impatient at this interruption. The
others also show their irritation.]

EMILY--[Pettishly.] Esther! For goodness sake! [CURT hesitates, stares
at his sister frowningly as if judging her sincerity--then bends down
over her and kisses the top of her bowed head impulsively--seems about
to break down himself--grits his teeth and forces it back--glances
around at the others defiantly and resumes his pacing. ESTHER dries her
eyes, forcing a trembling smile. The cry has done her good.]

SHEFFIELD--[Clearing his throat.] I may truthfully say we all feel--as
Esther does--even if we do not give vent--[With an air of sincere
sympathy.] I know how terrible a day this must be for you, Curt. We all
do. And we feel guilty in breaking in upon the sanctity of your sorrow
in any way. But, if you will pardon my saying so, your own course of
action--the suddenness of your plans--have made it imperative that we
come to an understanding about certain things--about one thing in
particular, I might say. [He pauses. CURT goes on pacing back and forth
as if he hadn't heard.]

JAYSON--[Placatingly.] Yes, it is for the best, Curt.

ESTHER--Yes, Curt dear, you mustn't be unreasonable.

DICK--[Feeling called upon to say something.] Yes, old man, you've got
to face things like a regular. Facts are facts. [This makes everybody
uneasy.]

LILY--[Springing to her feet.] Phew! it's close in here. I'm going out
in the garden. You can call me when these--orations--are finished. [She
sweeps out scornfully.]

JAYSON--[Calling after her imperiously.] Lily! [But she doesn't answer
and he gives it up with a hopeless sigh.]

CURTIS--[Harshly.] What time is it?

SHEFFIELD--You have plenty of time to listen to what I--I should rather
say we--have to ask you, Curt. I promise to be brief. But first let me
again impress upon you that I am talking in a spirit of the deepest
friendliness and sympathy with you--as a fellow-member of the same
family, I may say--and with the highest ideals and the honor of that
family always in view. [CURT makes no comment. SHEFFIELD unconsciously
begins to adopt the alert keenness of the cross-examiner.] First, let
me ask you, is it your intention to take that five o'clock train to-day?

CURTIS--[Harshly.] I've told you that.

SHEFFIELD--And then you'll join this expedition to Asia?

CURTIS--You know that.

SHEFFIELD--To be gone five years?

CURTIS--[Shrugging his shoulders.] More or less.

SHEFFIELD--Is it your intention to return here at any time before you
leave for Asia?

CURTIS--No!

SHEFFIELD--And your determination on these plans is irrevocable?

CURTIS--Irrevocable! Exactly. Please remember that.

SHEFFIELD--[Sharply.] That being your attitude, I will come bluntly to
the core of the whole matter--the child whose coming into the world
cost Martha her life.

CURTIS--[Savagely.] Her murderer! You are right! [They all look
shocked, suspicious.]

SHEFFIELD--[Remonstratingly but suspiciously.] You can hardly hold the
child responsible for the terrible outcome. Women die every day from
the same cause. [Keenly.] Why do you attribute guilt to the child in
this case, Curt?

CURTIS--It lives and Martha is gone--But, enough! I've said I never
wanted it mentioned to me. Will you please remember that?

SHEFFIELD--[Sharply.] Its name is Jayson. Curt--in the eyes of the law.
Will YOU please remember that?

CURTIS--[Distractedly.] I don't want to remember anything! [Wildly.]
Please, for God's sake, leave me alone!

SHEFFIELD--[Coldly.] I am sorry, Curt, but you cannot act as if you
were alone in this affair.

CURTIS--Why not? Am I not alone--more alone this minute than any
creature on God's earth?

SHEFFIELD--[Soothingly.] In your great grief. Yes, yes, of course. We
all appreciate--and we hate to--[Persuasively.] Yes, it would be much
wiser to postpone these practical considerations until you are in a
calmer mood. And if you will only give us the chance--why not put off
this precipitate departure--for a month, say--and in the meantime--

CURTIS--[Harshly.] I am going when I said I was. I must get away from
this horrible hole--as far away as I can. I must get back to my work
for only in it will I find Martha again. But you--you can't understand
that. What is the good of all this talking which leads nowhere?

SHEFFIELD--[Coldly.] You're mistaken. It leads to this: Do you
understand that your running away from this child--on the very day of
its mother's funeral!--will have a very queer appearance in the eyes of
the world?

EMILY--And what are you going to do with the baby, Curt? Do you think
you can run off regardless and leave it here--on our hands?

CURTIS--[Distractedly.] I'll give it this home. And
someone--anyone--Esther, Lily--can appoint a nurse to live here and--
[Breaking down.] Oh, don't bother me!

SHEFFIELD--[Sharply.] In the world's eyes, it will appear precious like
a desertion on your part.

CURTIS--Oh, arrange it to suit yourselves--anything you wish--

SHEFFIELD--[Quickly. ] I'll take you at your word. Then let us arrange
it this way. You will remain here a month longer at least--

CURTIS--No!

SHEFFIELD--[Ignoring the interruption.] You can make plans for the
child's future in that time, become reconciled to it--

CURTIS--No!

JAYSON--[Pleadingly.] Curt--please--for all our sakes--when the honor
of the family is at stake.

DICK--Yes, old man, there's that about it, you know.

CURTIS--No!

EMILY--Oh, he's impossible!

SHEFFIELD--Perhaps Curt misunderstood me. [Meaningly.] Be reconciled to
it in the eyes of the public, Curt. That's what I meant. Your own
private feelings in the matter--are no one's business but your own, of
course.

CURTIS--[Bewilderedly.] But--I don't see--Oh, damn your eyes of the
public!

EMILY--[Breaking in.] It's all very well for you to ignore what people
in town think--you'll be in China or heaven knows where. The scandal
won't touch you--but we've got to live here and have our position to
consider.

CURTIS--[Mystified.] Scandal? What scandal? [Then with a harsh laugh.]
Oh, you mean the imbecile busy-bodies will call me an unnatural father.
Well, let them! I suppose I am. But they don't know--

EMILY--[Spitefully.] Perhaps they know more than you think they do.

CURTIS--[Turning on her--sharply.] Just what do you mean by that, eh?

ESTHER--Emily! Shhh!

JAYSON--[Flurriedly.] Be still, Emily. Let Mark do the talking.

SHEFFIELD--[Interposing placatingly.] What Emily means is simply this,
Curt: You haven't even been to look at this child since it has been
born--not once, have you?

CURTIS--No, and I never intend--

SHEFFIELD--[Insinuatingly.] And don't you suppose the doctors and
nurses--and the servants--have noticed this? It is not the usual
procedure, you must acknowledge, and they wouldn't be human if they
didn't think your action--or lack of action--peculiar and comment on it
outside.

CURTIS--Well, let them! Do you think I care a fiddler's curse how
people judge me?

SHEFFIELD--It is hardly a case of their judging--you. [Breaking off as
he catches CURT'S tortured eyes fixed on him wildly.] This is a small
town, Curt, and you know as well as I do, gossip is not the least of
its faults. It doesn't take long for such things to get started.
[Persuasively.] Now I ask you frankly, is it wise to provoke
deliberately what may easily be set at rest by a little--I'll be
frank--a little pretense on your part?

JAYSON--Yes, my boy. As a Jayson, I know you don't wish--

ESTHEE--[With a sigh.] Yes, you really must think of us, Curt.

CURTIS--[In an acute state of muddled confusion.] But--I--you--how are
you concerned? Pretense? You mean you want me to stay and pretend--in
order that you won't be disturbed by any silly tales they tell about
me? [With a wild laugh.] Good God, this is too much! Why does a man
have to be maddened by fools at such a time! [Raging.] Leave me alone!
You're like a swarm of poisonous flies.

JAYSON--Curt! This is--really--when we've tried to be so considerate--

JOHN--[Bursting with rage.] It's an outrage to allow such insults!

DICK--You're not playing the game, Curt.

EMILY--[Spitefully.] It seems to me it's much more for Martha's sake,
we're urging you than for our own. After all, the town can't say
anything against us.

CURTIS--[Turning on her.] Martha's sake? [Brokenly.] Martha is gone.
Leave her out of this.

SHEFFIELD--[Sharply.] But unfortunately, Curt, others will not leave
her out of this. They will pry and pry--you know what they are--and--

EMILY--Curt couldn't act the way he is doing if he ever really cared
for her.

CURTIS--You dare to say that! [Then controlling himself a bit--with
scathing scorn.] What do know of love--women like you! You call your
little rabbit-hutch emotions love--your bread-and-butter passions--and
you have the effrontery to judge--

EMILY--[Shrinking from him frightenedly.] Oh! John!

JOHN--[Getting to his feet.] I protest! I cannot allow even my own
brother--

DICK--[Grabbing his arm.] Keep your head, old boy.

SHEFFIELD--[Peremptorily.] You are making a fool of yourself, Curt--and
you are damned insulting in the bargain. I think I may say that we've
all about reached the end of our patience. What Emily said is for your
own best interest, if you had the sense to see it. And I put it to you
once and for all: Are you or are you not willing to act like a man of
honor to protect your own good name, the family name, the name of this
child, and your wife's memory? Let me tell you, your wife's good name
is more endangered by your stubbornness than anything else.

CURTIS--[Trembling with rage.] I--I begin to think--you--all of
you--are aiming at something against Martha in this. Yes--in back of
your words--your actions--I begin to feel--[Raging.] Go away! Get out
of this house--all of you! Oh, I know your meanness! I've seen how
you've tried to hurt her ever since we came--because you resented in
your small minds her evident superiority--

EMILY--[Scornfully.] Superiority, indeed!

CURTIS--Her breadth, of mind and greatness of soul that you couldn't
understand. I've guessed all this, and if I haven't interfered it's
only because I knew she was too far above you to notice your sickening
malice--

EMILY--[Furiously.] You're only acting--acting for our benefit because
you think we don't--

CURTIS--[Turning on her--with annihilating contempt.] Why, you--you
poor little nonentity! [John struggles to get forward but Dick holds
him back.]

EMILY--[Insane with rage--shrilly.] But we know--and the whole town
knows--and you needn't pretend you've been blind. You've given the
whole thing away yourself--the silly way you've acted--telling everyone
how you hated that baby--letting everyone see--

JAYSON--Emily! [The others are all frightened, try to interrupt her.
CURT stares at her in a stunned bewilderment]

EMILY--[Pouring forth all her venom regardless.] But you might as well
leave off your idiotic pretending. It doesn't fool us--or anyone
else--your sending for Bigelow that night--your hobnobbing with him
ever since--your pretending he's as much your friend as ever. They're
all afraid of you--but I'm not! I tell you to your face--it's all
acting you're doing--just cheap acting to try and pull the wool over
our eyes until you've run away like a coward--and left us to face the
disgrace for you with this child on our hands!

ESTHER--[Trying to silence her--excitedly.] Emily! Keep still, for
Heaven's sake! [The others all utter exclamations of caution, with
fearful glances at CURT.]

EMILY--[Becoming exhausted by her outburst--more faintly.] Well,
someone had to show him his place. He thinks he's so superior to us
just because--telling us how much better she was than--But I won't
stand for that. I've always had a clean name--and always will--and my
children, too, thank God! [She sinks down on the couch exhausted,
panting but still glaring defiantly at CURT.]

CURTIS--[An awareness of her meaning gradually forcing itself on his
mind.] Bigelow! Big? Pretending he's as much my friend--[With a sudden
gasp of sickened understanding.] Oh! [He sways as if he were about to
fall, shrinking away from EMILY, all horror.] Oh, you--you--you-filth!

JOHN--[His fists clenched, tries to advance on his brother.] How dare
you insult my wife! [He is restrained, held bake by his remonstrating
father and DICK.]

MRS. DAVIDSON--[As if suddenly coming out of a dream--frightenedly.]
What is the matter? Why is John mad at Curt?

CURTIS--[His hands over his eyes, acting like a person stricken with a
sudden attack of nausea, weakly.] So--that's--what has been in your
minds. Oh, this is bestial--disgusting! And there is nothing to be
done. I feel defenseless. One would have to be as low as you are--She
would have been defenseless, too. It is better she is dead. [He stares
about him--wildly.] And you think--you all think--

ESTHER--[Pityingly.] Curt, dear, we don't think anything except what
you've made us think with your crazy carrying-on.

CURTIS--[Looking from one to the other of them.] Yes--all of you--it's
on your faces. [His eyes fix themselves on his aunt.] No, you
don't--you don't--

MRS. DAVIDSON--I? Don't what, Curtis? My, how sick you look, poor boy!

CURTIS--You--don't believe--this child--

MRS. DAVIDSON--He's the sweetest baby I ever saw [proudly] and Jayson
right to the tips of his toes.

CURTIS--Ah, I know you--[Looking around at the others with loathing and
hatred.] But look at them--[With a burst of fierce determination.]
Wait! I'll give you the only answer--[He dashes for the door in rear,
shakes off his father and DICK, who try to stop him, and then is heard
bounding up the stairs in hall. DICK runs after him, JAYSON as far as
the doorway. ESTHER gives a stifled scream. There is a tense pause.
Then DICK reappears.]

DICK--It's all right. I saw him go in.

JAYSON--[Frightenedly.] But--good God--he's liable--why didn't you
follow him?

DICK--The doctor and nurse are there. They would have called out,
wouldn't they, if--

MRS. DAVIDSON--[Getting angrier and angrier as her puzzlement has grown
greater--in a stern tone.] I understand less and less of this. Where
has Curtis gone? Why did he act so sick? What is the matter with all of
you?

ESTHER--Nothing, Aunt dear, nothing!

MRS. DAVIDSON--No, you'll not hush me up! [Accusingly.] You all look
guilty. Have you been saying anything against Curtis' baby? That was
what Curtis seemed to think. A fine time you've picked out--with his
wife not cold in her grave!

JAYSON--Aunt!

MRS. DAVIDSON--I never liked that woman. I never understood her. But
now--now I love her and beg her forgiveness. She died like a true woman
in the performance of her duty. She died gloriously--and I will always
respect her memory. [Suddenly flying into a passion.] I feel that you
are all hostile to her baby--poor, little, defenseless creature! Yes,
you'd hate the idea of Curtis' having a son--you and your girls! Well,
I'll make you bitterly regret the day you--[She plumps herself down in
her chair again, staring stubbornly and angrily before her.]

EMILY--[Spitefully.] I fear it will be necessary to tell Aunt--

JAYSON--Sshh! You have made enough trouble with your telling already!
[Miserably.] It should never have come to this pass. Curt will never
forgive us, never!

ESTHER--[Resentfully to EMILY.] See what not holding your tongue has
done--and my children will have to suffer for it, too!

SHEFFIELD--[Severely.] If Emily had permitted me to conduct this
business uninterruptedly, this would never have occurred.

EMILY--That's right! All pick on me! Cowards! [She breaks down and
sobs.]

DICK--[From the doorway. Coming back into the room.] Sstt! Here he
comes!

CURTIS--[Reenters. There is a look of strange exultation on his face.
He looks from one to the other of them. He stammers.] Well--my answer
to you--your rotten world--I kissed him--he is mine! He looked at
me--it was as if Martha looked at me--through his eyes.

ESTHER--[Voicing the general relief. Joyfully.] Oh, Curt! You won't go
now? You'll stay?

CURTIS--[Staring at her, then from one to another of the rest with a
withering scorn.] Ha! Now you think you have conquered, do you? No, I'm
not going to stay! Do you think your vile slander could influence me to
give up my work? And neither shall you influence the life of my son. I
leave him here. I must. But not to your tender mercies. No, no! Thank
God, there still remains one Jayson with unmuddled integrity to whom I
can appeal. [He goes to MRS. DAVIDSON.] I will leave him in your care,
Aunt--while I am gone.

MRS. DAVIDSON--[Delighted.] It will be a great happiness. He will
be--the one God never granted me. [Her lips trembling.] God has
answered my prayer at last.

CURTIS--I thank you, Aunt. [Kisses her reverentially.]

MRS. DAVIDSON--[Pleased but morally bound to grumble at him] But I
cannot approve of your running away like this. It isn't natural. [Then
with selfish haste, fearing her words may change his mind and she will
lose the baby.] But you always were a queer person--and a man must do
faithfully the work ordained for him.

CURTIS--[Gladly.] Yes, I must go! What would I be for him--or
anyone--if I stayed? Thank God, you understand. But I will come back.
[The light of an ideal beginning to shine in his eyes.] When he is old
enough, I will teach him to know and love a big, free life. Martha used
to say that he would take her part in time. My goal shall be his goal,
too. Martha shall live again for me in him. And you, Aunt, swear to
keep him with you--out there in the country--never to let him know this
obscene little world. [He indicates his relatives.]

MRS. DAVIDSON--Yes, I promise, Curtis. Let anyone dare--! [She glares
about her. The noise of a motor is heard from the drive. It stops in
front of the house.]

CURTIS--I must go. [He kisses his aunt.] Teach him his mother was the
most beautiful soul that ever lived. Good-by, Aunt.

MRS. DAVIDSON--Good-by, Curtis! [Without looking at the others, he
starts for the door, rear. They all break out into conscience-stricken
protestations.]

JAYSON--[Miserably.] Curt! You're not leaving us that way?

ESTHER--Curt--you're going--without a word! [They all say this
practically together and crowd toward him. JOHN and EMILY remain
sullenly apart. CURT turns to face them.]

LILY--[Enters from the rear.] You're not going, Curt?

CURTIS--[Turning to her.] Yes. Good-by, Lily. [He kisses her.] You
loved her, didn't you? You are not like--Take my advice and get away
before you become--[He has been staring into her face. Suddenly he
pushes her brusquely away from him--coldly.] But I see in your face
it's too late.

LILY--[Miserably.] No, Curt--I swear--

CURTIS--[Facing them all defiantly.] Yes, I am going without a
word--because I cannot find the fitting one. Be thankful I can't. It
would shrivel up your souls like flame, [He again turns and strides to
the door.]

JAYSON--[His grief overcoming him.] My boy! We are wrong--we
know--but--at least say you forgive us.

CURTIS--[Wavers with his back towards them--then turns and forces the
words out.] Ask forgiveness of her. She--yes--she was so fine--I feel
she--so you are forgiven. Good-by. [He goes. The motor is heard driving
off. There is a tense pause.]

LILY--Then he did find out? Oh, a fine mess you've made of everything!
But no--I should say "we," shouldn't I? Curt guessed that. Oh, I hate
you--and myself! [She breaks down.]

[There is a strained pause during which they are all silent, their eyes
avoiding each other, fixed in dull, stupid stares. Finally, DICK
fidgets uncomfortably, heaves a noisy sigh, and blurts out with an
attempt at comforting reassurance:]

DICK--Well, it isn't as bad as it might have been, anyway. He did
acknowledge the kid--before witnesses, too.

JAYSON--[Testily.] Keep your remarks to yourself, if you please! [But
most of his family are already beginning to look relieved.]

[The Curtain Falls]










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The First Man, by Eugene O'Neill

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FIRST MAN ***

***** This file should be named 4026.txt or 4026.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/0/2/4026/

Produced by Charles Franks, Robert Rowe and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team. HTML version by Al Haines.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
          you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
               owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
                    has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
	         Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
	              must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
	                   prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
		        returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
		             sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
		                  address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
          does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
               License.  You must require such a user to return or
                    destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
	         and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
	              Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
          electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
               of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
          Chief Executive and Director
               gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.﻿"THE HAIRY APE"

A Comedy of Ancient and Modern Life

In Eight Scenes


By

EUGENE O'NEILL





CHARACTERS


  ROBERT SMITH, "YANK"
  PADDY
  LONG
  MILDRED DOUGLAS
  HER AUNT
  SECOND ENGINEER
  A GUARD
  A SECRETARY OF AN ORGANIZATION
  STOKERS, LADIES, GENTLEMEN, ETC.





SCENE I


SCENE--_The firemen's forecastle of a transatlantic liner an hour after
sailing from New York for the voyage across. Tiers of narrow, steel
bunks, three deep, on all sides. An entrance in rear. Benches on the
floor before the bunks. The room is crowded with men, shouting,
cursing, laughing, singing--a confused, inchoate uproar swelling into a
sort of unity, a meaning--the bewildered, furious, baffled defiance of
a beast in a cage. Nearly all the men are drunk. Many bottles are
passed from hand to hand. All are dressed in dungaree pants, heavy ugly
shoes. Some wear singlets, but the majority are stripped to the waist._

_The treatment of this scene, or of any other scene in the play, should
by no means be naturalistic. The effect sought after is a cramped space
in the bowels of a ship, imprisoned by white steel. The lines of bunks,
the uprights supporting them, cross each other like the steel framework
of a cage. The ceiling crushes down upon the men's heads. They cannot
stand upright. This accentuates the natural stooping posture which
shovelling coal and the resultant over-development of back and shoulder
muscles have given them. The men themselves should resemble those
pictures in which the appearance of Neanderthal Man is guessed at. All
are hairy-chested, with long arms of tremendous power, and low,
receding brows above their small, fierce, resentful eyes. All the
civilized white races are represented, but except for the slight
differentiation in color of hair, skin, eyes, all these men are alike._

_The curtain rises on a tumult of sound. YANK is seated in the
foreground. He seems broader, fiercer, more truculent, more powerful,
more sure of himself than the rest. They respect his superior
strength--the grudging respect of fear. Then, too, he represents to
them a self-expression, the very last word in what they are, their most
highly developed individual._

VOICES--Gif me trink dere, you!

'Ave a wet!

Salute!

Gesundheit!

Skoal!

Drunk as a lord, God stiffen you!

Here's how!

Luck!

Pass back that bottle, damn you!

Pourin' it down his neck!

Ho, Froggy! Where the devil have you been?

La Touraine.

I hit him smash in yaw, py Gott!

Jenkins--the First--he's a rotten swine--

And the coppers nabbed him--and I run--

I like peer better. It don't pig head gif you.

A slut, I'm sayin'! She robbed me aslape--

To hell with 'em all!

You're a bloody liar!

Say dot again!

[_Commotion. Two men about to fight are pulled apart._]

No scrappin' now!

To-night--

See who's the best man!

Bloody Dutchman!

To-night on the for'ard square.

I'll bet on Dutchy.

He packa da wallop, I tella you!

Shut up, Wop!

No fightin', maties. We're all chums, ain't we?

[_A voice starts bawling a song._]

    "Beer, beer, glorious beer!
    Fill yourselves right up to here."

YANK--[_For the first time seeming to take notice of the uproar about
him, turns around threateningly--in a tone of contemptuous authority._]
"Choke off dat noise! Where d'yuh get dat beer stuff? Beer, hell!
Beer's for goils--and Dutchmen. Me for somep'n wit a kick to it! Gimme
a drink, one of youse guys. [_Several bottles are eagerly offered. He
takes a tremendous gulp at one of them; then, keeping the bottle in his
hand, glares belligerently at the owner, who hastens to acquiesce in
this robbery by saying:_] All righto, Yank. Keep it and have another."
[_Yank contemptuously turns his back on the crowd again. For a second
there is an embarrassed silence. Then--_]

VOICES--We must be passing the Hook. She's beginning to roll to it. Six
days in hell--and then Southampton. Py Yesus, I vish somepody take my
first vatch for me! Gittin' seasick, Square-head? Drink up and forget
it! What's in your bottle? Gin. Dot's nigger trink. Absinthe? It's
doped. You'll go off your chump, Froggy! Cochon! Whiskey, that's the
ticket! Where's Paddy? Going asleep. Sing us that whiskey song, Paddy.
[_They all turn to an old, wizened Irishman who is dozing, very drunk,
on the benches forward. His face is extremely monkey-like with all the
sad, patient pathos of that animal in his small eyes._] Singa da song,
Caruso Pat! He's gettin' old. The drink is too much for him. He's too
drunk.

PADDY--[_Blinking about him, starts to his feet resentfully, swaying,
holding on to the edge of a bunk._] I'm never too drunk to sing. 'Tis
only when I'm dead to the world I'd be wishful to sing at all. [_With a
sort of sad contempt._] "Whiskey Johnny," ye want? A chanty, ye want?
Now that's a queer wish from the ugly like of you, God help you. But no
matther. [_He starts to sing in a thin, nasal, doleful tone:_]

    Oh, whiskey is the life of man!
        Whiskey! O Johnny!

[_They all join in on this._]

    Oh, whiskey is the life of man!
        Whiskey for my Johnny! [_Again chorus_]
    Oh, whiskey drove my old man mad!
        Whiskey! O Johnny!
    Oh, whiskey drove my old man mad!
        Whiskey for my Johnny!

YANK--[_Again turning around scornfully._] Aw hell! Nix on dat old
sailing ship stuff! All dat bull's dead, see? And you're dead, too, yuh
damned old Harp, on'y yuh don't know it. Take it easy, see. Give us a
rest. Nix on de loud noise. [_With a cynical grin._] Can't youse see
I'm tryin' to t'ink?

ALL--[_Repeating the word after him as one with same cynical amused
mockery._] Think! [_The chorused word has a brazen metallic quality as
if their throats were phonograph horns. It is followed by a general
uproar of hard, barking laughter._]

VOICES--Don't be cracking your head wid ut, Yank.

You gat headache, py yingo!

One thing about it--it rhymes with drink!

Ha, ha, ha!

Drink, don't think!

Drink, don't think!

Drink, don't think!

[_A whole chorus of voices has taken up this refrain, stamping on the
floor, pounding on the benches with fists._]

YANK--[_Taking a gulp from his bottle--good-naturedly._] Aw right. Can
de noise. I got yuh de foist time. [_The uproar subsides. A very
drunken sentimental tenor begins to sing:_]

    "Far away in Canada,
    Far across the sea,
    There's a lass who fondly waits
    Making a home for me--"

YANK--[_Fiercely contemptuous._] Shut up, yuh lousey boob! Where d'yuh
get dat tripe? Home? Home, hell! I'll make a home for yuh! I'll knock
yuh dead. Home! T'hell wit home! Where d'yuh get dat tripe? Dis is
home, see? What d'yuh want wit home? [_Proudly._] I runned away from
mine when I was a kid. On'y too glad to beat it, dat was me. Home was
lickings for me, dat's all. But yuh can bet your shoit noone ain't
never licked me since! Wanter try it, any of youse? Huh! I guess not.
[_In a more placated but still contemptuous tone._] Goils waitin' for
yuh, huh? Aw, hell! Dat's all tripe. Dey don't wait for noone. Dey'd
double-cross yuh for a nickel. Dey're all tarts, get me? Treat 'em
rough, dat's me. To hell wit 'em. Tarts, dat's what, de whole bunch of
'em.

LONG--[_Very drunk, jumps on a bench excitedly, gesticulating with a
bottle in his hand._] Listen 'ere, Comrades! Yank 'ere is right. 'E
says this 'ere stinkin' ship is our 'ome. And 'e says as 'ome is 'ell.
And 'e's right! This is 'ell. We lives in 'ell, Comrades--and right
enough we'll die in it. [_Raging._] And who's ter blame, I arsks yer?
We ain't. We wasn't born this rotten way. All men is born free and
ekal. That's in the bleedin' Bible, maties. But what d'they care for
the Bible--them lazy, bloated swine what travels first cabin? Them's
the ones. They dragged us down 'til we're on'y wage slaves in the
bowels of a bloody ship, sweatin', burnin' up, eatin' coal dust! Hit's
them's ter blame--the damned capitalist clarss! [_There had been a
gradual murmur of contemptuous resentment rising among the men until
now he is interrupted by a storm of catcalls, hisses, boos, hard
laughter._]

VOICES--Turn it off!

Shut up!

Sit down!

Closa da face!

Tamn fool! (Etc.)

YANK--[_Standing up and glaring at Long._] Sit down before I knock yuh
down! [_Long makes haste to efface himself. Yank goes on
contemptuously._] De Bible, huh? De Cap'tlist class, huh? Aw nix on dat
Salvation Army-Socialist bull. Git a soapbox! Hire a hall! Come and be
saved, huh? Jerk us to Jesus, huh? Aw g'wan! I've listened to lots of
guys like you, see, Yuh're all wrong. Wanter know what I t'ink? Yuh
ain't no good for noone. Yuh're de bunk. Yuh ain't got no noive, get
me? Yuh're yellow, dat's what. Yellow, dat's you. Say! What's dem slobs
in de foist cabin got to do wit us? We're better men dan dey are, ain't
we? Sure! One of us guys could clean up de whole mob wit one mit. Put
one of 'em down here for one watch in de stokehole, what'd happen?
Dey'd carry him off on a stretcher. Dem boids don't amount to nothin'.
Dey're just baggage. Who makes dis old tub run? Ain't it us guys? Well
den, we belong, don't we? We belong and dey don't. Dat's all. [_A loud
chorus of approval. Yank goes on_] As for dis bein' hell--aw, nuts! Yuh
lost your noive, dat's what. Dis is a man's job, get me? It belongs. It
runs dis tub. No stiffs need apply. But yuh're a stiff, see? Yuh're
yellow, dat's you.

VOICES--[_With a great hard pride in them._]

Righto!

A man's job!

Talk is cheap, Long.

He never could hold up his end.

Divil take him!

Yank's right. We make it go.

Py Gott, Yank say right ting!

We don't need noone cryin' over us.

Makin' speeches.

Throw him out!

Yellow!

Chuck him overboard!

I'll break his jaw for him!

[_They crowd around Long threateningly._]

YANK--[_Half good-natured again--contemptuously._] Aw, take it easy.
Leave him alone. He ain't woith a punch. Drink up. Here's how, whoever
owns dis. [_He takes a long swallow from his bottle. All drink with
him. In a flash all is hilarious amiability again, back-slapping, loud
talk, etc._]

PADDY--[_Who has been sitting in a blinking, melancholy daze--suddenly
cries out in a voice full of old sorrow._] We belong to this, you're
saying? We make the ship to go, you're saying? Yerra then, that
Almighty God have pity on us! [_His voice runs into the wail of a keen,
he rocks back and forth on his bench. The men stare at him, startled
and impressed in spite of themselves._] Oh, to be back in the fine days
of my youth, ochone! Oh, there was fine beautiful ships them
days--clippers wid tall masts touching the sky--fine strong men in
them--men that was sons of the sea as if 'twas the mother that bore
them. Oh, the clean skins of them, and the clear eyes, the straight
backs and full chests of them! Brave men they was, and bold men surely!
We'd be sailing out, bound down round the Horn maybe. We'd be making
sail in the dawn, with a fair breeze, singing a chanty song wid no care
to it. And astern the land would be sinking low and dying out, but we'd
give it no heed but a laugh, and never a look behind. For the day that
was, was enough, for we was free men--and I'm thinking 'tis only slaves
do be giving heed to the day that's gone or the day to come--until
they're old like me. [_With a sort of religious exaltation._] Oh, to be
scudding south again wid the power of the Trade Wind driving her on
steady through the nights and the days! Full sail on her! Nights and
days! Nights when the foam of the wake would be flaming wid fire, when
the sky'd be blazing and winking wid stars. Or the full of the moon
maybe. Then you'd see her driving through the gray night, her sails
stretching aloft all silver and white, not a sound on the deck, the lot
of us dreaming dreams, till you'd believe 'twas no real ship at all you
was on but a ghost ship like the Flying Dutchman they say does be
roaming the seas forevermore widout touching a port. And there was the
days, too. A warm sun on the clean decks. Sun warming the blood of you,
and wind over the miles of shiny green ocean like strong drink to your
lungs. Work--aye, hard work--but who'd mind that at all? Sure, you
worked under the sky and 'twas work wid skill and daring to it. And wid
the day done, in the dog watch, smoking me pipe at ease, the lookout
would be raising land maybe, and we'd see the mountains of South
Americy wid the red fire of the setting sun painting their white tops
and the clouds floating by them! [_His tone of exaltation ceases. He
goes on mournfully._] Yerra, what's the use of talking? 'Tis a dead
man's whisper. [_To Yank resentfully._] 'Twas them days men belonged to
ships, not now. 'Twas them days a ship was part of the sea, and a man
was part of a ship, and the sea joined all together and made it one.
[_Scornfully._] Is it one wid this you'd be, Yank--black smoke from the
funnels smudging the sea, smudging the decks--the bloody engines
pounding and throbbing and shaking--wid divil a sight of sun or a
breath of clean air--choking our lungs wid coal dust--breaking our
backs and hearts in the hell of the stokehole--feeding the bloody
furnace--feeding our lives along wid the coal, I'm thinking--caged in
by steel from a sight of the sky like bloody apes in the Zoo! [_With a
harsh laugh._] Ho-ho, divil mend you! Is it to belong to that you're
wishing? Is it a flesh and blood wheel of the engines you'd be?

YANK--[_Who has been listening with a contemptuous sneer, barks out the
answer._] Sure ting! Dat's me! What about it?

PADDY--[_As if to himself--with great sorrow._] Me time is past due.
That a great wave wid sun in the heart of it may sweep me over the side
sometime I'd be dreaming of the days that's gone!

YANK--Aw, yuh crazy Mick! [_He springs to his feet and advances on
Paddy threateningly--then stops, fighting some queer struggle within
himself--lets his hands fall to his sides--contemptuously._] Aw, take
it easy. Yuh're aw right, at dat. Yuh're bugs, dat's all--nutty as a
cuckoo. All dat tripe yuh been pullin'--Aw, dat's all right. On'y it's
dead, get me? Yuh don't belong no more, see. Yuh don't get de stuff.
Yuh're too old. [_Disgustedly._] But aw say, come up for air onct in a
while, can't yuh? See what's happened since yuh croaked. [_He suddenly
bursts forth vehemently, growing more and more excited._] Say! Sure!
Sure I meant it! What de hell--Say, lemme talk! Hey! Hey, you old Harp!
Hey, youse guys! Say, listen to me--wait a moment--I gotter talk, see.
I belong and he don't. He's dead but I'm livin'. Listen to me! Sure I'm
part of de engines! Why de hell not! Dey move, don't dey? Dey're speed,
ain't dey? Dey smash trou, don't dey? Twenty-five knots a hour! Dat's
goin' some! Dat's new stuff! Dat belongs! But him, he's too old. He
gets dizzy. Say, listen. All dat crazy tripe about nights and days; all
dat crazy tripe about stars and moons; all dat crazy tripe about suns
and winds, fresh air and de rest of it--Aw hell, dat's all a dope
dream! Hittin' de pipe of de past, dat's what he's doin'. He's old and
don't belong no more. But me, I'm young! I'm in de pink! I move wit it!
It, get me! I mean de ting dat's de guts of all dis. It ploughs trou
all de tripe he's been sayin'. It blows dat up! It knocks dat dead! It
slams dat off en de face of de oith! It, get me! De engines and de coal
and de smoke and all de rest of it! He can't breathe and swallow coal
dust, but I kin, see? Dat's fresh air for me! Dat's food for me! I'm
new, get me? Hell in de stokehole? Sure! It takes a man to work in
hell. Hell, sure, dat's my fav'rite climate. I eat it up! I git fat on
it! It's me makes it hot! It's me makes it roar! It's me makes it move!
Sure, on'y for me everyting stops. It all goes dead, get me? De noise
and smoke and all de engines movin' de woild, dey stop. Dere ain't
nothin' no more! Dat's what I'm sayin'. Everyting else dat makes de
woild move, somep'n makes it move. It can't move witout somep'n else,
see? Den yuh get down to me. I'm at de bottom, get me! Dere ain't
nothin' foither. I'm de end! I'm de start! I start somep'n and de woild
moves! It--dat's me!--de new dat's moiderin' de old! I'm de ting in
coal dat makes it boin; I'm steam and oil for de engines; I'm de ting
in noise dat makes yuh hear it; I'm smoke and express trains and
steamers and factory whistles; I'm de ting in gold dat makes it money!
And I'm what makes iron into steel! Steel, dat stands for de whole
ting! And I'm steel--steel--steel! I'm de muscles in steel, de punch
behind it! [_As he says this he pounds with his fist against the steel
bunks. All the men, roused to a pitch of frenzied self-glorification by
his speech, do likewise. There is a deafening metallic roar, through
which Yank's voice can be heard bellowing._] Slaves, hell! We run de
whole woiks. All de rich guys dat tink dey're somep'n, dey ain't
nothin'! Dey don't belong. But us guys, we're in de move, we're at de
bottom, de whole ting is us! [_Paddy from the start of Yank's speech
has been taking one gulp after another from his bottle, at first
frightenedly, as if he were afraid to listen, then desperately, as if
to drown his senses, but finally has achieved complete indifferent,
even amused, drunkenness. Yank sees his lips moving. He quells the
uproar with a shout._] Hey, youse guys, take it easy! Wait a moment! De
nutty Harp is sayin' someth'n.

PADDY--[_Is heard now--throws his head back with a mocking burst of
laughter._] Ho-ho-ho-ho-ho---

YANK--[_Drawing back his fist, with a snarl._] Aw! Look out who yuh're
givin' the bark!

PADDY--[_Begins to sing the "Muler of Dee" with enormous good-nature._]

    "I care for nobody, no, not I,
    And nobody cares for me."

YANK--[_Good-natured himself in a flash, interrupts PADDY with a slap
on the bare back like a report._] Dat's de stuff! Now yuh're gettin'
wise to somep'n. Care for nobody, dat's de dope! To hell wit 'em all!
And nix on nobody else carin'. I kin care for myself, get me! [_Eight
bells sound, muffled, vibrating through the steel walls as if some
enormous brazen gong were imbedded in the heart of the ship. All the
men jump up mechanically, file through the door silently close upon each
other's heels in what is very like a prisoners lockstep. YANK slaps
PADDY on the back._] Our watch, yuh old Harp! [_Mockingly._] Come on
down in hell. Eat up de coal dust. Drink in de heat. It's it, see! Act
like yuh liked it, yuh better--or croak yuhself.

PADDY--[_With jovial defiance._] To the divil wid it! I'll not report
this watch. Let thim log me and be damned. I'm no slave the like of
you. I'll be sittin' here at me ease, and drinking, and thinking, and
dreaming dreams.

YANK--[_Contemptuously._] Tinkin' and dreamin', what'll that get yuh?
What's tinkin' got to do wit it? We move, don't we? Speed, ain't it?
Fog, dat's all you stand for. But we drive trou dat, don't we? We split
dat up and smash trou--twenty-five knots a hour! [_Turns his back on
Paddy scornfully._] Aw, yuh make me sick! Yuh don't belong! [_He
strides out the door in rear. Paddy hums to himself, blinking
drowsily._]

[_Curtain_]




SCENE II


SCENE--Two days out. A section of the promenade deck. MILDRED DOUGLAS
and her aunt are discovered reclining in deck chairs. The former is a
girl of twenty, slender, delicate, with a pale, pretty face marred by a
self-conscious expression of disdainful superiority. She looks fretful,
nervous and discontented, bored by her own anemia. Her aunt is a
pompous and proud--and fat--old lady. She is a type even to the point
of a double chin and lorgnettes. She is dressed pretentiously, as if
afraid her face alone would never indicate her position in life.
MILDRED is dressed all in white.

The impression to be conveyed by this scene is one of the beautiful,
vivid life of the sea all about--sunshine on the deck in a great flood,
the fresh sea wind blowing across it. In the midst of this, these two
incongruous, artificial figures, inert and disharmonious, the elder
like a gray lump of dough touched up with rouge, the younger looking as
if the vitality of her stock had been sapped before she was conceived,
so that she is the expression not of its life energy but merely of the
artificialities that energy had won for itself in the spending.

MILDRED--[_Looking up with affected dreaminess._] How the black smoke
swirls back against the sky! Is it not beautiful?

AUNT--[_Without looking up._] I dislike smoke of any kind.

MILDRED--My great-grandmother smoked a pipe--a clay pipe.

AUNT--[_Ruffling._] Vulgar!

MILDRED--She was too distant a relative to be vulgar. Time mellows
pipes.

AUNT--[_Pretending boredom but irritated._] Did the sociology you took
up at college teach you that--to play the ghoul on every possible
occasion, excavating old bones? Why not let your great-grandmother rest
in her grave?

MILDRED--[_Dreamily._] With her pipe beside her--puffing in Paradise.

AUNT--[_With spite._] Yes, you are a natural born ghoul. You are even
getting to look like one, my dear.

MILDRED--[_In a passionless tone._] I detest you, Aunt. [_Looking at
her critically._] Do you know what you remind me of? Of a cold pork
pudding against a background of linoleum tablecloth in the kitchen of
a--but the possibilities are wearisome. [_She closes her eyes._]

AUNT--[_With a bitter laugh._] Merci for your candor. But since I am
and must be your chaperone--in appearance, at least--let us patch up
some sort of armed truce. For my part you are quite free to indulge any
pose of eccentricity that beguiles you--as long as you observe the
amenities--

MILDRED--[_Drawling._] The inanities?

AUNT--[_Going on as if she hadn't heard._] After exhausting the morbid
thrills of social service work on New York's East Side--how they must
have hated you, by the way, the poor that you made so much poorer in
their own eyes!--you are now bent on making your slumming
international. Well, I hope Whitechapel will provide the needed nerve
tonic. Do not ask me to chaperone you there, however. I told your
father I would not. I loathe deformity. We will hire an army of
detectives and you may investigate everything--they allow you to see.

MILDRED--[_Protesting with a trace of genuine earnestness._] Please do
not mock at my attempts to discover how the other half lives. Give me
credit for some sort of groping sincerity in that at least. I would
like to help them. I would like to be some use in the world. Is it my
fault I don't know how? I would like to be sincere, to touch life
somewhere. [_With weary bitterness._] But I'm afraid I have neither the
vitality nor integrity. All that was burnt out in our stock before I
was born. Grandfather's blast furnaces, flaming to the sky, melting
steel, making millions--then father keeping those home fires burning,
making more millions--and little me at the tail-end of it all. I'm a
waste product in the Bessemer process--like the millions. Or rather, I
inherit the acquired trait of the by-product, wealth, but none of the
energy, none of the strength of the steel that made it. I am sired by
gold and darned by it, as they say at the race track--damned in more
ways than one, [_She laughs mirthlessly_].

AUNT--[_Unimpressed--superciliously._] You seem to be going in for
sincerity to-day. It isn't becoming to you, really--except as an
obvious pose. Be as artificial as you are, I advise. There's a sort of
sincerity in that, you know. And, after all, you must confess you like
that better.

MILDRED--[_Again affected and bored._] Yes, I suppose I do. Pardon me
for my outburst. When a leopard complains of its spots, it must sound
rather grotesque. [_In a mocking tone._] Purr, little leopard. Purr,
scratch, tear, kill, gorge yourself and be happy--only stay in the
jungle where your spots are camouflage. In a cage they make you
conspicuous.

AUNT--I don't know what you are talking about.

MILDRED--It would be rude to talk about anything to you. Let's just
talk. [_She looks at her wrist watch._] Well, thank goodness, it's
about time for them to come for me. That ought to give me a new thrill,
Aunt.

AUNT--[_Affectedly troubled._] You don't mean to say you're really
going? The dirt--the heat must be frightful--

MILDRED--Grandfather started as a puddler. I should have inherited an
immunity to heat that would make a salamander shiver. It will be fun to
put it to the test.

AUNT--But don't you have to have the captain's--or
someone's--permission to visit the stokehole?

MILDRED--[_With a triumphant smile._] I have it--both his and the chief
engineer's. Oh, they didn't want to at first, in spite of my social
service credentials. They didn't seem a bit anxious that I should
investigate how the other half lives and works on a ship. So I had to
tell them that my father, the president of Nazareth Steel, chairman of
the board of directors of this line, had told me it would be all right.

AUNT--He didn't.

MILDRED--How naive age makes one! But I said he did, Aunt. I even said
he had given me a letter to them--which I had lost. And they were
afraid to take the chance that I might be lying. [_Excitedly._] So it's
ho! for the stokehole. The second engineer is to escort me. [_Looking
at her watch again._] It's time. And here he comes, I think. [_The
SECOND ENGINEER enters, He is a husky, fine-looking man of thirty-five
or so. He stops before the two and tips his cap, visibly embarrassed
and ill-at-ease._]

SECOND ENGINEER--Miss Douglas?

MILDRED--Yes. [_Throwing off her rugs and getting to her feet._] Are we
all ready to start?

SECOND ENGINEER--In just a second, ma'am. I'm waiting for the Fourth.
He's coming along.

MILDRED--[_With a scornful smile._] You don't care to shoulder this
responsibility alone, is that it?

SECOND ENGINEER--[_Forcing a smile._] Two are better than one.
[_Disturbed by her eyes, glances out to sea--blurts out._] A fine day
we're having.

MILDRED--Is it?

SECOND ENGINEER--A nice warm breeze--

MILDRED--It feels cold to me.

SECOND ENGINEER--But it's hot enough in the sun--

MILDRED--Not hot enough for me. I don't like Nature. I was never
athletic.

SECOND ENGINEER--[_Forcing a smile._] Well, you'll find it hot enough
where you're going.

MILDRED--Do you mean hell?

SECOND ENGINEER--[_Flabbergasted, decides to laugh._] Ho-ho! No, I mean
the stokehole.

MILDRED--My grandfather was a puddler. He played with boiling steel.

SECOND ENGINEER--[_All at sea--uneasily._] Is that so? Hum, you'll
excuse me, ma'am, but are you intending to wear that dress.

MILDRED--Why not?

SECOND ENGINEER--You'll likely rub against oil and dirt. It can't be
helped.

MILDRED--It doesn't matter. I have lots of white dresses.

SECOND ENGINEER--I have an old coat you might throw over--

MILDRED--I have fifty dresses like this. I will throw this one into the
sea when I come back. That ought to wash it clean, don't you think?

SECOND ENGINEER--[_Doggedly._] There's ladders to climb down that are
none too clean--and dark alleyways--

MILDRED--I will wear this very dress and none other.

SECOND ENGINEER--No offence meant. It's none of my business. I was only
warning you--

MILDRED--Warning? That sounds thrilling.

SECOND ENGINEER--[_Looking down the deck--with a sigh of
relief._]--There's the Fourth now. He's waiting for us. If you'll come--

MILDRED--Go on. I'll follow you. [_He goes. Mildred turns a mocking
smile on her aunt._] An oaf--but a handsome, virile oaf.

AUNT--[_Scornfully._] Poser!

MILDRED--Take care. He said there were dark alleyways--

AUNT--[_In the same tone._] Poser!

MILDRED--[_Biting her lips angrily._] You are right. But would that my
millions were not so anemically chaste!

AUNT--Yes, for a fresh pose I have no doubt you would drag the name of
Douglas in the gutter!

MILDRED--From which it sprang. Good-by, Aunt. Don't pray too hard that
I may fall into the fiery furnace.

AUNT--Poser!

MILDRED--[_Viciously._] Old hag! [_She slaps her aunt insultingly
across the face and walks off, laughing gaily._]

AUNT--[_Screams after her._] I said poser!

[_Curtain_]




SCENE III


SCENE--The stokehole. In the rear, the dimly-outlined bulks of the
furnaces and boilers. High overhead one hanging electric bulb sheds
just enough light through the murky air laden with coal dust to pile up
masses of shadows everywhere. A line of men, stripped to the waist, is
before the furnace doors. They bend over, looking neither to right nor
left, handling their shovels as if they were part of their bodies, with
a strange, awkward, swinging rhythm. They use the shovels to throw open
the furnace doors. Then from these fiery round holes in the black a
flood of terrific light and heat pours full upon the men who are
outlined in silhouette in the crouching, inhuman attitudes of chained
gorillas. The men shovel with a rhythmic motion, swinging as on a pivot
from the coal which lies in heaps on the floor behind to hurl it into
the flaming mouths before them. There is a tumult of noise--the brazen
clang of the furnace doors as they are flung open or slammed shut, the
grating, teeth-gritting grind of steel against steel, of crunching
coal. This clash of sounds stuns one's ears with its rending
dissonance. But there is order in it, rhythm, a mechanical regulated
recurrence, a tempo. And rising above all, making the air hum with the
quiver of liberated energy, the roar of leaping flames in the furnaces,
the monotonous throbbing beat of the engines.

As the curtain rises, the furnace doors are shut. The men are taking a
breathing spell. One or two are arranging the coal behind them, pulling
it into more accessible heaps. The others can be dimly made out leaning
on their shovels in relaxed attitudes of exhaustion.

PADDY--[_From somewhere in the line--plaintively._] Yerra, will this
divil's own watch nivir end? Me back is broke. I'm destroyed entirely.

YANK--[_From the center of the line--with exuberant scorn._] Aw, yuh
make me sick! Lie down and croak, why don't yuh? Always beefin', dat's
you! Say, dis is a cinch! Dis was made for me! It's my meat, get me!
[_A whistle is blown--a thin, shrill note from somewhere overhead in
the darkness. Yank curses without resentment._] Dere's de damn engineer
crakin' de whip. He tinks we're loafin'.

PADDY--[_Vindictively._] God stiffen him!

YANK--[_In an exultant tone of command._] Come on, youse guys! Git into
de game! She's gittin' hungry! Pile some grub in her! Trow it into her
belly! Come on now, all of youse! Open her up! [_At this last all the
men, who have followed his movements of getting into position, throw
open their furnace doors with a deafening clang. The fiery light floods
over their shoulders as they bend round for the coal. Rivulets of sooty
sweat have traced maps on their backs. The enlarged muscles form
bunches of high light and shadow._]

YANK--[_Chanting a count as he shovels without seeming effort._]
One--two--tree--[_His voice rising exultantly in the joy of battle._]
Dat's de stuff! Let her have it! All togedder now! Sling it into her!
Let her ride! Shoot de piece now! Call de toin on her! Drive her into
it! Feel her move! Watch her smoke! Speed, dat's her middle name! Give
her coal, youse guys! Coal, dat's her booze! Drink it up, baby! Let's
see yuh sprint! Dig in and gain a lap! Dere she go-o-es [_This last in
the chanting formula of the gallery gods at the six-day bike race. He
slams his furnace door shut. The others do likewise with as much unison
as their wearied bodies will permit. The effect is of one fiery eye
after another being blotted out with a series of accompanying bangs._]

PADDY--[_Groaning._] Me back is broke. I'm bate out--bate--[_There is a
pause. Then the inexorable whistle sounds again from the dim regions
above the electric light. There is a growl of cursing rage from all
sides._]

YANK--[_Shaking his fist upward--contemptuously._] Take it easy dere,
you! Who d'yuh tinks runnin' dis game, me or you? When I git ready, we
move. Not before! When I git ready, get me!

VOICES--[_Approvingly._] That's the stuff!

Yank tal him, py golly!

Yank ain't affeerd.

Goot poy, Yank!

Give him hell!

Tell 'im 'e's a bloody swine!

Bloody slave-driver!

YANK--[_Contemptuously._] He ain't got no noive. He's yellow, get me?
All de engineers is yellow. Dey got streaks a mile wide. Aw, to hell
wit him! Let's move, youse guys. We had a rest. Come on, she needs it!
Give her pep! It ain't for him. Him and his whistle, dey don't belong.
But we belong, see! We gotter feed de baby! Come on! [_He turns and
flings his furnace door open. They all follow his lead. At this instant
the Second and Fourth Engineers enter from the darkness on the left
with Mildred between them. She starts, turns paler, her pose is
crumbling, she shivers with fright in spite of the blazing heat, but
forces herself to leave the Engineers and take a few steps nearer the
men. She is right behind Yank. All this happens quickly while the men
have their backs turned._]

YANK--Come on, youse guys! [_He is turning to get coal when the whistle
sounds again in a peremptory, irritating note. This drives Yank into a
sudden fury. While the other men have turned full around and stopped
dumfounded by the spectacle of Mildred standing there in her white
dress, Yank does not turn far enough to see her. Besides, his head is
thrown back, he blinks upward through the murk trying to find the owner
of the whistle, he brandishes his shovel murderously over his head in
one hand, pounding on his chest, gorilla-like, with the other,
shouting:_] Toin off dat whistle! Come down outa dere, yuh yellow,
brass-buttoned, Belfast bum, yuh! Come down and I'll knock yer brains
out! Yuh lousey, stinkin', yellow mut of a Catholic-moiderin' bastard!
Come down and I'll moider yuh! Pullin' dat whistle on me, huh? I'll
show yuh! I'll crash yer skull in! I'll drive yer teet' down yer troat!
I'll slam yer nose trou de back of yer head! I'll cut yer guts out for
a nickel, yuh lousey boob, yuh dirty, crummy, muck-eatin' son of a--

[_Suddenly he becomes conscious of all the other men staring at
something directly behind his back. He whirls defensively with a
snarling, murderous growl, crouching to spring, his lips drawn back
o'ver his teeth, his small eyes gleaming ferociously. He sees Mildred,
like a white apparition in the full light from the open furnace doors.
He glares into her eyes, turned to stone. As for her, during his speech
she has listened, paralyzed with horror, terror, her whole personality
crushed, beaten in, collapsed, by the terrific impact of this unknown,
abysmal brutality, naked and shameless. As she looks at his gorilla
face, as his eyes bore into hers, she utters a low, choking cry and
shrinks away from him, putting both hands up before her eyes to shut
out the sight of his face, to protect her own. This startles Yank to a
reaction. His mouth falls open, his eyes grow bewildered._]

MILDRED--[_About to faint--to the Engineers, who now have her one by
each arm--whimperingly._] Take me away! Oh, the filthy beast! [_She
faints. They carry her quickly back, disappearing in the darkness at
the left, rear. An iron door clangs shut. Rage and bewildered fury rush
back on Yank. He feels himself insulted in some unknown fashion in the
very heart of his pride. He roars:_] God damn yuh! [_And hurls his
shovel after them at the door which has just closed. It hits the steel
bulkhead with a clang and falls clattering on the steel floor. From
overhead the whistle sounds again in a long, angry, insistent command._]

[_Curtain_]




SCENE IV


SCENE--The firemen's forecastle. Yank's watch has just come off duty
and had dinner. Their faces and bodies shine from a soap and water
scrubbing but around their eyes, where a hasty dousing does not touch,
the coal dust sticks like black make-up, giving them a queer, sinister
expression. Yank has not washed either face or body. He stands out in
contrast to them, a blackened, brooding figure. He is seated forward on
a bench in the exact attitude of Rodin's "The Thinker." The others,
most of them smoking pipes, are staring at Yank half-apprehensively, as
if fearing an outburst; half-amusedly, as if they saw a joke somewhere
that tickled them.

VOICES--He ain't ate nothin'.

Py golly, a fallar gat gat grub in him.

Divil a lie.

Yank feeda da fire, no feeda da face.

Ha-ha.

He ain't even washed hisself.

He's forgot.

Hey, Yank, you forgot to wash.

YANK--[_Sullenly._] Forgot nothin'! To hell wit washin'.

VOICES--It'll stick to you. It'll get under your skin. Give yer the
bleedin' itch, that's wot. It makes spots on you--like a leopard. Like
a piebald nigger, you mean. Better wash up, Yank. You sleep better.
Wash up, Yank. Wash up! Wash up!

YANK--[_Resentfully._] Aw say, youse guys. Lemme alone. Can't youse see
I'm tryin' to tink?

ALL--[_Repeating the word after him as one with cynical mockery._]
Think! [_The word has a brazen, metallic quality as if their throats
were phonograph horns. It is followed by a chorus of hard, barking
laughter._]

YANK--[_Springing to his feet and glaring at them belligerently._] Yes,
tink! Tink, dat's what I said! What about it? [_They are silent,
puzzled by his sudden resentment at what used to be one of his jokes.
Yank sits down again in the same attitude of "The Thinker."_]

VOICES--Leave him alone.

He's got a grouch on.

Why wouldn't he?

PADDY--[_With a wink at the others._] Sure I know what's the matther.
'Tis aisy to see. He's fallen in love, I'm telling you.

ALL--[_Repeating the word after him as one with cynical mockery._]
Love! [_The word has a brazen, metallic quality as if their throats
were phonograph horns. It is followed by a chorus of hard, barking
laughter._]

YANK--[_With a contemptuous snort._] Love, hell! Hate, dat's what. I've
fallen in hate, get me?

PADDY--[_Philosophically_] 'Twould take a wise man to tell one from the
other. [_With a bitter, ironical scorn, increasing as he goes on._] But
I'm telling you it's love that's in it. Sure what else but love for us
poor bastes in the stokehole would be bringing a fine lady, dressed
like a white quane, down a mile of ladders and steps to be havin' a
look at us? [_A growl of anger goes up from all sides._]

LONG--[_Jumping on a bench--hecticly_] Hinsultin' us! Hinsultin' us,
the bloody cow! And them bloody engineers! What right 'as they got to
be exhibitin' us 's if we was bleedin' monkeys in a menagerie? Did we
sign for hinsults to our dignity as 'onest workers? Is that in the
ship's articles? You kin bloody well bet it ain't! But I knows why they
done it. I arsked a deck steward 'o she was and 'e told me. 'Er old
man's a bleedin' millionaire, a bloody Capitalist! 'E's got enuf bloody
gold to sink this bleedin' ship! 'E makes arf the bloody steel in the
world! 'E owns this bloody boat! And you and me, comrades, we're 'is
slaves! And the skipper and mates and engineers, they're 'is slaves!
And she's 'is bloody daughter and we're all 'er slaves, too! And she
gives 'er orders as 'ow she wants to see the bloody animals below decks
and down they takes 'er! [_There is a roar of rage from all sides._]

YANK--[_Blinking at him bewilderedly._] Say! Wait a moment! Is all dat
straight goods?

LONG--Straight as string! The bleedin' steward as waits on 'em, 'e told
me about 'er. And what're we goin' ter do, I arsks yer? 'Ave we got ter
swaller 'er hinsults like dogs? It ain't in the ship's articles. I tell
yer we got a case. We kin go ter law--

YANK--[_With abysmal contempt._] Hell! Law!

ALL--[_Repeating the word after him as one with cynical mockery._] Law!
[_The word has a brazen metallic quality as if their throats were
phonograph horns. It is followed by a chorus of hard, barking
laughter._]

LONG--[_Feeling the ground slipping from under his feet--desperately._]
As voters and citizens we kin force the bloody governments--

YANK--[_With abysmal contempt._] Hell! Governments!

ALL--[_Repeating the word after him as one with cynical mockery._]
Governments! [_The word has a brazen metallic quality as if their
throats were phonograph horns. It is followed by a chorus of hard,
barking laughter._]

LONG--[_Hysterically._] We're free and equal in the sight of God--

YANK--[_With abysmal contempt._] Hell! God!

ALL--[_Repeating the word after him as one with cynical mockery._] God!
[_The word has a brazen metallic quality as if their throats were
phonograph horns. It is followed by a chorus of hard, barking
laughter._]

YANK--[_Witheringly._] Aw, join de Salvation Army!

ALL--Sit down! Shut up! Damn fool! Sea-lawyer! [_Long slinks back out
of sight._]

PADDY--[_Continuing the trend of his thoughts as if he had never been
interrupted--bitterly._] And there she was standing behind us, and the
Second pointing at us like a man you'd hear in a circus would be
saying: In this cage is a queerer kind of baboon than ever you'd find
in darkest Africy. We roast them in their own sweat--and be damned if
you won't hear some of thim saying they like it! [_He glances
scornfully at Yank._]

YANK--[_With a bewildered uncertain growl._] Aw!

PADDY--And there was Yank roarin' curses and turning round wid his
shovel to brain her--and she looked at him, and him at her--

YANK--[_Slowly._] She was all white. I tought she was a ghost. Sure.

PADDY--[_With heavy, biting sarcasm._] 'Twas love at first sight, divil
a doubt of it! If you'd seen the endearin' look on her pale mug when
she shrivelled away with her hands over her eyes to shut out the sight
of him! Sure, 'twas as if she'd seen a great hairy ape escaped from the
Zoo!

YANK--[_Stung--with a growl of rage._] Aw!

PADDY--And the loving way Yank heaved his shovel at the skull of her,
only she was out the door! [_A grin breaking over his face._] 'Twas
touching, I'm telling you! It put the touch of home, swate home in the
stokehole. [_There is a roar of laughter from all._]

YANK--[_Glaring at Paddy menacingly._] Aw, choke dat off, see!

PADDY--[_Not heeding him--to the others._] And her grabbin' at the
Second's arm for protection. [_With a grotesque imitation of a woman's
voice._] Kiss me, Engineer dear, for it's dark down here and me old
man's in Wall Street making money! Hug me tight, darlin', for I'm
afeerd in the dark and me mother's on deck makin' eyes at the skipper!
[_Another roar of laughter._]

YANK--[_Threateningly._] Say! What yuh tryin' to do, kid me, yuh old
Harp?

PADDY--Divil a bit! Ain't I wishin' myself you'd brained her?

YANK--[_Fiercely._] I'll brain her! I'll brain her yet, wait 'n' see!
[_Coming over to Paddy--slowly._] Say, is dat what she called me--a
hairy ape?

PADDY--She looked it at you if she didn't say the word itself.

YANK--[_Grinning horribly._] Hairy ape, huh? Sure! Dat's de way she
looked at me, aw right. Hairy ape! So dat's me, huh? [_Bursting into
rage--as if she were still in front of him._] Yuh skinny tart! Yuh
white-faced bum, yuh! I'll show yuh who's a ape! [_Turning to the
others, bewilderment seizing him again._] Say, youse guys. I was
bawlin' him out for pullin' de whistle on us. You heard me. And den I
seen youse lookin' at somep'n and I tought he'd sneaked down to come up
in back of me, and I hopped round to knock him dead wit de shovel. And
dere she was wit de light on her! Christ, yuh coulda pushed me over
with a finger! I was scared, get me? Sure! I tought she was a ghost,
see? She was all in white like dey wrap around stiffs. You seen her.
Kin yuh blame me? She didn't belong, dat's what. And den when I come to
and seen it was a real skoit and seen de way she was lookin' at
me--like Paddy said--Christ, I was sore, get me? I don't stand for dat
stuff from nobody. And I flung de shovel--on'y she'd beat it.
[_Furiously._] I wished it'd banged her! I wished it'd knocked her
block off!

LONG--And be 'anged for murder or 'lectrocuted? She ain't bleedin' well
worth it.

YANK--I don't give a damn what! I'd be square wit her, wouldn't I? Tink
I wanter let her put somep'n over on me? Tink I'm goin' to let her git
away wit dat stuff? Yuh don't know me! Noone ain't never put nothin'
over on me and got away wit it, see!--not dat kind of stuff--no guy and
no skoit neither! I'll fix her! Maybe she'll come down again--

VOICE--No chance, Yank. You scared her out of a year's growth.

YANK--I scared her? Why de hell should I scare her? Who de hell is she?
Ain't she de same as me? Hairy ape, huh? [_With his old confident
bravado._] I'll show her I'm better'n her, if she on'y knew it. I
belong and she don't, see! I move and she's dead! Twenty-five knots a
hour, dats me! Dat carries her but I make dat. She's on'y baggage.
Sure! [_Again bewilderedly._] But, Christ, she was funny lookin'! Did
yuh pipe her hands? White and skinny. Yuh could see de bones trough
'em. And her mush, dat was dead white, too. And her eyes, dey was like
dey'd seen a ghost. Me, dat was! Sure! Hairy ape! Ghost, huh? Look at
dat arm! [_He extends his right arm, swelling out the great muscles._]
I coulda took her wit dat, wit' just my little finger even, and broke
her in two. [_Again bewilderedly._] Say, who is dat skoit, huh? What is
she? What's she come from? Who made her? Who give her de noive to look
at me like dat? Dis ting's got my goat right. I don't get her. She's
new to me. What does a skoit like her mean, huh? She don't belong, get
me! I can't see her. [_With growing anger._] But one ting I'm wise to,
aw right, aw right! Youse all kin bet your shoits I'll git even wit
her. I'll show her if she tinks she--She grinds de organ and I'm on de
string, huh? I'll fix her! Let her come down again and I'll fling her
in de furnace! She'll move den! She won't shiver at nothin', den!
Speed, dat'll be her! She'll belong den! [_He grins horribly._]

PADDY--She'll never come. She's had her belly-full, I'm telling you.
She'll be in bed now, I'm thinking, wid ten doctors and nurses feedin'
her salts to clean the fear out of her.

YANK--[_Enraged._] Yuh tink I made her sick, too, do yuh? Just lookin'
at me, huh? Hairy ape, huh? [_In a frenzy of rage._] I'll fix her! I'll
tell her where to git off! She'll git down on her knees and take it
back or I'll bust de face offen her! [_Shaking one fist upward and
beating on his chest with the other._] I'll find yuh! I'm comin', d'yuh
hear? I'll fix yuh, God damn yuh! [_He makes a rush for the door._]

VOICES--Stop him!

He'll get shot!

He'll murder her!

Trip him up!

Hold him!

He's gone crazy!

Gott, he's strong!

Hold him down!

Look out for a kick!

Pin his arms!

[_They have all piled on him and, after a fierce struggle, by sheer
weight of numbers have borne him to the floor just inside the door._]

PADDY--[_Who has remained detached._] Kape him down till he's cooled
off. [_Scornfully._] Yerra, Yank, you're a great fool. Is it payin'
attention at all you are to the like of that skinny sow widout one drop
of rale blood in her?

YANK--[_Frenziedly, from the bottom of the heap._] She done me doit!
She done me doit, didn't she? I'll git square wit her! I'll get her
some way! Git offen me, youse guys! Lemme up! I'll show her who's a ape!

[_Curtain_]




SCENE V


SCENE--Three weeks later. A corner of Fifth Avenue in the Fifties on a
fine, Sunday morning. A general atmosphere of clean, well-tidied, wide
street; a flood of mellow, tempered sunshine; gentle, genteel breezes.
In the rear, the show windows of two shops, a jewelry establishment on
the corner, a furrier's next to it. Here the adornments of extreme
wealth are tantalizingly displayed. The jeweler's window is gaudy with
glittering diamonds, emeralds, rubies, pearls, etc., fashioned in
ornate tiaras, crowns, necklaces, collars, etc. From each piece hangs
an enormous tag from which a dollar sign and numerals in intermittent
electric lights wink out the incredible prices. The same in the
furrier's. Rich furs of all varieties hang there bathed in a downpour
of artificial light. The general effect is of a background of
magnificence cheapened and made grotesque by commercialism, a
background in tawdry disharmony with the clear light and sunshine on
the street itself.

Up the side street Yank and Long come swaggering. Long is dressed in
shore clothes, wears a black Windsor tie, cloth cap. Yank is in his
dirty dungarees. A fireman's cap with black peak is cocked defiantly on
the side of his head. He has not shaved for days and around his fierce,
resentful eyes--as around those of Long to a lesser degree--the black
smudge of coal dust still sticks like make-up. They hesitate and stand
together at the corner, swaggering, looking about them with a forced,
defiant contempt.

LONG--[_Indicating it all with an oratorical gesture._] Well, 'ere we
are. Fif' Avenoo. This 'ere's their bleedin' private lane, as yer might
say. [_Bitterly._] We're trespassers 'ere. Proletarians keep orf the
grass!

YANK--[_Dully._] I don't see no grass, yuh boob. [_Staring at the
sidewalk._] Clean, ain't it? Yuh could eat a fried egg offen it. The
white wings got some job sweepin' dis up. [_Looking up and down the
avenue--surlily._] Where's all de white-collar stiffs yuh said was
here--and de skoits--her kind?

LONG--In church, blarst 'em! Arskin' Jesus to give 'em more money.

YANK--Choich, huh? I useter go to choich onct--sure--when I was a kid.
Me old man and woman, dey made me. Dey never went demselves, dough.
Always got too big a head on Sunday mornin', dat was dem. [_With a
grin._] Dey was scrappers for fair, bot' of dem. On Satiday nights when
dey bot' got a skinful dey could put up a bout oughter been staged at
de Garden. When dey got trough dere wasn't a chair or table wit a leg
under it. Or else dey bot' jumped on me for somep'n. Dat was where I
loined to take punishment. [_With a grin and a swagger._] I'm a chip
offen de old block, get me?

LONG--Did yer old man follow the sea?

YANK--Naw. Worked along shore. I runned away when me old lady croaked
wit de tremens. I helped at truckin' and in de market. Den I shipped in
de stokehole. Sure. Dat belongs. De rest was nothin'. [_Looking around
him._] I ain't never seen dis before. De Brooklyn waterfront, dat was
where I was dragged up. [_Taking a deep breath._] Dis ain't so bad at
dat, huh?

LONG--Not bad? Well, we pays for it wiv our bloody sweat, if yer wants
to know!

YANK--[_With sudden angry disgust._] Aw, hell! I don't see noone,
see--like her. All dis gives me a pain. It don't belong. Say, ain't
dere a backroom around dis dump? Let's go shoot a ball. All dis is too
clean and quiet and dolled-up, get me! It gives me a pain.

LONG--Wait and yer'll bloody well see--

YANK--I don't wait for noone. I keep on de move. Say, what yuh drag me
up here for, anyway? Tryin' to kid me, yuh simp, yuh?

LONG--Yer wants to get back at her, don't yer? That's what yer been
saying' every bloomin' 'our since she hinsulted yer.

YANK--[_Vehemently._] Sure ting I do! Didn't I try to git even wit her
in Southampton? Didn't I sneak on de dock and wait for her by de
gangplank? I was goin' to spit in her pale mug, see! Sure, right in her
pop-eyes! Dat woulda made me even, see? But no chanct. Dere was a whole
army of plain clothes bulls around. Dey spotted me and gimme de bum's
rush. I never seen her. But I'll git square wit her yet, you watch!
[_Furiously._] De lousey tart! She tinks she kin get away wit
moider--but not wit me! I'll fix her! I'll tink of a way!

LONG--[_As disgusted as he dares to be._] Ain't that why I brought yer
up 'ere--to show yer? Yer been lookin' at this 'ere 'ole affair wrong.
Yer been actin' an' talkin' 's if it was all a bleedin' personal matter
between yer and that bloody cow. I wants to convince yer she was on'y a
representative of 'er clarss. I wants to awaken yer bloody clarss
consciousness. Then yer'll see it's 'er clarss yer've got to fight, not
'er alone. There's a 'ole mob of 'em like 'er, Gawd blind 'em!

YANK--[_Spitting on his hands--belligerently._] De more de merrier when
I gits started. Bring on de gang!

LONG--Yer'll see 'em in arf a mo', when that church lets out. [_He
turns and sees the window display in the two stores for the first
time._] Blimey! Look at that, will yer? [_They both walk back and stand
looking in the jewelers. Long flies into a fury._] Just look at this
'ere bloomin' mess! Just look at it! Look at the bleedin' prices on
'em--more'n our 'old bloody stokehole makes in ten voyages sweatin' in
'ell! And they--her and her bloody clarss--buys 'em for toys to dangle
on 'em! One of these 'ere would buy scoff for a starvin' family for a
year!

YANK--Aw, cut de sob stuff! T' hell wit de starvin' family! Yuh'll be
passin' de hat to me next. [_With naive admiration._] Say, dem tings is
pretty, huh? Bet yuh dey'd hock for a piece of change aw right. [_Then
turning away, bored._] But, aw hell, what good are dey? Let her have
'em. Dey don't belong no more'n she does. [_With a gesture of sweeping
the jewelers into oblivion._] All dat don't count, get me?

LONG--[_Who has moved to the furriers--indignantly._] And I s'pose this
'ere don't count neither--skins of poor, 'armless animals slaughtered
so as 'er and 'ers can keep their bleedin' noses warm!

YANK--[_Who has been staring at something inside--with queer
excitement._] Take a slant at dat! Give it de once-over! Monkey
fur--two t'ousand bucks! [_Bewilderedly._] Is dat straight
goods--monkey fur? What de hell--?

LONG--[_Bitterly._] It's straight enuf. [_With grim humor._] They
wouldn't bloody well pay that for a 'airy ape's skin--no, nor for the
'ole livin' ape with all 'is 'ead, and body, and soul thrown in!

YANK--[_Clenching his fists, his face growing pale with rage as if the
skin in the window were a personal insult._] Trowin' it up in my face!
Christ! I'll fix her!

LONG--[_Excitedly._] Church is out. 'Ere they come, the bleedin' swine.
[_After a glance at Yank's lowering face--uneasily._] Easy goes,
Comrade. Keep yer bloomin' temper. Remember force defeats itself. It
ain't our weapon. We must impress our demands through peaceful
means--the votes of the on-marching proletarians of the bloody world!

YANK--[_With abysmal contempt._] Votes, hell! Votes is a joke, see.
Votes for women! Let dem do it!

LONG--[_Still more uneasily._] Calm, now. Treat 'em wiv the proper
contempt. Observe the bleedin' parasites but 'old yer 'orses.

YANK--[_Angrily._] Git away from me! Yuh're yellow, dat's what. Force,
dat's me! De punch, dat's me every time, see! [_The crowd from church
enter from the right, sauntering slowly and affectedly, their heads
held stiffly up, looking neither to right nor left, talking in
toneless, simpering voices. The women are rouged, calcimined, dyed,
overdressed to the nth degree. The men are in Prince Alberts, high
hats, spats, canes, etc. A procession of gaudy marionettes, yet with
something of the relentless horror of Frankensteins in their detached,
mechanical unawareness._]

VOICES--Dear Doctor Caiaphas! He is so sincere!
    What was the sermon? I dozed off.
    About the radicals, my dear--and the false
        doctrines that are being preached.
    We must organize a hundred per cent American bazaar.
    And let everyone contribute one one-hundredth percent
        of their income tax.
    What an original idea!
    We can devote the proceeds to rehabilitating the veil of the
        temple.
    But that has been done so many times.

YANK--[_Glaring from one to the other of them--with an insulting snort
of scorn._] Huh! Huh! [_Without seeming to see him, they make wide
detours to avoid the spot where he stands in the middle of the
sidewalk._]

LONG--[_Frightenedly._] Keep yer bloomin' mouth shut, I tells yer.

YANK--[_Viciously._] G'wan! Tell it to Sweeney! [_He swaggers away and
deliberately lurches into a top-hatted gentleman, then glares at him
pugnaciously._] Say, who d'yuh tink yuh're bumpin'? Tink yuh own de
oith?

GENTLEMAN--[_Coldly and affectedly._] I beg your pardon. [_He has not
looked at YANK and passes on without a glance, leaving him bewildered._]

LONG--[_Rushing up and grabbing YANK's arm._] 'Ere! Come away! This
wasn't what I meant. Yer'll 'ave the bloody coppers down on us.

YANK--[_Savagely--giving him a push that sends him sprawling._] G'wan!

LONG--[_Picks himself up--hysterically._] I'll pop orf then. This ain't
what I meant. And whatever 'appens, yer can't blame me. [_He slinks off
left._]

YANK--T' hell wit youse! [_He approaches a lady--with a vicious grin
and a smirking wink._] Hello, Kiddo. How's every little ting? Got
anyting on for to-night? I know an old boiler down to de docks we kin
crawl into. [_The lady stalks by without a look, without a change of
pace. YANK turns to others--insultingly._] Holy smokes, what a mug! Go
hide yuhself before de horses shy at yuh. Gee, pipe de heinie on dat
one! Say, youse, yuh look like de stoin of a ferryboat. Paint and
powder! All dolled up to kill! Yuh look like stiffs laid out for de
boneyard! Aw, g'wan, de lot of youse! Yuh give me de eye-ache. Yuh
don't belong, get me! Look at me, why don't youse dare? I belong, dat's
me! [_Pointing to a skyscraper across the street which is in process of
construction--with bravado._] See dat building goin' up dere? See de
steel work? Steel, dat's me! Youse guys live on it and tink yuh're
somep'n. But I'm IN it, see! I'm de hoistin' engine dat makes it go up!
I'm it--de inside and bottom of it! Sure! I'm steel and steam and smoke
and de rest of it! It moves--speed--twenty-five stories up--and me at
de top and bottom--movin'! Youse simps don't move. Yuh're on'y dolls I
winds up to see 'm spin. Yuh're de garbage, get me--de leavins--de
ashes we dump over de side! Now, whata yuh gotto say? [_But as they
seem neither to see nor hear him, he flies into a fury._] Bums! Pigs!
Tarts! Bitches! [_He turns in a rage on the men, bumping viciously into
them but not jarring them the least bit. Rather it is he who recoils
after each collision. He keeps growling._] Git off de oith! G'wan, yuh
bum! Look where yuh're goin,' can't yuh? Git outa here! Fight, why
don't yuh? Put up yer mits! Don't be a dog! Fight or I'll knock yuh
dead! [_But, without seeming to see him, they all answer with
mechanical affected politeness:_] I beg your pardon. [_Then at a cry
from one of the women, they all scurry to the furrier's window._]

THE WOMAN--[_Ecstatically, with a gasp of delight._] Monkey fur! [_The
whole crowd of men and women chorus after her in the same tone of
affected delight._] Monkey fur!

YANK--[_With a jerk of his head back on his shoulders, as if he had
received a punch full in the face--raging._] I see yuh, all in white! I
see yuh, yuh white-faced tart, yuh! Hairy ape, huh? I'll hairy ape yuh!
[_He bends down and grips at the street curbing as if to pluck it out
and hurl it. Foiled in this, snarling with passion, he leaps to the
lamp-post on the corner and tries to pull it up for a club. Just at
that moment a bus is heard rumbling up. A fat, high-hatted, spatted
gentleman runs out from the side street. He calls out plaintively:
"Bus! Bus! Stop there!" and runs full tilt into the bending, straining
YANK, who is bowled off his balance._]

YANK--[_Seeing a fight--with a roar of joy as he springs to his feet._]
At last! Bus, huh? I'll bust yuh! [_He lets drive a terrific swing, his
fist landing full on the fat gentleman's face. But the gentleman stands
unmoved as if nothing had happened._]

GENTLEMAN--I beg your pardon. [_Then irritably._] You have made me lose
my bus. [_He claps his hands and begins to scream:_] Officer! Officer!
[_Many police whistles shrill out on the instant and a whole platoon of
policemen rush in on YANK from all sides. He tries to fight but is
clubbed to the pavement and fallen upon. The crowd at the window have
not moved or noticed this disturbance. The clanging gong of the patrol
wagon approaches with a clamoring din._]

[_Curtain_]




SCENE VI


SCENE--Night of the following day. A row of cells in the prison on
Blackwells Island. The cells extend back diagonally from right front to
left rear. They do not stop, but disappear in the dark background as if
they ran on, numberless, into infinity. One electric bulb from the low
ceiling of the narrow corridor sheds its light through the heavy steel
bars of the cell at the extreme front and reveals part of the interior.
YANK can be seen within, crouched on the edge of his cot in the
attitude of Rodin's "The Thinker." His face is spotted with black and
blue bruises. A blood-stained bandage is wrapped around his head.

YANK--[_Suddenly starting as if awakening from a dream, reaches out and
shakes the bars--aloud to himself, wonderingly._] Steel. Dis is de Zoo,
huh? [_A burst of hard, barking laughter comes from the unseen
occupants of the cells, runs back down the tier, and abruptly ceases._]

VOICES--[_Mockingly._] The Zoo? That's a new name for this coop--a damn
good name! Steel, eh? You said a mouthful. This is the old iron house.
Who is that boob talkin'? He's the bloke they brung in out of his head.
The bulls had beat him up fierce.

YANK--[_Dully._] I musta been dreamin'. I tought I was in a cage at de
Zoo--but de apes don't talk, do dey?

VOICES--[_With mocking laughter._] You're in a cage aw right.

A coop!

A pen!

A sty!

A kennel! [_Hard laughter--a pause._]

Say, guy! Who are you? No, never mind lying. What are you?

Yes, tell us your sad story. What's your game?

What did they jug yuh for?

YANK--[_Dully._] I was a fireman--stokin' on de liners. [_Then with
sudden rage, rattling his cell bars._] I'm a hairy ape, get me? And
I'll bust youse all in de jaw if yuh don't lay off kiddin' me.

VOICES--Huh! You're a hard boiled duck ain't you!

When you spit, it bounces! [_Laughter._]

Aw, can it. He's a regular guy. Ain't you?

What did he say he was--a ape?

YANK--[_Defiantly._] Sure ting! Ain't dat what youse all are--apes? [_A
silence. Then a furious rattling of bars from down the corridor._]

A VOICE--[_Thick with rage._] I'll show yuh who's a ape, yuh bum!

VOICES--Ssshh! Nix!

Can de noise!

Piano!

You'll have the guard down on us!

YANK--[_Scornfully._] De guard? Yuh mean de keeper, don't yuh? [_Angry
exclamations from all the cells._]

VOICE--[_Placatingly._] Aw, don't pay no attention to him. He's off his
nut from the beatin'-up he got. Say, you guy! We're waitin' to hear
what they landed you for--or ain't yuh tellin'?

YANK--Sure, I'll tell youse. Sure! Why de hell not? On'y--youse won't
get me. Nobody gets me but me, see? I started to tell de Judge and all
he says was: "Toity days to tink it over." Tink it over! Christ, dat's
all I been doin' for weeks! [_After a pause._] I was tryin' to git even
wit someone, see?--someone dat done me doit.

VOICES--[_Cynically._] De old stuff, I bet. Your goil, huh?

Give yuh the double-cross, huh?

That's them every time!

Did yuh beat up de odder guy?

YANK--[_Disgustedly_] Aw, yuh're all wrong! Sure dere was a skoit in
it--but not what youse mean, not dat old tripe. Dis was a new kind of
skoit. She was dolled up all in white--in de stokehole. I tought she
was a ghost. Sure. [_A pause._]

VOICES--[_Whispering._] Gee, he's still nutty.

Let him rave. It's fun listenin'.

YANK--[_Unheeding--groping in his thoughts._] Her hands--dey was skinny
and white like dey wasn't real but painted on somep'n. Dere was a
million miles from me to her--twenty-five knots a hour. She was like
some dead ting de cat brung in. Sure, dat's what. She didn't belong.
She belonged in de window of a toy store, or on de top of a garbage
can, see! Sure! [_He breaks out angrily._] But would yuh believe it,
she had de noive to do me doit. She lamped me like she was seein'
somep'n broke loose from de menagerie. Christ, yuh'd oughter seen her
eyes! [_He rattles the bars of his cell furiously._] But I'll get back
at her yet, you watch! And if I can't find her I'll take it out on de
gang she runs wit. I'm wise to where dey hangs out now. I'll show her
who belongs! I'll show her who's in de move and who ain't. You watch my
smoke!

VOICES--[_Serious and joking._] Dat's de talkin'!

Take her for all she's got!

What was this dame, anyway? Who was she, eh?

YANK--I dunno. First cabin stiff. Her old man's a millionaire, dey
says--name of Douglas.

VOICES--Douglas? That's the president of the Steel Trust, I bet.

Sure. I seen his mug in de papers.

He's filthy with dough.

VOICE--Hey, feller, take a tip from me. If you want to get back at that
dame, you better join the Wobblies. You'll get some action then.

YANK--Wobblies? What de hell's dat?

VOICE--Ain't you ever heard of the I. W. W.?

YANK--Naw. What is it?

VOICE--A gang of blokes--a tough gang. I been readin' about 'em to-day
in the paper. The guard give me the Sunday Times. There's a long spiel
about 'em. It's from a speech made in the Senate by a guy named Senator
Queen. [_He is in the cell next to YANK's. There is a rustling of
paper._] Wait'll I see if I got light enough and I'll read you. Listen.
[_He reads:_] "There is a menace existing in this country to-day which
threatens the vitals of our fair Republic--as foul a menace against the
very life-blood of the American Eagle as was the foul conspiracy of
Cataline against the eagles of ancient Rome!"

VOICE [_Disgustedly._] Aw hell! Tell him to salt de tail of dat eagle!

VOICE--[_Reading:_] "I refer to that devil's brew of rascals,
jailbirds, murderers and cutthroats who libel all honest working men by
calling themselves the Industrial Workers of the World; but in the
light of their nefarious plots, I call them the Industrious WRECKERS of
the World!"

YANK--[_With vengeful satisfaction._] Wreckers, dat's de right dope!
Dat belongs! Me for dem!

VOICE--Ssshh! [_Reading._] "This fiendish organization is a foul ulcer
on the fair body of our Democracy--"

VOICE--Democracy, hell! Give him the boid, fellers--the raspberry!
[_They do._]

VOICE--Ssshh! [_Reading:_] "Like Cato I say to this senate, the I. W.
W. must be destroyed! For they represent an ever-present dagger pointed
at the heart of the greatest nation the world has ever known, where all
men are born free and equal, with equal opportunities to all, where the
Founding Fathers have guaranteed to each one happiness, where Truth,
Honor, Liberty, Justice, and the Brotherhood of Man are a religion
absorbed with one's mother's milk, taught at our father's knee, sealed,
signed, and stamped upon in the glorious Constitution of these United
States!" [_A perfect storm of hisses, catcalls, boos, and hard
laughter._]

VOICES--[_Scornfully._] Hurrah for de Fort' of July!

Pass de hat!

Liberty!

Justice!

Honor!

Opportunity!

Brotherhood!

ALL--[_With abysmal scorn._] Aw, hell!

VOICE--Give that Queen Senator guy the bark! All togedder
now--one--two--tree--[_A terrific chorus of barking and yapping._]

GUARD--[_From a distance._] Quiet there, youse--or I'll git the hose.
[_The noise subsides._]

YANK--[_With growling rage._] I'd like to catch dat senator guy alone
for a second. I'd loin him some trute!

VOICE--Ssshh! Here's where he gits down to cases on the Wobblies.
[_Reads:_] "They plot with fire in one hand and dynamite in the other.
They stop not before murder to gain their ends, nor at the outraging of
defenceless womanhood. They would tear down society, put the lowest
scum in the seats of the mighty, turn Almighty God's revealed plan for
the world topsy-turvy, and make of our sweet and lovely civilization a
shambles, a desolation where man, God's masterpiece, would soon
degenerate back to the ape!"

VOICE--[_To YANK._] Hey, you guy. There's your ape stuff again.

YANK--[_With a growl of fury._] I got him. So dey blow up tings, do
dey? Dey turn tings round, do dey? Hey, lend me dat paper, will yuh?

VOICE--Sure. Give it to him. On'y keep it to yourself, see. We don't
wanter listen to no more of that slop.

VOICE--Here you are. Hide it under your mattress.

YANK--[_Reaching out._] Tanks. I can't read much but I kin manage. [_He
sits, the paper in the hand at his side, in the attitude of Rodin's
"The Thinker." A pause. Several snores from down the corridor. Suddenly
YANK jumps to his feet with a furious groan as if some appalling
thought had crashed on him--bewilderedly._] Sure--her old
man--president of de Steel Trust--makes half de steel in de
world--steel--where I tought I belonged--drivin' trou--movin'--in
dat--to make HER--and cage me in for her to spit on! Christ [_He shakes
the bars of his cell door till the whole tier trembles. Irritated,
protesting exclamations from those awakened or trying to get to
sleep._] He made dis--dis cage! Steel! IT don't belong, dat's what!
Cages, cells, locks, bolts, bars--dat's what it means!--holdin' me down
wit him at de top! But I'll drive trou! Fire, dat melts it! I'll be
fire--under de heap--fire dat never goes out--hot as hell--breakin' out
in de night--[_While he has been saying this last he has shaken his
cell door to a clanging accompaniment. As he comes to the "breakin'
out" he seizes one bar with both hands and, putting his two feet up
against the others so that his position is parallel to the floor like a
monkey's, he gives a great wrench backwards. The bar bends like a
licorice stick under his tremendous strength. Just at this moment the
PRISON GUARD rushes in, dragging a hose behind him._]

GUARD--[_Angrily._] I'll loin youse bums to wake me up! [_Sees YANK._]
Hello, it's you, huh? Got the D.T.s, hey? Well, I'll cure 'em. I'll
drown your snakes for yuh! [_Noticing the bar._] Hell, look at dat bar
bended! On'y a bug is strong enough for dat!

YANK--[_Glaring at him._] Or a hairy ape, yuh big yellow bum! Look out!
Here I come! [_He grabs another bar._]

GUARD--[_Scared now--yelling off left._] Toin de hoose on, Ben!--full
pressure! And call de others--and a strait jacket! [_The curtain is
falling. As it hides YANK from view, there is a splattering smash as
the stream of water hits the steel of YANK's cell._]

[_Curtain_]




SCENE VII


SCENE--Nearly a month later. An I. W. W. local near the waterfront,
showing the interior of a front room on the ground floor, and the
street outside. Moonlight on the narrow street, buildings massed in
black shadow. The interior of the room, which is general assembly room,
office, and reading room, resembles some dingy settlement boys club. A
desk and high stool are in one corner. A table with papers, stacks of
pamphlets, chairs about it, is at center. The whole is decidedly cheap,
banal, commonplace and unmysterious as a room could well be. The
secretary is perched on the stool making entries in a large ledger. An
eye shade casts his face into shadows. Eight or ten men, longshoremen,
iron workers, and the like, are grouped about the table. Two are
playing checkers. One is writing a letter. Most of them are smoking
pipes. A big signboard is on the wall at the rear, "Industrial Workers
of the World--Local No. 57."

YANK--[_Comes down the street outside. He is dressed as in Scene Five.
He moves cautiously, mysteriously. He comes to a point opposite the
door; tiptoes softly up to it, listens, is impressed by the silence
within, knocks carefully, as if he were guessing at the password to
some secret rite. Listens. No answer. Knocks again a bit louder. No
answer. Knocks impatiently, much louder._]

SECRETARY--[_Turning around on his stool._] What the devil is
that--someone knocking? [_Shouts:_] Come in, why don't you? [_All the
men in the room look up. YANK opens the door slowly, gingerly, as if
afraid of an ambush. He looks around for secret doors, mystery, is
taken aback by the commonplaceness of the room and the men in it,
thinks he may have gotten in the wrong place, then sees the signboard
on the wall and is reassured._]

YANK--[_Blurts out._] Hello.

MEN--[_Reservedly._] Hello.

YANK--[_More easily._] I tought I'd bumped into de wrong dump.

SECRETARY--[_Scrutinizing him carefully._] Maybe you have. Are you a
member?

YANK--Naw, not yet. Dat's what I come for--to join.

SECRETARY--That's easy. What's your job--longshore?

YANK--Naw. Fireman--stoker on de liners.

SECRETARY--[_With satisfaction._] Welcome to our city. Glad to know you
people are waking up at last. We haven't got many members in your line.

YANK--Naw. Dey're all dead to de woild.

SECRETARY--Well, you can help to wake 'em. What's your name? I'll make
out your card.

YANK--[_Confused._] Name? Lemme tink.

SECRETARY--[_Sharply._] Don't you know your own name?

YANK--Sure; but I been just Yank for so long--Bob, dat's it--Bob Smith.

SECRETARY--[_Writing._] Robert Smith. [_Fills out the rest of card._]
Here you are. Cost you half a dollar.

YANK--Is dat all--four bits? Dat's easy. [_Gives the SECRETARY the
money._]

SECRETARY--[_Throwing it in drawer._] Thanks. Well, make yourself at
home. No introductions needed. There's literature on the table. Take
some of those pamphlets with you to distribute aboard ship. They may
bring results. Sow the seed, only go about it right. Don't get caught
and fired. We got plenty out of work. What we need is men who can hold
their jobs--and work for us at the same time.

YANK--Sure. [_But he still stands, embarrassed and uneasy._]

SECRETARY--[_Looking at him--curiously._] What did you knock for? Think
we had a coon in uniform to open doors?

YANK--Naw. I tought it was locked--and dat yuh'd wanter give me the
once-over trou a peep-hole or somep'n to see if I was right.

SECRETARY--[_Alert and suspicious but with an easy laugh._] Think we
were running a crap game? That door is never locked. What put that in
your nut?

YANK--[_With a knowing grin, convinced that this is all camouflage, a
part of the secrecy._] Dis burg is full of bulls, ain't it?

SECRETARY--[_Sharply._] What have the cops got to do with us? We're
breaking no laws.

YANK--[_With a knowing wink._] Sure. Youse wouldn't for woilds. Sure.
I'm wise to dat.

SECRETARY--You seem to be wise to a lot of stuff none of us knows about.

YANK--[_With another wink._] Aw, dat's aw right, see. [_Then made a bit
resentful by the suspicious glances from all sides._] Aw, can it! Youse
needn't put me trou de toid degree. Can't youse see I belong? Sure! I'm
reg'lar. I'll stick, get me? I'll shoot de woiks for youse. Dat's why I
wanted to join in.

SECRETARY--[_Breezily, feeling him out._] That's the right spirit. Only
are you sure you understand what you've joined? It's all plain and
above board; still, some guys get a wrong slant on us. [_Sharply._]
What's your notion of the purpose of the I. W. W.?

YANK--Aw, I know all about it.

SECRETARY--[_Sarcastically._] Well, give us some of your valuable
information.

YANK--[_Cunningly._] I know enough not to speak outa my toin. [_Then
resentfully again._] Aw, say! I'm reg'lar. I'm wise to de game. I know
yuh got to watch your step wit a stranger. For all youse know, I might
be a plain-clothes dick, or somep'n, dat's what yuh're tinkin', huh?
Aw, forget it! I belong, see? Ask any guy down to de docks if I don't.

SECRETARY--Who said you didn't?

YANK--After I'm 'nitiated, I'll show yuh.

SECRETARY--[_Astounded._] Initiated? There's no initiation.

YANK--[_Disappointed._] Ain't there no password--no grip nor nothin'?

SECRETARY--What'd you think this is--the Elks--or the Black Hand?

YANK--De Elks, hell! De Black Hand, dey're a lot of yellow backstickin'
Ginees. Naw. Dis is a man's gang, ain't it?

SECRETARY--You said it! That's why we stand on our two feet in the
open. We got no secrets.

YANK--[_Surprised but admiringly._] Yuh mean to say yuh always run wide
open--like dis?

SECRETARY--Exactly.

YANK--Den yuh sure got your noive wit youse!

SECRETARY--[_Sharply._] Just what was it made you want to join us? Come
out with that straight.

YANK--Yuh call me? Well, I got noive, too! Here's my hand. Yuh wanter
blow tings up, don't yuh? Well, dat's me! I belong!

SECRETARY--[_With pretended carelessness._] You mean change the unequal
conditions of society by legitimate direct action--or with dynamite?

YANK--Dynamite! Blow it offen de oith--steel--all de cages--all de
factories, steamers, buildings, jails--de Steel Trust and all dat makes
it go.

SECRETARY--So--that's your idea, eh? And did you have any special job
in that line you wanted to propose to us. [_He makes a sign to the men,
who get up cautiously one by one and group behind YANK._]

YANK--[_Boldly._] Sure, I'll come out wit it. I'll show youse I'm one
of de gang. Dere's dat millionaire guy, Douglas--

SECRETARY--President of the Steel Trust, you mean? Do you want to
assassinate him?

YANK--Naw, dat don't get yuh nothin'. I mean blow up de factory, de
woiks, where he makes de steel. Dat's what I'm after--to blow up de
steel, knock all de steel in de woild up to de moon. Dat'll fix tings!
[_Eagerly, with a touch of bravado._] I'll do it by me lonesome! I'll
show yuh! Tell me where his woiks is, how to git there, all de dope.
Gimme de stuff, de old butter--and watch me do de rest! Watch de smoke
and see it move! I don't give a damn if dey nab me--long as it's done!
I'll soive life for it--and give 'em de laugh! [_Half to himself._] And
I'll write her a letter and tell her de hairy ape done it. Dat'll
square tings.

SECRETARY--[_Stepping away from YANK._] Very interesting. [_He gives a
signal. The men, huskies all, throw themselves on YANK and before he
knows it they have his legs and arms pinioned. But he is too
flabbergasted to make a struggle, anyway. They feel him over for
weapons._]

MAN--No gat, no knife. Shall we give him what's what and put the boots
to him?

SECRETARY--No. He isn't worth the trouble we'd get into. He's too
stupid. [_He comes closer and laughs mockingly in YANK'S face._] Ho-ho!
By God, this is the biggest joke they've put up on us yet. Hey, you
Joke! Who sent you--Burns or Pinkerton? No, by God, you're such a
bonehead I'll bet you're in the Secret Service! Well, you dirty spy,
you rotten agent provocator, you can go back and tell whatever skunk is
paying you blood-money for betraying your brothers that he's wasting
his coin. You couldn't catch a cold. And tell him that all he'll ever
get on us, or ever has got, is just his own sneaking plots that he's
framed up to put us in jail. We are what our manifesto says we are,
neither more or less--and we'll give him a copy of that any time he
calls. And as for you--[_He glares scornfully at YANK, who is sunk in
an oblivious stupor._] Oh, hell, what's the use of talking? You're a
brainless ape.

YANK--[_Aroused by the word to fierce but futile struggles._] What's
dat, yuh Sheeny bum, yuh!

SECRETARY--Throw him out, boys. [_In spite of his struggles, this is
done with gusto and eclat. Propelled by several parting kicks, YANK
lands sprawling in the middle of the narrow cobbled street. With a
growl he starts to get up and storm the closed door, but stops
bewildered by the confusion in his brain, pathetically impotent. He
sits there, brooding, in as near to the attitude of Rodin's "Thinker"
as he can get in his position._]

YANK--[_Bitterly._] So dem boids don't tink I belong, neider. Aw, to
hell wit 'em! Dey're in de wrong pew--de same old bull--soapboxes and
Salvation Army--no guts! Cut out an hour offen de job a day and make me
happy! Gimme a dollar more a day and make me happy! Tree square a day,
and cauliflowers in de front yard--ekal rights--a woman and kids--a
lousey vote--and I'm all fixed for Jesus, huh? Aw, hell! What does dat
get yuh? Dis ting's in your inside, but it ain't your belly. Feedin'
your face--sinkers and coffee--dat don't touch it. It's way down--at de
bottom. Yuh can't grab it, and yuh can't stop it. It moves, and
everyting moves. It stops and de whole woild stops. Dat's me now--I
don't tick, see?--I'm a busted Ingersoll, dat's what. Steel was me, and
I owned de woild. Now I ain't steel, and de woild owns me. Aw, hell! I
can't see--it's all dark, get me? It's all wrong! [_He turns a bitter
mocking face up like an ape gibbering at the moon._] Say, youse up
dere, Man in de Moon, yuh look so wise, gimme de answer, huh? Slip me
de inside dope, de information right from de stable--where do I get off
at, huh?

A POLICEMAN--[_Who has come up the street in time to hear this
last--with grim humor._] You'll get off at the station, you boob, if
you don't get up out of that and keep movin'.

YANK--[_Looking up at him--with a hard, bitter laugh._] Sure! Lock me
up! Put me in a cage! Dat's de on'y answer yuh know. G'wan, lock me up!

POLICEMAN--What you been doin'?

YANK--Enuf to gimme life for! I was born, see? Sure, dat's de charge.
Write it in de blotter. I was born, get me!

POLICEMAN--[_Jocosely._] God pity your old woman! [_Then
matter-of-fact._] But I've no time for kidding. You're soused. I'd run
you in but it's too long a walk to the station. Come on now, get up, or
I'll fan your ears with this club. Beat it now! [_He hauls YANK to his
feet._]

YANK--[_In a vague mocking tone._] Say, where do I go from here?

POLICEMAN--[_Giving him a push--with a grin, indifferently._] Go to
hell.

[_Curtain_]




SCENE VIII


SCENE--Twilight of the next day. The monkey house at the Zoo. One spot
of clear gray light falls on the front of one cage so that the interior
can be seen. The other cages are vague, shrouded in shadow from which
chatterings pitched in a conversational tone can be heard. On the one
cage a sign from which the word "gorilla" stands out. The gigantic
animal himself is seen squatting on his haunches on a bench in much the
same attitude as Rodin's "Thinker." YANK enters from the left.
Immediately a chorus of angry chattering and screeching breaks out. The
gorilla turns his eyes but makes no sound or move.

YANK--[_With a hard, bitter laugh._] Welcome to your city, huh? Hail,
hail, de gang's all here! [_At the sound of his voice the chattering
dies away into an attentive silence. YANK walks up to the gorilla's
cage and, leaning over the railing, stares in at its occupant, who
stares back at him, silent and motionless. There is a pause of dead
stillness. Then YANK begins to talk in a friendly confidential tone,
half-mockingly, but with a deep undercurrent of sympathy._] Say, yuh're
some hard-lookin' guy, ain't yuh? I seen lots of tough nuts dat de gang
called gorillas, but yuh're de foist real one I ever seen. Some chest
yuh got, and shoulders, and dem arms and mits! I bet yuh got a punch in
eider fist dat'd knock 'em all silly! [_This with genuine admiration.
The gorilla, as if he understood, stands upright, swelling out his
chest and pounding on it with his fist. YANK grins sympathetically._]
Sure, I get yuh. Yuh challenge de whole woild, huh? Yuh got what I was
sayin' even if yuh muffed de woids. [_Then bitterness creeping in._]
And why wouldn't yuh get me? Ain't we both members of de same club--de
Hairy Apes? [_They stare at each other--a pause--then YANK goes on
slowly and bitterly._] So yuh're what she seen when she looked at me,
de white-faced tart! I was you to her, get me? On'y outa de cage--broke
out--free to moider her, see? Sure! Dat's what she tought. She wasn't
wise dat I was in a cage, too--worser'n yours--sure--a damn
sight--'cause you got some chanct to bust loose--but me--[_He grows
confused._] Aw, hell! It's all wrong, ain't it? [_A pause._] I s'pose
yuh wanter know what I'm doin' here, huh? I been warmin' a bench down
to de Battery--ever since last night. Sure. I seen de sun come up. Dat
was pretty, too--all red and pink and green. I was lookin' at de
skyscrapers--steel--and all de ships comin' in, sailin' out, all over
de oith--and dey was steel, too. De sun was warm, dey wasn't no clouds,
and dere was a breeze blowin'. Sure, it was great stuff. I got it aw
right--what Paddy said about dat bein' de right dope--on'y I couldn't
get IN it, see? I couldn't belong in dat. It was over my head. And I
kept tinkin'--and den I beat it up here to see what youse was like. And
I waited till dey was all gone to git yuh alone. Say, how d'yuh feel
sittin' in dat pen all de time, havin' to stand for 'em comin' and
starin' at yuh--de white-faced, skinny tarts and de boobs what marry
'em--makin' fun of yuh, laughin' at yuh, gittin' scared of yuh--damn
'em! [_He pounds on the rail with his fist. The gorilla rattles the
bars of his cage and snarls. All the other monkeys set up an angry
chattering in the darkness. YANK goes on excitedly._] Sure! Dat's de
way it hits me, too. On'y yuh're lucky, see? Yuh don't belong wit 'em
and yuh know it. But me, I belong wit 'em--but I don't, see? Dey don't
belong wit me, dat's what. Get me? Tinkin' is hard--[_He passes one
hand across his forehead with a painful gesture. The gorilla growls
impatiently. YANK goes on gropingly._] It's dis way, what I'm drivin'
at. Youse can sit and dope dream in de past, green woods, de jungle and
de rest of it. Den yuh belong and dey don't. Den yuh kin laugh at 'em,
see? Yuh're de champ of de woild. But me--I ain't got no past to tink
in, nor nothin' dat's comin', on'y what's now--and dat don't belong.
Sure, you're de best off! Yuh can't tink, can yuh? Yuh can't talk
neider. But I kin make a bluff at talkin' and tinkin'--a'most git away
wit it--a'most!--and dat's where de joker comes in. [_He laughs._] I
ain't on oith and I ain't in heaven, get me? I'm in de middle tryin' to
separate 'em, takin' all de woist punches from bot' of 'em. Maybe dat's
what dey call hell, huh? But you, yuh're at de bottom. You belong!
Sure! Yuh're de on'y one in de woild dat does, yuh lucky stiff! [_The
gorilla growls proudly._] And dat's why dey gotter put yuh in a cage,
see? [_The gorilla roars angrily._] Sure! Yuh get me. It beats it when
you try to tink it or talk it--it's way down--deep--behind--you 'n' me
we feel it. Sure! Bot' members of dis club! [_He laughs--then in a
savage tone._] What de hell! T' hell wit it! A little action, dat's our
meat! Dat belongs! Knock 'em down and keep bustin' 'em till dey croaks
yuh wit a gat--wit steel! Sure! Are yuh game? Dey've looked at youse,
ain't dey--in a cage? Wanter git even? Wanter wind up like a sport
'stead of croakin' slow in dere? [_The gorilla roars an emphatic
affirmative. YANK goes on with a sort of furious exaltation._] Sure!
Yuh're reg'lar! Yuh'll stick to de finish! Me 'n' you, huh?--bot'
members of this club! We'll put up one last star bout dat'll knock 'em
offen deir seats! Dey'll have to make de cages stronger after we're
trou! [_The gorilla is straining at his bars, growling, hopping from
one foot to the other. YANK takes a jimmy from under his coat and
forces the lock on the cage door. He throws this open._] Pardon from de
governor! Step out and shake hands! I'll take yuh for a walk down Fif'
Avenoo. We'll knock 'em offen de oith and croak wit de band playin'.
Come on, Brother. [_The gorilla scrambles gingerly out of his cage.
Goes to YANK and stands looking at him. YANK keeps his mocking
tone--holds out his hand._] Shake--de secret grip of our order.
[_Something, the tone of mockery, perhaps, suddenly enrages the animal.
With a spring he wraps his huge arms around YANK in a murderous hug.
There is a crackling snap of crushed ribs--a gasping cry, still
mocking, from YANK._] Hey, I didn't say, kiss me. [_The gorilla lets
the crushed body slip to the floor; stands over it uncertainly,
considering; then picks it up, throws it in the cage, shuts the door,
and shuffles off menacingly into the darkness at left. A great uproar
of frightened chattering and whimpering comes from the other cages.
Then YANK moves, groaning, opening his eyes, and there is silence. He
mutters painfully._] Say--dey oughter match him--wit Zybszko. He got
me, aw right. I'm trou. Even him didn't tink I belonged. [_Then, with
sudden passionate despair._] Christ, where do I get off at? Where do I
fit in? [_Checking himself as suddenly._] Aw, what de hell! No
squakin', see! No quittin', get me! Croak wit your boots on! [_He grabs
hold of the bars of the cage and hauls himself painfully to his
feet--looks around him bewilderedly--forces a mocking laugh._] In de
cage, huh? [_In the strident tones of a circus barker._] Ladies and
gents, step forward and take a slant at de one and only--[_His voice
weakening_]--one and original--Hairy Ape from de wilds of--[_He slips
in a heap on the floor and dies. The monkeys set up a chattering,
whimpering wail. And, perhaps, the Hairy Ape at last belongs._]

[_Curtain_]










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Hairy Ape, by Eugene O'Neill

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HAIRY APE ***

***** This file should be named 4015.txt or 4015.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/0/1/4015/

Produced by Charles Franks, Robert Rowe and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team. HTML version by Al Haines.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
﻿The Emperor Jones

_The Straw_, and '_Diff'rent_


Three Plays by

Eugene O'Neill



Jonathan Cape
Thirty Bedford Square, London

FIRST PUBLISHED 1922
REPRINTED IN 1925
REPRINTED IN 1931
REPRINTED IN 1935
REPRINTED IN 1953
REPRINTED IN 1955
REPRINTED IN 1958
REPRINTED IN 1965

PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY
BUTLER AND TANNER LTD. FROME AND LONDON
BOUND BY A. W. BAIN AND CO. LTD.




Characters


Bill Carmody
Mary            }
Nora            } _his children_
Tom             }
Billy           }
Doctor Gaynor
Fred Nicholls
Eileen Carmody, _Bill's eldest child_
Stephen Murray
Miss Howard,    _a nurse in training_
Miss Gilpin,    _superintendent of the Infirmary_
Doctor Stanton, _of the Hill Farm Sanatorium_
Doctor Simms,   _his assistant_
Mr. Sloan
Peters,         _a patient_
Mrs. Turner,    _matron of the Sanatorium_
Miss Bailey     }
Mrs. Abner      } _Patients_
Flynn           }
Other Patients of the Sanatorium
Mrs. Brennan

(_The characters are named in the order in which they appear_)




Act One

Scene One: The Kitchen of the Carmody Home--Evening.

Scene Two: The Reception Room of the Infirmary, Hill Farm
Sanatorium--An Evening a Week Later.


Act Two

Scene One: Assembly Room of the Main Building at the Sanatorium--A
Morning Four Months Later.

Scene Two: A Crossroads Near the Sanatorium--Midnight of the Same Day.


Act Three

An Isolation Room and Porch at the Sanatorium--An Afternoon Four Months
Later.


TIME--1910





The Straw




Act One

Act One: Scene One


    _The kitchen of the Carmody home on the outskirts of a manufacturing
    town in Connecticut. On the left, forward, the sink. Farther back,
    two windows looking out on the yard. In the left corner, rear, the
    icebox. Immediately to the right of it, in the rear wall, a window
    opening on the side porch. To the right of this, a china cupboard,
    and a door leading into the hall where the main front entrance to
    the house and the stairs to the floor above are situated. On the
    right, to the rear, a door opening on to the dining room. Further
    forward, the kitchen range with scuttle, wood box, etc. In the
    centre of the room, a table with a red and white cloth. Four
    cane-bottomed chairs are pushed under the table. In front of the
    stove, two battered wicker rocking chairs. The floor is partly
    covered by linoleum strips. The walls are papered a light cheerful
    colour. Several old framed picture-supplement prints hang from
    nails. Everything has a clean, neatly-kept appearance. The supper
    dishes are piled in the sink ready for washing. A saucepan of water
    simmers on the stove._

    _It is about eight o'clock in the evening of a bitter cold day in
    late February of the year 1912._

    _As the curtain rises,_ Bill Carmody _is discovered fitting in a
    rocker by the stove, reading a newspaper and smoking a blackened
    clay pipe. He is a man of fifty, heavy-set and round-shouldered,
    with long muscular arms and swollen-veined, hairy hands. His face
    is bony and ponderous; his nose short and squat; his mouth large,
    thick-lipped and harsh; his complexion mottled--red, purple-streaked,
    and freckled; his hair, short and stubby with a bald spot on the
    crown. The expression of his small, blue eyes is one of selfish
    cunning. His voice is loud and hoarse. He wears a flannel shirt,
    open at the neck, criss-crossed by red braces; black, baggy
    trousers grey with dust; muddy brogues._

    _His youngest daughter,_ Mary, _is sitting on a chair by the table,
    front, turning over the pages of a picture book. She is a delicate,
    dark-haired, blue-eyed, quiet little girl about eight years old._

CARMODY (_after watching the child's preoccupation for a moment, in a
tone of half exasperated amusement_). Well, but you're the quiet one,
surely! (_Mary looks up at him with a shy smile, her eyes still full of
dreams._) Glory be to God, I'd not know a soul was alive in the room,
barrin' myself. What is it you're at, Mary, that there's not a word out
of you?

MARY. I'm looking at the pictures.

CARMODY. It's the dead spit and image of your sister Eileen you are,
with your nose always in a book; and you're like your mother, too, God
rest her soul. (_He crosses himself with pious unction and_ Mary _also
does so._) It's Nora and Tom has the high spirits in them like their
father; and Billy, too,--if he is a lazy, shiftless divil--has the
fightin' Carmody blood like me. You're a Cullen like your mother's
people. They always was dreamin' their lives out. (_He lights his pipe
and shakes his head with ponderous gravity._) There's no good in too
many books, I'll tell you. It's out rompin' and playin' with your
brother and sister you ought to be at your age, not carin' a fig for
books. (_With a glance at the clock._) Is that auld fool of a doctor
stayin' the night? If he had his wits about him he'd know in a jiffy
'tis only a cold has taken Eileen, and give her the medicine. Run out
in the hall, Mary, and see if you hear him. He may have sneaked away by
the front door.

MARY (_goes out into the hall, rear, and comes back_). He's upstairs. I
heard him talking to Eileen.

CARMODY. Close the door, ye little divil! There's a freezin' draught
comin' in. (_She does so and comes back to her chair._ Carmody
_continues with a sneer._) It's mad I am to be thinkin' he'd go without
gettin' his money--the like of a doctor! (_Angrily._) Rogues and
thieves they are, the lot of them, robbin' the poor like us! I've no
use for their drugs at all. They only keep you sick to pay more visits.
I'd not have sent for this bucko if Eileen didn't scare me by faintin'.

MARY (_anxiously_). Is Eileen very sick, Papa?

CARMODY (_spitting--roughly_). If she is, it's her own fault
entirely--weakenin' her health by readin' here in the house. This'll be
a lesson for her, and for you, too. (_Irritably._) Put down that book
on the table and leave it be. I'll have no more readin' in this house,
or I'll take the strap to you!

MARY (_laying the book on the table_). It's only pictures.

CARMODY. No back talk! Pictures or not, it's all the same mopin' and
lazin' in it. (_After a pause--morosely._) It's the bad luck I've been
havin' altogether this last year since your mother died. Who's to do
the work and look after Nora and Tom and yourself, if Eileen is bad
took and has to stay in her bed? I'll have to get Mrs. Brennan come
look after the house. That means money, too, and where's it to come
from? All that I've saved from slavin' and sweatin' in the sun with a
gang of lazy Dagoes'll be up the spout in no time. (_Bitterly._) What a
fool a man is to be raisin' a raft of children and him not a
millionaire! (_With lugubrious self-pity._) Mary, dear, it's a black
curse God put on me when he took your mother just when I needed her
most. (Mary _commences to sob._ Carmody _starts and looks at her
angrily._) What are you sniffin' at?

MARY (_tearfully_). I was thinking--of Mamma.

CARMODY (_scornfully_). It's late you are with your tears, and her cold
in her grave for a year. Stop it, I'm tellin' you! (Mary _gulps back
her sobs._)

      (_There is a noise of childish laughter and screams from the
      street in front. The outside door is opened and slammed,
      footsteps pound along the hall. The door in the rear is pushed
      open, and_ Nora _and_ Tom _rush in breathlessly._ Nora _is a
      bright, vivacious, red-haired girl of eleven--pretty after an
      elfish, mischievous fashion--light-hearted and robust._)

      (Tom _resembles_ Nora _in disposition and appearance. A healthy,
      good-humoured youngster with a shock of sandy hair. He is a year
      younger than_ Nora. _They are followed into the room, a moment
      later, by their brother_ Billy, _who is evidently loftily
      disgusted with their antics._ Billy _is a fourteen-year-old
      replica of his father, whom he imitates even to the hoarse,
      domineering tone of voice._)

CARMODY (_grumpily_). Ah, here you are, the lot of you. Shut that door
after you! What's the use in me spendin' money for coal if all you do
is to let the cold night in the room itself?

NORA (_hopping over to him--teasingly_). Me and Tom had a race, Papa. I
beat him. (_She sticks her tongue out at her younger brother._) Slow
poke!

TOM. You didn't beat me, neither!

NORA. I did, too!

TOM. You did not! You didn't play fair. You tripped me comin' up the
steps. Brick-top! Cheater!

NORA (_flaring up_). You're a liar! You stumbled over your own big
feet, clumsy bones! And I beat you fair Didn't I, Papa?

CARMODY (_with a grin_). You did, darlin', and fair, too. (Tom _slinks
back to the chair in the rear of table, sulking._ Carmody _pats_ Nora's
_red hair with delighted pride._) Sure it's you can beat the divil
himself!

NORA (_sticks out her tongue again at_ Tom). See? Liar! (_She goes and
perches on the table near_ Mary, _who is staring sadly in front of
her._)

CARMODY (_to_ Billy--_irritably_). Did you get the plug for me I told
you?

BILLY. Sure. (_He takes a plug of tobacco from his pocket and hands it
to his father._ Nora _slides down off her perch and disappears,
unnoticed, under the table._)

CARMODY. It's a great wonder you didn't forget it--and me without a
chew. (_He bites off a piece and tucks it into his cheek._)

TOM (_suddenly clutching at his leg with a yell_). Ouch! Darn you! (_He
kicks frantically at something under the table, but_ Nora _scrambles
out at the other end, grinning._)

CARMODY (_angrily_). Shut your big mouth! What is the matter with you
at all?

TOM (_indignantly_). She pinched me--hard as she could, too--and look
at her laughin'!

NORA (_hopping on the table again_). Cry-baby! I owed you one.

TOM. I'll fix you. I'll tell Eileen, wait 'n' see!

NORA. Tattle-tale! I don't care. Eileen's sick.

TOM. That's why you dast do it. You dasn't if she was up. I'll get
even, you bet!

CARMODY (_exasperated_). Shut up your noise! Go up to bed, the two of
you, and no more talk, and you go with them, Mary.

NORA (_giving a quick tug at_ Mary's _hair_). Come on, Mary. Wake up.

MARY. Ow! (_She begins to cry._)

CARMODY (_raising his voice furiously_). Hush your noise, you soft,
weak thing, you! It's nothin' but blubberin' you do be doin' all the
time. (_He stands up threateningly._) I'll have a moment's peace, I
will! Off to bed with you before I get the strap! It's crazy mad you
all get the moment Eileen's away from you. Go on, now! (_They scurry
out of the rear door._) And be quiet or I'll be up to you!

NORA (_sticks her head back in the door_). Can I say good-night to
Eileen, Papa?

CARMODY. No. The doctor's with her yet. (_Then he adds hastily._) Yes,
go in to her, Nora. It'll drive himself out of the house maybe, bad
cess to him, and him stayin' half the night. (Nora _waits to hear no
more but darts back, shutting the door behind her._ Billy _takes the
chair in front of the table._ Carmody _sits down again with a groan._)
The rheumatics are in my leg again. (_Shakes his head._) If Eileen's in
bed long those brats'll have the house down.

BILLY. Eileen ain't sick very bad, is she?

CARMODY (_easily_). It's a cold only she has. (_Then mournfully._) Your
poor mother died of the same. (Billy _looks awed._) Ara, well, it's
God's will, I suppose, but where the money'll come from, I dunno.
(_With a disparaging glance at his son._) They'll not be raisin' your
wages soon, I'll be bound.

BILLY (_surlily_). Naw. The old boss never gives no one a raise, 'less
he has to. He's a tight-wad for fair.

CARMODY (_still scanning him with contempt_). Five dollars a week--for
a strappin' lad the like of you! It's shamed you should be to own up to
it. A divil of a lot of good it was for me to go against Eileen's wish
and let you leave off your schoolin' this year like you wanted,
thinkin' the money you'd earn at work would help with the house.

BILLY. Aw, goin' to school didn't do me no good. The teachers was all
down on me. I couldn't learn nothin' there.

CARMODY (_disgustedly_). Nor any other place, I'm thinkin', you're that
thick, (_There is a noise from the stairs in the hall._) Whisht! It's
the doctor comin' down from Eileen. What'll he say, I wonder? (_The
door in the rear is opened and_ Doctor Gaynor _enters. He is a stout,
bald, middle-aged man, forceful of speech, who in the case of patients
of the Carmodys' class dictates rather than advises._ Carmody _adopts a
whining tone._) Aw, Doctor, and how's Eileen now? Have you got her
cured of the weakness?

GAYNOR (_does not answer this but comes forward into the room holding
out two slips of paper--dictatorially_). Here are two prescriptions
that'll have to be filled immediately.

CARMODY (_frowning_). You take them, Billy, and run round to the drug
store. (Gaynor _hands them to_ Billy.)

BILLY. Give me the money, then.

CARMODY (_reaches down into his trousers pocket with a sigh_). How much
will they come to, Doctor?

GAYNOR. About a dollar, I guess.

CARMODY (_protestingly_). A dollar! Sure it's expensive medicines
you're givin' her for a bit of a cold. (_He meets the doctor's cold
glance of contempt and he wilts--grumblingly, as he peels a dollar bill
off a small roll and gives it to_ Billy.) Bring back the change--if
there is any. And none of your tricks, for I'll stop at the drug store
myself to-morrow and ask the man how much it was.

BILLY. Aw, what do you think I am? (_He takes the money and goes out._)

CARMODY (_grudgingly_). Take a chair, Doctor, and tell me what's wrong
with Eileen.

GAYNOR (_seating himself by the table--gravely_). Your daughter is very
seriously ill.

CARMODY (_irritably_). Aw, Doctor, didn't I know you'd be sayin' that,
anyway!

GAYNOR (_ignoring this remark--coldly_). Your daughter has tuberculosis
of the lungs.

CARMODY (_with puzzled awe_). Too-ber-c'losis?

GAYNOR. Consumption, if that makes it plainer to you.

CARMODY (_with dazed terror--after a pause_). Consumption? Eileen?
(_With sudden anger._) What lie is it you're tellin' me?

GAYNOR (_icily_). Look here, Carmody! I'm not here to stand for your
insults!

CARMODY (_bewilderingly_). Don't be angry, now, at what I said. Sure
I'm out of my wits entirely. Eileen to have the consumption! Ah,
Doctor, sure you must be mistaken!

GAYNOR. There's no chance for a mistake, I'm sorry to say. Her right
lung is badly affected.

CARMODY (_desperately_). It's a bad cold only, maybe.

GAYNOR (_curtly_). Don't talk nonsense. (Carmody _groans._ Gaynor
_continues authoritatively._) She will have to go to a sanatorium at
once. She ought to have been sent to one months ago. The girl's been
keeping up on her nerve when she should have been in bed, and it's
given the disease a chance to develop. (_Casts a look of indignant
scorn at_ Carmody, _who is sitting staring at the floor with an
expression of angry stupor on his face._) It's a wonder to me you
didn't see the condition she was in and force her to take care of
herself. Why, the girl's nothing but skin and bone!

CARMODY (_with vague fury_). God blast it!

GAYNOR. No, your kind never realises things till the crash
comes--usually when it's too late. She kept on doing her work, I
suppose--taking care of her brothers and sisters, washing, cooking,
sweeping, looking after your comfort--worn out--when she should have
been in bed--and---- (_He gets to his feet with a harsh laugh._) But
what's the use of talking? The damage is done. We've got to set to work
to repair it at once. I'll write to-night to Dr. Stanton of the Hill
Farm Sanatorium and find out if he has a vacancy. And if luck is with
us we can send her there at once. The sooner the better.

CARMODY (_his face growing red with rage_). Is it sendin' Eileen away
to a hospital you'd be? (_Exploding._) Then you'll not! You'll get that
notion out of your head damn quick. It's all nonsense you're stuffin'
me with, and lies, makin' things out to be the worst in the world. I'll
not believe a word of Eileen having the consumption at all. It's
doctors' notions to be always lookin' for a sickness that'd kill you.
She'll not move a step out of here, and I say so, and I'm her father!

GAYNOR (_who has been staring at him with contempt--coldly angry_). You
refuse to let your daughter go to a sanatorium?

CARMODY. I do.

GAYNOR (_threateningly_). Then I'll have to report her case to the
Society for the Prevention of Tuberculosis of this county, and tell
them of your refusal to help her.

CARMODY (_wavering a bit_). Report all you like, and be damned to you!

GAYNOR (_ignoring the interruption--impressively_). A majority of the
most influential men of this city are behind the Society. Do you know
that? (_Grimly._) We'll find a way to move you, Carmody, if you try to
be stubborn.

CARMODY (_thoroughly frightened, but still protesting_). Ara, Doctor,
you don't see the way of it at all. If Eileen goes to the hospital,
who's to be takin' care of the others, and mindin' the house when I'm
off to work?

GAYNOR. You can easily hire some woman.

CARMODY (_at once furious again_). Hire? D'you think I'm a millionaire
itself?

GAYNOR (_contemptuously_). That's where the shoe pinches, eh? (_In a
rage._) I'm not going to waste any more words on you, Carmody, but I'm
damn well going to see this thing through! You might as well give in
first as last.

CARMODY (_wailing_). But where's the money comin' from?

GAYNOR (_brutally_). That's your concern. Don't lie about your poverty.
You've a steady well-paid job, and plenty of money to throw away on
drunken sprees, I'll bet. The weekly fee at the Hill Farm is only seven
dollars. You can easily afford that--the price of a few rounds of
drinks.

CARMODY. Seven dollars! And I'll have to pay a woman to come in--and
the four of the children eatin' their heads off! Glory be to God, I'll
not have a penny saved for me old age--and then it's the poor-house!

GAYNOR (_curtly_). Don't talk nonsense!

CARMODY. Ah, doctor, it's the truth I'm tellin' you!

GAYNOR. Well, perhaps I can get the Society to pay half for your
daughter--if you're really as hard up as you pretend. They're willing
to do that where it seems necessary.

CARMODY (_brightening_). Ah, Doctor, thank you.

GAYNOR (_abruptly_). Then it's all settled?

CARMODY (_grudgingly--trying to make the best of it_). I'll do my best
for Eileen, if it's needful--and you'll not be tellin' them people
about it at all, Doctor?

GAYNOR. Not unless you force me to.

CARMODY. And they'll pay the half, surely?

GAYNOR. I'll see what I can do--for your daughter's sake, not yours,
understand!

CARMODY. God bless you, Doctor! (_Grumblingly._) It's the whole of it
they ought to be payin', I'm thinkin', and them with bags of money.
'Tis them builds the hospitals and why should they be wantin' the poor
like me to support them?

GAYNOR (_disgustedly_). Bah! (_Abruptly._) I'll telephone to Doctor
Stanton to-morrow morning. Then I'll know something definite when I
come to see your daughter in the afternoon.

CARMODY (_darkly_). You'll be comin' again tomorrow? (_Half to
himself._) Leave it to the likes of you to be drainin' a man dry.

(Gaynor _has gone out to the hall in rear and does not hear this last
remark. There is a loud knock from the outside door. The Doctor comes
back into the room carrying his hat and overcoat._)

GAYNOR. There's someone knocking.

CARMODY. Who'll it be? Ah, it's Fred Nicholls, maybe. (_In a low voice
to_ Gaynor _who has started to put on his overcoat._) Eileen's young
man, Doctor, that she's engaged to marry, as you might say.

GAYNOR (_thoughtfully_). H'mm--yes--she spoke of him.

      (_As another knock sounds_ Carmody _hurries to the rear._ Gaynor,
      _after a moments indecision, takes off his overcoat again and
      sits down. A moment later_ Carmody _re-enters, followed by_ Fred
      Nicholls, _who has left his overcoat and hat in the hallway._
      Nicholls _is a young fellow of twenty-three, stockily built,
      fair-haired, handsome in a commonplace, conventional mould. His
      manner is obviously an attempt at suave gentility; he has an
      easy, taking smile and a ready laugh, but there is a petty,
      calculating expression in his small, observing, blue eyes. His
      well-fitting, ready-made clothes are carefully pressed. His whole
      get-up suggests an attitude of man-about-small-town
      complacency._)

CARMODY (_as they enter_). I had a mind to phone to your house, but I
wasn't wishful to disturb you, knowin' you'd be comin' to call
to-night.

NICHOLLS (_with disappointed concern_). It's nothing serious, I hope.

CARMODY (_grumblingly_). Ah, who knows? Here's the doctor. You've not
met him?

NICHOLLS (_politely, looking at_ Gaynor, _who inclines his head
stiffly_). I haven't had the pleasure. Of course, I've heard----

CARMODY. It's Doctor Gaynor. This is Fred Nicholls, Doctor. (_The two
men shake hands with conventional greetings._) Sit down, Fred, that's a
good lad, and be talkin' to the Doctor a moment while I go upstairs and
see how is Eileen. She's all alone up there.

NICHOLLS. Certainly, Mr. Carmody. Go ahead--and tell her how sorry I am
to learn she's under the weather.

CARMODY. I will so. (_He goes out._)

GAYNOR (_after a pause in which he is studying_ Nicholls). Do you
happen to be any relative to the Albert Nicholls who is superintendent
over at the Downs Manufacturing Company?

NICHOLLS (_smiling_). He's sort of a near relative--my father.

GAYNOR. Ah, yes?

NICHOLLS (_with satisfaction_). I work for the Downs Company
myself--bookkeeper----

GAYNOR. Miss Carmody--the sick girl upstairs--she had a position there
also, didn't she, before her mother died?

NICHOLLS. Yes. She had a job as stenographer for a time. When she
graduated from the business college course--I was already working at
the Downs--and through my father's influence--you understand. (Gaynor
_nods curtly._) She was getting on finely, too, and liked the work.
It's too bad--her mother's death, I mean--forcing her to give it up and
come home to take care of those kids.

GAYNOR. It's a damn shame. That's the main cause of her breakdown.

NICHOLLS (_frowning_). I've noticed she's been looking badly lately. So
that's the trouble? Well, it's all her father's fault--and her own,
too, because whenever I raised a kick about his making a slave of her,
she always defended him. (_With a quick glance at the Doctor--in a
confidential tone._) Between us, Carmody's as selfish as they make 'em,
if you want my opinion.

GAYNOR (_with a growl_). He's a hog on two legs.

NICHOLLS (_with a gratified smile_). You bet! (_With a patronising
air._) I hope to get Eileen away from all this as soon as--things pick
up a little. (_Making haste to explain his connection with the dubious
household._) Eileen and I have gone around together for years--went to
Grammar and High School together--in different classes, of course.
She's really a corker--very different from the rest of the family
you've seen--like her mother. She's really educated and knows a
lot--used to carry off all the prizes at school. My folks like her
awfully well. Of course, they'd never stand for--him.

GAYNOR. You'll excuse my curiosity--I've a good reason for it--but you
and Miss Carmody are engaged, aren't you? Carmody said you were.

NICHOLLS (_embarrassed_). Why, yes, in a way--but nothing definite--no
official announcement or anything of that kind. It's all in the future.
We have to wait, you know. (_With a sentimental smile._) We've been
sort of engaged for years, you might say. It's always been sort of
understood between us. (_He laughs awkwardly._)

GAYNOR (_gravely_). Then I can be frank with you. I'd like to be
because I may need your help. I don't put much faith in any promise
Carmody makes. Besides, you're bound to know anyway. She'd tell you.

NICHOLLS (_a look of apprehension coming over his face_). Is it--about
her sickness?

GAYNOR. Yes.

NICHOLLS. Then--it's serious?

GAYNOR. It's pulmonary tuberculosis--consumption.

NICHOLLS (_stunned_). Consumption? Good heavens! (_After a dazed
pause--lamely._) Are you sure, Doctor?

GAYNOR. Positive. (Nicholls _stares at him with vaguely frightened
eyes._) It's had a good start--thanks to her father's blind
selfishness--but let's hope that can be overcome. The important thing
is to ship her off to a sanatorium immediately. Carmody wouldn't hear
of it at first. However, I managed to bully him into consenting; but I
don't trust his word. That's where you can be of help. It's up to you
to convince him that it's imperative she be sent away at once--for the
safety of those around her as well as her own.

NICHOLLS (_confusedly_). I'll do my best, Doctor. (_As if he couldn't
yet believe his ears--shuddering!_) Good heavens! She never said a word
about--being so ill. She's had a cold. But, Doctor--do you think this
sanatorium will----?

GAYNOR (_with hearty hopefulness_). Most certainly. She has every
chance. The Hill Farm has a really surprising record of arrested
cases--as good as any place in the country. Of course, she'll never be
able to live as carelessly as before, even after the most favourable
results. She'll have to take care of herself. (_Apologetically._) I'm
telling you all this as being the one most intimately concerned. I
don't count Carmody. You are the one who will have to assume
responsibility for her welfare when she returns to everyday life.

NICHOLLS (_answering as if he were merely talking to screen the
thoughts in his mind_). Yes--certainly. Where is this sanatorium,
Doctor--very far away?

GAYNOR. Half an hour by train to the town. The sanatorium is two miles
out on the hills--a nice drive. You'll be able to see her whenever
you've a day off. It's a pleasant trip.

NICHOLLS (_a look of horrified realisation has been creeping into his
eyes_). You said--Eileen ought to be sent away--for the sake of those
around her----?

GAYNOR. That's obvious. T.B. is extremely contagious, you must know
that. Yet I'll bet she's been fondling and kissing those brothers and
sisters of hers regardless. (_Nicholls fidgets uneasily on his chair._)
And look at this house sealed tight against the fresh air! Not a window
open an inch! (_Fuming._) That's what we're up against in the fight
with T.B.--a total ignorance of the commonest methods of prevention----

NICHOLLS (_his eyes shiftily avoiding the doctor's face_). Then the
kids might have gotten it--by kissing Eileen?

GAYNOR. It stands to reason that's a common means of communication.

NICHOLLS (_very much shaken_). Yes. I suppose it must be. But that's
terrible, isn't it? (_With sudden volubility, evidently extremely
anxious to wind up this conversation and conceal his thoughts from_
Gaynor.) I'll promise you, Doctor, I'll tell Carmody straight what's
what. He'll pay attention to me or I'll know the reason why.

GAYNOR (_getting to his feet and picking up his overcoat_). Good boy!
You've probably saved me a disagreeable squabble. I won't wait for
Carmody. The sight of him makes me lose my temper. Tell him I'll be
back to-morrow with definite information about the sanatorium.

NICHOLLS (_helping him on with his overcoat, anxious to have him go_).
All right, Doctor.

GAYNOR (_puts on his hat_). And do your best to cheer the patient up
when you talk to her. Give her confidence in her ability to get well.
That's half the battle. And she'll believe it, coming from you.

NICHOLLS (_hastily_). Yes, yes, I'll do all I can.

GAYNOR (_turns to the door and shakes_ Nicholls' _hand
sympathetically_). And don't take it to heart too much yourself.
There's every hope, remember that. In six months she'll come back to
you her old self again.

NICHOLLS (_nervously_). It's hard on a fellow--so suddenly--but I'll
remember--and---- (_Abruptly_). Good night, Doctor.

GAYNOR. Good night.

      (_He goes out. The outer door is heard shutting behind him._
      Nicholls _closes the door, rear, and comes back and sits in the
      chair in front of table. He rests his chin on his hands and
      stares before him, a look of desperate, frightened calculation
      coming into his eyes._ Carmody _is heard clumping heavily down
      the stairs. A moment later he enters. His expression is glum and
      irritated._)

CARMODY (_coming forward to his chair by the stove_). Has he gone away?

NICHOLLS (_turning on him with a look of repulsion_). Yes. He told me
to tell you he'd be back to-morrow with definite information--about the
sanatorium business.

CARMODY (_darkly_). Oho, he did, did he? Maybe I'll surprise him. I'm
thinkin' it's lyin' he is about Eileen's sickness, and her lookin' as
fresh as a daisy with the high colour in her cheeks when I saw her now.

NICHOLLS (_impatiently_). That's silly, Mr. Carmody. Gaynor knows his
business. (_After a moment's hesitation._) He told me all about
Eileen's sickness.

CARMODY (_resentfully_). Did he now, the auld monkey! Small thanks to
him to be tellin' our secrets to the town.

NICHOLLS (_exasperated_). I didn't want to learn your affairs. He only
told me because you'd said I and Eileen were engaged. You're the one
who was telling--secrets.

CARMODY (_irritated_). Ara, don't be talkin'! That's no secret at all
with the whole town watchin' Eileen and you spoonin' together from the
time you was kids.

NICHOLLS (_vindictively_). Well, the whole town is liable to find
out---- (_He checks himself._)

CARMODY (_too absorbed in his own troubles to notice this threat_). To
hell with the town and all in it! I've troubles enough of my own. So he
told you he'd send Eileen away to the hospital? I've half a mind not to
let him--and let him try to make me! (_With a frown._) But Eileen
herself says she's wantin' to go, now. (_Angrily._) It's all that
divil's notion he put in her head that the children'd be catchin' her
sickness that makes her willin' to go.

NICHOLLS (_with a superior air_). From what he told me, I should say it
was the only thing for Eileen to do if she wants to get well quickly.
(_Spitefully._) And I'd certainly not go against Gaynor, if I was you.
He told me he'd make it hot for you if you did. He will, too, you can
bet on that. He's that kind.

CARMODY (_worriedly_). He's a divil. But what can he do--him and his
Sasiety? I'm her father.

NICHOLLS (_seeing_ Carmody's _uneasiness, with revengeful
satisfaction_). Oh, he'll do what he says, don't worry! You'll make a
mistake if you think he's bluffing. It'd probably get in all the papers
about you refusing. Every one would be down on you. (_As a last
jab--spitefully._) You might even lose your job over it, people would
be so sore.

CARMODY (_jumping to his feet_). Ah, divil take him! Let him send her
where he wants, then. I'll not be sayin' a word.

NICHOLLS (_as an afterthought_). And, honestly, Mr. Carmody, I don't
see how you can object for a second--after he's told you it's
absolutely necessary for Eileen to go away. (_Seeing_ Carmody's _shaken
condition, he finishes boldly._) You've some feeling for your own
daughter, haven't you? You'd be a fine father if you hadn't!

CARMODY (_apprehensively_). Whisht! She might hear you. But you're
right. Let her do what she's wishful to, _and_ get well soon.

NICHOLLS (_complacently--feeling his duty in the matter well done_).
That's the right spirit. I knew you'd see it that way. And you and I'll
do all we can to help her. (_He gets to his feet._) Well, I guess I'll
have to go. Tell Eileen----

CARMODY. You're not goin'? Sure, Eileen is puttin' on her clothes to
come down and have a look at you. She'll be here in a jiffy. Sit down
now, and wait for her.

NICHOLLS (_suddenly panic-stricken by the prospect of facing her_).
No--no--I can't stay--I only came for a moment--I've got an
appointment--honestly. Besides, it isn't right for her to be up. She's
too weak. It'll make her worse. You should have told her.

      (_The door in the rear is opened and_ Eileen _enters. She is
      just over eighteen. Her wavy mass of dark hair is parted in the
      middle and combed low on her forehead, covering her ears, to a
      knot at the back of her head. The oval of her face is spoiled by
      a long, rather heavy Irish jaw contrasting with the delicacy of
      her other features. Her eyes are large and blue, confident in
      their compelling candour and sweetness; her lips, full and red,
      half-open over strong, even teeth, droop at the corners into
      an expression of wistful sadness; her clear complexion is
      unnaturally striking in its contrasting colours, rose and white;
      her figure is slight and undeveloped. She wears a plain black
      dress with a bit of white at the neck and wrists. She stands
      looking appealingly at_ Nicholls, _who avoids her glance. Her
      eyes have a startled, stunned expression as if the doctor's
      verdict were still in her ears._)

EILEEN (_faintly--forcing a smile_). Good evening, Fred. (_Her eyes
search his face anxiously._)

NICHOLLS (_confusedly_). Hello, Eileen. I'm so sorry to---- (_Clumsily
trying to cover up his confusion, he goes over and leads her to a
chair._) You must sit down. You've got to take care of yourself. You
never ought to have got up to-night.

EILEEN (_sits down_). I wanted to talk to you. (_She raises her face
with a pitiful smile._ Nicholls _hurriedly moves back to his own
chair._)

NICHOLLS (_almost brusquely_). I could have talked to you from the
hall. You're silly to take chances just now.

      (Eileen's _eyes show her hurt at his tone._)

CARMODY (_seeing his chance--hastily_). You'll be stayin' a while now,
Fred? I'll take a walk down the road. I'm needin' a drink to clear my
wits. (_He goes to the door in rear._)

EILEEN (_reproachfully_). You won't be long, Father? And please
don't--you know.

CARMODY (_exasperated_). Sure who wouldn't get drunk with all the
sorrows of the world piled on him? (_He stamps out. A moment later the
outside door bangs behind him._ Eileen _sighs._ Nicholls _walks up and
down with his eyes on the floor._)

NICHOLLS (_furious at_ Carmody _for having left him in this
situation_). Honestly, Eileen, your father is the limit. I don't see
how you stand for him. He's the most selfish----

EILEEN (_gently_). Sssh! You mustn't, Fred. He's not to blame. He just
doesn't understand. (Nicholls _snorts disdainfully._) Don't! Let's not
talk about him now. We won't have many more evenings together for a
long, long time. Did father or the Doctor tell you---- (_She falters._)

NICHOLLS (_not looking at her--glumly_). Everything there was to tell,
I guess.

EILEEN (_hastening to comfort him_). You mustn't worry, Fred. Please
don't! It'd make it so much worse for me if I thought you did. I'll be
all right. I'll do exactly what they tell me, and in a few months I'll
be back so fat and healthy you won't know me.

NICHOLLS (_lamely_). Oh, there's no doubt of that. No one's worrying
about your not getting well quick.

EILEEN. It won't be long. We can write often, and it isn't far away.
You can come out and see me every Sunday--if you want to.

NICHOLLS (_hastily_). Of course I will!

EILEEN (_looking at his face searchingly_). Why do you act so funny?
Why don't you sit down--here, by me? Don't you want to?

NICHOLLS (_drawing up a chair by hers--flushing guiltily_). I--I'm all
flustered, Eileen. I don't know what I'm doing.

EILEEN (_putting her hand on his knee_). Poor Fred! I'm so sorry I have
to go. I didn't want to at first. I knew how hard it would be on father
and the kids--especially little Mary. (_Her voice trembles a bit._) And
then the doctor said if I stayed I'd be putting them all in danger. He
even ordered me not to kiss them any more. (_She bites her lip to
restrain a sob--then coughs, a soft, husky cough._ Nicholls _shrinks
away from her to the edge of his chair, his eyes shifting nervously
with fright._ Eileen _continues gently._) So I've got to go and get
well, don't you see?

NICHOLLS (_wetting his dry lips_). Yes--it's better.

EILEEN (_sadly_). I'll miss the kids so much. Taking care of them has
meant so much to me since mother died. (_With a half-sob she suddenly
throws her arms about his neck and hides her face on his shoulder. He
shudders and fights against an impulse to push her away._) But I'll
miss you most of all, Fred. (_She lifts her lips towards his, expecting
a kiss. He seems about to kiss her--then averts his face with a
shrinking movement, pretending he hasn't seen._ Eileen's _eyes grow
wide with horror. She throws herself back into her chair, staring
accusingly at_ Nicholls. _She speaks chokingly._) Fred! Why--why didn't
you kiss--what is it? Are you--afraid? (_With a moaning sound._) Oooh!

NICHOLLS (_goaded by this accusation into a display of manhood, seizes
her fiercely by the arms_). No! What--what d'you mean? (_He tries to
kiss her, but she hides her face._)

EILEEN (_in a muffled voice of hysterical self-accusation, pushing his
head away_). No, no, you mustn't! I was wrong. The doctor told you not
to, didn't he? Please don't, Fred! It would be awful if anything
happened to you--through me. (Nicholls _gives up his attempts, recalled
to caution by her words. She raises her face and tries to force a smile
through her tears._) But you can kiss me on the forehead, Fred. That
can't do any harm. (_His face crimson, he does so. She laughs
hysterically._) It seems so silly--being kissed that way--by you. (_She
gulps back a sob and continued to attempt to joke._) I'll have to get
used to it, won't I?


THE CURTAIN FALLS




Act One: Scene Two.


    _The reception room of the Infirmary, a large, high-ceilinged room
    painted white, with oiled, hard wood floor. In the left wall,
    forward, a row of four windows. Farther back, the main entrance
    from the drive, and another window. In the rear wall left, a glass
    partition looking out on the sleeping porch. A row of white beds,
    with the faces of patients barely peeping out from under piles of
    heavy bed-clothes, can be seen. To the right of this partition, a
    bookcase, and a door leading to the hall past the patients' rooms.
    Farther right, another door opening on the examining room. In the
    right wall, rear, a door to the office. Farther forward, a row of
    windows. In front of the windows, a long dining-table with chairs.
    On the left of the table, towards the centre of the room, a chimney
    with two open fire-places, facing left and right. Several wicker
    armchairs are placed around the fire-place on the left in which a
    cheerful wood fire is crackling. To the left of centre, a round
    reading and writing table with a green-shaded electric lamp. Other
    electric lights are in brackets around the walls. Easy chairs stand
    near the table, which is stacked with magazines. Rocking chairs are
    placed here and there about the room, near the windows, etc. A
    gramophone stands near the left wall, forward._

    _It is nearing eight o'clock of a cold evening about a week later._

    _At the rise of the curtain_ Stephen Murray _is discovered sitting
    in a chair in front of the fireplace, left._ Murray _is thirty
    years old--a tall, slender, rather unusual-looking fellow with a
    pale face, sunken under high cheek bones, lined about the eyes and
    mouth, jaded and worn for one still so young. His intelligent,
    large hazel eyes have a tired, dispirited expression in repose, but
    can quicken instantly with a concealed mechanism of mocking,
    careless humour whenever his inner privacy is threatened. His large
    mouth aids this process of protection by a quick change from its
    set apathy to a cheerful grin of cynical good nature. He gives off
    the impression of being somehow dissatisfied with himself, but not
    yet embittered enough by it to take it out on others. His manner,
    as revealed by his speech--nervous, inquisitive, alert--seems more
    an acquired quality than any part of his real nature. He stoops a
    trifle, giving him a slightly round-shouldered appearance. He is
    dressed in a shabby dark suit, baggy at the knees. He is staring
    into the fire, dreaming, an open book lying unheeded on the arm of
    his chair. The gramophone is whining out the last strains of
    Dvorak's Humoresque. In the doorway to the office,_ Miss Gilpin
    _stands talking to_ Miss Howard. _The former is a slight,
    middle-aged woman with black hair, and a strong, intelligent face,
    its expression of resolute efficiency softened and made kindly by
    her warm, sympathetic grey eyes._ Miss Howard _is tall, slender and
    blonde--decidedly pretty and provokingly conscious of it, yet with
    a certain air of seriousness underlying her apparent frivolity. She
    is twenty years old. The elder woman is dressed in the all-white of
    a full-fledged nurse._ Miss Howard _wears the grey-blue uniform of
    one still in training. The record finishes._ Murray _sighs with
    relief, but makes no move to get up and stop the grinding needle._
    Miss Howard _hurries across to the machine._ Miss Gilpin _goes back
    into the office._

MISS HOWARD (_takes off the record, glancing at_ Murray _with amused
vexation_). It's a wonder you wouldn't stop this machine grinding
itself to bits, Mr. Murray.

MURRAY (_with a smile_). I was hoping the darn thing would bust. (Miss
Howard _sniffs._ Murray _grins at her teasingly._) It keeps you from
talking to me. That's the real music.

MISS HOWARD (_comes over to his chair laughing_). It's easy to see
you've got Irish in you. Do you know what I think? I think you're a
natural born kidder. All newspaper reporters are like that, I've heard.

MURRAY. You wrong me terribly. (_Then frowning._) And it isn't
charitable to remind me of my job. I hoped to forget all about it up
here.

MISS HOWARD (_surprised_). I think it's great to be able to write. I
wish I could. You ought to be proud of it.

MURRAY (_glumly_). I'm not. You can't call it writing--not what I
did--small town stuff. (_Changing the subject._) But I wanted to ask
you something. Do you know when I'm to be moved away to the huts?

MISS HOWARD. In a few days, I guess. Don't be impatient. (Murray
_grunts and moves nervously on his chair._) What's the matter? Don't
you like us here at the Sanatorium?

MURRAY (_smiling_). Oh--you--yes! (_Then seriously._) I don't care for
the atmosphere, though. (_He waves his hand towards the partition
looking out on the porch._) All those people in bed out there on the
porch seem so sick. It's depressing. I can't do anything for
them--and--it makes me feel so helpless.

MISS HOWARD. Well, it's the rules, you know. All the patients have to
come here first until Doctor Stanton finds out whether they're well
enough to be sent out to the huts and cottages. And remember you're a
patient just like the ones in bed out there--even if you are up and
about.

MURRAY. I know it. But I don't feel as I were--really sick like them.

MISS HOWARD (_wisely_). None of them do, either.

MURRAY (_after a moment's reflection--cynically_). Yes, I suppose it's
that pipe dream that keeps us all going, eh?

MISS HOWARD. Well, you ought to be thankful. You're very lucky, if you
knew it. (_Lowering her voice._) Shall I tell you a secret? I've seen
your chart and _you've_ no cause to worry. Doctor Stanton joked about
it. He said you were too uninteresting--there was so little the matter
with you.

MURRAY (_pleased, but pretending indifference_). Humph! He's original
in that opinion.

MISS HOWARD. I know it's hard your being the only one up the week since
you've been here, with no one to talk to; but there's another patient
due to-day. Maybe she'll be well enough to be around with you. (_With a
quick glance at her wrist watch._) She can't be coming unless she got
in on the last train.

MURRAY (_interestedly_). It's a she, eh?

MISS HOWARD. Yes.

MURRAY (_grinning provokingly_). Young?

MISS HOWARD. Eighteen, I believe. (_Seeing his grin--with feigned
pique._) I suppose you'll be asking if she's pretty next! Oh, you men
are all alike, sick or well. Her name is Carmody, that's the only other
thing I know. So there!

MURRAY. Carmody?

MISS HOWARD. Oh, you don't know her. She's from another part of the
state from your town.

MISS GILPIN (_appearing in the office doorway_). Miss Howard.

MISS HOWARD. Yes, Miss Gilpin. (_In an aside to Murray __as she leaves
him._) It's time for those horrid diets.

      (_She hurries back into the office._ Murray _stares into the
      fire._ Miss Howard _reappears from the office and goes out by the
      door to the hall, rear. Carriage wheels are heard from the drive
      in front of the house on the left. They stop. After a pause there
      is a sharp rap on the door and a bell rings insistently. Men's
      muffled voices are heard in argument._ Murray _turns curiously in
      his chair._ Miss Gilpin _comes from the office and walks quickly
      to the door, unlocking and opening it._ Eileen _enters, followed
      by_ Nicholls, _who is carrying her suit-case, and by her father._)

EILEEN. I'm Miss Carmody. I believe Doctor Gaynor wrote----

MISS GILPIN (_taking her hand--with kind affability_). We've been
expecting you all day. How do you do? I'm Miss Gilpin. You came on the
last train, didn't you?

EILEEN (_heartened by the other woman's kindness_). Yes. This is my
father, Miss Gilpin--and Mr. Nicholls.

      (Miss Gilpin _shakes hands cordially with the two men who are
      staring about the room in embarrassment._ Carmody _has very
      evidently been drinking. His voice is thick and his face
      puffed and stupid._ Nicholls' _manner is that of one who is
      accomplishing a necessary but disagreeable duty with the best
      grace possible, but is frightfully eager to get it over and done
      with._ Carmody's _condition embarrasses him acutely and when he
      glances at him it is with hatred and angry disgust._)

MISS GILPIN (_indicating the chairs in front of the windows on the
left, forward_). Won't you gentlemen sit down? (Carmody _grunts
sullenly and plumps himself into the one nearest the door._ Nicholls
_hesitates, glancing down at the suit-case he carries._ Miss Gilpin
_turns to_ Eileen.) And now we'll get you settled immediately. Your
room is all ready for you. If you'll follow me---- (_She turns toward
the door in rear, centre._)

EILEEN. Let me take the suit-case now, Fred.

MISS GILPIN (_as he is about to hand it to her--decisively_). No, my
dear, you mustn't. Put the case right down there, Mr. Nicholls. I'll
have it taken to Miss Carmody's room in a moment. (_She shakes her
finger at_ Eileen _with kindly admonition._) That's the first rule
you'll have to learn. Never exert yourself or tax your strength. It's
very important. You'll find laziness is a virtue instead of a vice with
us.

EILEEN (_confused_). I--I didn't know----

MISS GILPIN (_smiling_). Of course you didn't. And now if you'll come
with me I'll show you your room. We'll have a little chat there and I
can explain all the other important rules in a second. The gentlemen
can make themselves comfortable in the meantime. We won't be gone more
than a moment.

NICHOLLS (_feeling called upon to say something_). Yes--we'll
wait--certainly, we're all right.

      (Carmody _remains silent, glowering at the fire._ Nicholls _sits
      down beside him._ Miss Gilpin _and_ Eileen _go out._ Murray
      _switches his chair so that he can observe the two men out of the
      corner of his eye while pretending to be absorbed in his book._)

CARMODY (_looking about shiftily and reaching for the inside pocket of
his overcoat_). I'll be havin' a nip now we're alone, and that cacklin'
hen gone. I'm feelin' sick in the pit of the stomach. (_He pulls out a
pint flask, half full._)

NICHOLLS (_excitedly_). For God's sake, don't! Put that bottle away!
(_In a whisper._) Don't you see that fellow in the chair there?

CARMODY (_taking a big drink_). Ah, I'm not mindin' a man at all. Sure
I'll bet it's himself would be likin' a taste of the same. (_He appears
about to get up and invite_ Murray _to join him, but_ Nicholls _grabs
his arm._)

NICHOLLS (_with a frightened look at_ Murray _who appears buried in his
book_). Stop it, you---- Don't you know he's probably a patient and
they don't allow them----

CARMODY (_scornfully_). A sick one, and him readin' a book like a dead
man without a civil word out of him! It's queer they'd be allowin' the
sick ones to read books, when I'll bet it's the same lazy readin' in
the house brought the half of them down with the consumption itself.
(_Raising his voice._) I'm thinking this whole shebang is a big,
thievin' fake--and I've always thought so.

NICHOLLS (_furiously_). Put that bottle away, damn it! And don't shout.
You're not in a public-house.

CARMODY (_with provoking calm_). I'll put it back when I'm ready, not
before, and no lip from you!

NICHOLLS (_with fierce disgust_). You're drunk now. It's disgusting.

CARMODY (_raging_). Drunk, am I? Is it the like of a young jackass like
you that's still wet behind the ears to be tellin' me I'm drunk?

NICHOLLS (_half-rising from his chair--pleadingly_). For heaven's sake,
Mr. Carmody, remember where we are and don't raise any rumpus. What'll
Eileen say? Do you want to make trouble for her at the start?

CARMODY (_puts the bottle away hastily, mumbling to himself--then
glowers about the room scornfully with blinking eyes_). It's a grand
hotel this is, I'm thinkin', for the rich to be takin' their ease, and
not a hospital for the poor, but the poor has to pay for it.

NICHOLLS (_fearful of another outbreak_). Sssh!

CARMODY. Don't be shshin' at me? I'm tellin' you the truth. I'd make
Eileen come back out of this to-night if that divil of a doctor didn't
have me by the throat.

NICHOLLS (_glancing at him nervously_). I wonder how soon she'll be
back? The carriage is waiting for us. We'll have to hurry to make that
last train back. If we miss it--it means two hours on the damn tram.

CARMODY (_angrily_). Is it anxious to get out of her sight you are, and
you engaged to marry and pretendin' to love her? (Nicholls _flushes
guiltily._ Murray _pricks up his ears and stares over at_ Nicholls.
_The latter meets his glance, scowls, and hurriedly averts his eyes._
Carmody _goes on accusingly._) Sure, it's no heart at all you have--and
her your sweetheart for years--and her sick with the consumption--and
you wild to run away from her and leave her alone.

NICHOLLS (_springing to his feet--furiously_). That's a----! (_He
controls himself with an effort. His voice trembles._) You're not
responsible for the idiotic things you're saying or I'd---- (_He turns
away, seeking some escape from the old man's tongue._) I'll see if the
man is still there with the carriage. (_He walks to the door on left
and goes out._)

CARMODY (_following him with his eyes_). Go to hell, for all I'm
preventin'. You've got no guts of a man in you. (_He addresses_ Murray
_with the good nature inspired by the flight of_ Nicholls.) Is it true
you're one of the consumptives, young fellow?

MURRAY (_delighted by this speech--with a grin_). Yes, I'm one of them.

CARMODY. My name's Carmody. What's yours, then?

MURRAY. Murray.

CARMODY (_slapping his thigh_). Irish as Paddy's pig! (Murray _nods._
Carmody _brightens and grows confidential._) I'm glad to be knowin'
you're one of us. You can keep an eye on Eileen. That's my daughter
that came with us. She's got consumption like yourself.

MURRAY. I'll be glad to do all I can.

CARMODY. Thanks to you--though it's a grand life she'll be havin' here
from the fine look of the place. (_With whining self-pity._) It's me
it's hard on, God help me, with four small children and me widowed, and
havin' to hire a woman to come in and look after them and the house now
that Eileen's sick; and payin' for her curin' in this place, and me
with only a bit of money in the bank for my old age. That's hard, now,
on a man, and who'll say it isn't?

MURRAY (_made uncomfortable by this confidence_). Hard luck always
comes in bunches. (_To head off_ Carmody _who is about to give vent to
more woe--quickly, with a glance towards the door from the hall._) If
I'm not mistaken, here comes your daughter now.

CARMODY (_as_ Eileen _comes into the room_). I'll make you acquainted.
Eileen! (_She comes over to them, embarrassed to find her father in his
condition so chummy with a stranger._ Murray _rises to his feet._) This
is Mr. Murray, Eileen. I want you to meet. He's Irish and he'll put you
on to the ropes of the place. He's got the consumption, too, God pity
him.

EILEEN (_distressed_). Oh, Father, how can you---- (_With a look at_
Murray _which pleads for her father._) I'm glad to meet you, Mr.
Murray.

MURRAY (_with a straight glance at her which is so frankly admiring
that she flushes and drops her eyes_). I'm glad to meet you. (_The
front door is opened and_ Nicholls _re-appears, shivering with the
cold. He stares over at the others with ill-concealed irritation._)

CARMODY (_noticing him--with malicious satisfaction_). Oho, here you
are again. (Nicholls _scowls and turns away._ Carmody _addresses his
daughter with a sly wink at_ Murray.) I thought Fred was slidin' down
hill to the train with his head bare to the frost, and him so desperate
hurried to get away from here. Look at the knees on him clappin'
together with the cold, and with the great fear that's in him he'll be
catchin' a sickness in this place! (Nicholls, _his guilty conscience
stabbed to the quick, turns pale with impotent rage._)

EILEEN (_remonstrating pitifully_). Father! Please! (_She hurries over
to_ Nicholls.) Oh, please don't mind him, Fred. You know what he is
when he's drinking. He doesn't mean a word he's saying.

NICHOLLS (_thickly_). That's all right--for you to say. But I won't
forget--I'm sick and tired standing for--I'm not used to--such people.

EILEEN (_shrinking from him_). Fred!

NICHOLLS (_with a furious glance at_ Murray). Before that cheap slob,
too--letting him know everything!

EILEEN (_faintly_). He seems--very nice.

NICHOLLS. You've got your eyes set on him already, have you? Leave it
to you! No fear of your not having a good time of it out here!

EILEEN. Fred!

NICHOLLS. Well, go ahead if you want to. I don't care. I'll----
(_Startled by the look of anguish which comes over her face, he hastily
swallows his words. He takes out his watch--fiercely._) We'll miss that
train, damn it!

EILEEN (_in a stricken tone_). Oh, Fred! (_Then forcing back her tears
she calls to_ Carmody _in a strained voice._) Father! You'll have to go
now. Miss Gilpin told me to tell you you'd have to go right away to
catch the train.

CARMODY (_shaking hands with_ Murray). I'll be goin'. Keep your eye on
her. I'll be out soon to see her and you and me'll have another talk.

MURRAY. Glad to. Good-bye for the present. (_He walks to windows on the
far right, turning his back considerately on their leave-taking._)

EILEEN (_comes to_ Carmody _and hangs on his arm as they proceed to the
door_). Be sure and kiss them all for me--Billy and Tom and Nora and
little Mary--and bring them out to see me as soon as you can, father,
please! And you come often, too, won't you? And don't forget to tell
Mrs. Brennan all the directions I gave you coming out on the train. I
told her, but she mightn't remember--about Mary's bath--and to give Tom
his----

CARMODY (_impatiently_). Hasn't she brought up brats of her own, and
doesn't she know the way of it? Don't be worryin' now, like a fool.

EILEEN (_helplessly_). Never mind telling her, then. I'll write to her.

CARMODY. You'd better not. Leave her alone. She'll not wish you mixin'
in with her work and tellin' her how to do it.

EILEEN (_aghast_). Her work! (_She seems at the end of her
tether--wrung too dry for any further emotion. She kisses her father at
the door with indifference and speaks calmly._) Good-bye, father.

CARMODY (_in a whining tone of injury_). A cold kiss! And never a small
tear out of her! Is your heart a stone? (_Drunken tears well from his
eyes and he blubbers._) And your own father going back to a lone house
with a stranger in it!

EILEEN (_wearily, in a dead voice_). You'll miss your train, father.

CARMODY (_raging in a second_). I'm off, then! Come on, Fred. It's no
welcome we have with her here in this place--and a great curse on this
day I brought her to it! (_He stamps out._)

EILEEN (_in the same dead tone_). Good-bye, Fred.

NICHOLLS (_repenting his words of a moment ago--confusedly_). I'm
sorry, Eileen--for what I said. I didn't mean--you know what your
father is--excuse me, won't you?

EILEEN (_without feeling_). Yes.

NICHOLLS. And I'll be out soon--in a week if I can make it. Well
then,--good-bye for the present. (_He bends down as if to kiss her, but
she shrinks back out of his reach._)

EILEEN (_a faint trace of mockery in her weary voice_). No, Fred.
Remember you mustn't now.

NICHOLLS (_in an instant huff_). Oh, if that's the way you feel
about----

      (_He strides out and slams the door viciously behind him._ Eileen
      _walks slowly back towards the fire-place, her face fixed in a
      dead calm of despair. As she sinks into one of the armchairs, the
      strain becomes too much. She breaks down, hiding her face in her
      hands, her frail shoulders heaving with the violence of her sobs.
      At this sound,_ Murray _turns from the windows and comes over
      near her chair._)

MURRAY (_after watching her for a moment--in an embarrassed tone of
sympathy_). Come on, Miss Carmody, that'll never do. I know it's hard
at first--but--getting yourself all worked up is bad for you. You'll
run a temperature and then they'll keep you in bed--which isn't
pleasant. Take hold of yourself! It isn't so bad up here--really--once
you get used to it! (_The shame she feels at giving way in the presence
of a stranger only adds to her loss of control and she sobs
heartbrokenly._ Murray _walks up and down nervously, visibly nonplussed
and upset. Finally he hits upon something._) One of the nurses will be
in any minute. You don't want them to see you like this.

EILEEN (_chokes back her sobs and finally raises her face and attempts
a smile_). I'm sorry--to make such a sight of myself. I just couldn't
help it.

MURRAY (_jocularly_). Well, they say a good cry does you a lot of good.

EILEEN (_forcing a smile_). I do feel--better.

MURRAY (_staring at her with a quizzical smile--cynically_). You
shouldn't take those lovers' squabbles so seriously. To-morrow he'll be
sorry--you'll be sorry. He'll write begging forgiveness--you'll do
ditto. Result--all serene again.

EILEEN (_a shadow of pain on her face--with dignity_). Don't--please.

MURRAY (_angry at himself--hanging his head contritely_). I'm a fool.
Pardon me. I'm rude sometimes--before I know it. (_He shakes off his
confusion with a renewed attempt at a joking tone._) You can blame your
father for any breaks I make. He made me your guardian, you know--told
me to see that you behaved.

EILEEN (_with a genuine smile_). Oh, father! (_Flushing._) You mustn't
mind anything he said to-night.

MURRAY (_thoughtlessly_). Yes, he was well lit up. I envied him.
(Eileen _looks very shame-faced._ Murray _sees it and exclaims in
exasperation at himself._) Darn! There I go again putting my foot in
it! (_With an irrepressible grin._) I ought to have my tongue operated
on--that's what's the matter with me. (_He laughs and throws himself in
a chair._)

EILEEN (_forced in spite of herself to smile with him_). You're candid,
at any rate, Mr. Murray.

MURRAY. Don't misunderstand me. Far be it from me to cast slurs at your
father's high spirits. I said I envied him his jag and that's the
truth. The same candour compels me to confess that I was pickled to the
gills myself when I arrived here. Fact! I made love to all the nurses
and generally disgraced myself--and had a wonderful time.

EILEEN. I suppose it does make you forget your troubles--for a while.

MURRAY (_waving this aside_). I didn't want to forget--not for a
second. I wasn't drowning my sorrow. I was hilariously celebrating.

EILEEN (_astonished--by this time quite interested in this queer fellow
to the momentary forgetfulness of her own grief_). Celebrating--coming
here? But--aren't you sick?

MURRAY. T.B.? Yes, of course. (_Confidentially._) But it's only a
matter of time when I'll be all right again. I hope it won't be too
soon. I was dying for a rest--a good, long rest with time to think
about things. I'm due to get what I wanted here. That's why I
celebrated.

EILEEN (_with wide eyes_). I wonder if you really mean----

MURRAY. What I've been sayin'? I sure do--every word of it!

EILEEN (_puzzled_). I can't understand how anyone could---- (_With a
worried glance over her shoulder._) I think I'd better look for Miss
Gilpin, hadn't I? She may wonder---- (_She half rises from her chair._)

MURRAY (_quickly_). No. Please don't go yet. Sit down. Please do. (_She
glances at him irresolutely, then resumes her chair._) They'll give you
your diet of milk and shoo you off to bed on that freezing porch soon
enough, don't worry. I'll see to it that you don't fracture any rules.
(_Hitching his chair nearer hers--impulsively._) In all charity to me
you've got to stick awhile. I haven't had a chance to really talk to a
soul for a week. You found what I said a while ago hard to believe,
didn't you?

EILEEN (_with a smile_). Isn't it? You said you hoped you wouldn't get
well too soon!

MURRAY. And I meant it! This place is honestly like heaven to me--a
lonely heaven till your arrival. (Eileen _looks embarrassed._) And why
wouldn't it be? I've no fear for my health--eventually. Just let me
tell you what I was getting away from---- (_With a sudden laugh full of
a weary bitterness._) Do you know what it means to work from seven at
night till three in the morning as a reporter on a morning newspaper in
a town of twenty thousand people--for _ten years_? No. You don't. You
can't. No one could who hadn't been through the mill. But what it did
to me--it made me happy--yes, happy!--to get out here--T.B. and all,
notwithstanding.

EILEEN (_looking at him curiously_). But I always thought being a
reporter was so interesting.

MURRAY (_with a cynical laugh_). Interesting? On a small town rag? A
month of it, perhaps, when you're a kid and new to the game. But ten
years. Think of it! With only a raise of a couple of dollars every blue
moon or so, and a weekly spree on Saturday night to vary the monotony.
(_He laughs again._) Interesting, eh? Getting the dope on the Social of
the Queen Esther Circle in the basement of the Methodist Episcopal
Church, unable to sleep through a meeting of the Common Council on
account of the noisy oratory caused by John Smith's application for a
permit to build a house; making a note that a tugboat towed two barges
loaded with coal up the river, that Mrs. Perkins spent a week-end with
relatives in Hickville, that John Jones---- Oh help! Why go on? Ten
years of it! I'm a broken man. God, how I used to pray that our
Congressman would commit suicide, or the Mayor murder his wife--just to
be able to write a real story!

EILEEN (_with a smile_). Is it as bad as that? But weren't there other
things in the town--outside your work--that were interesting?

MURRAY (_decidedly_). No. Never anything new--and I knew everyone and
every thing in town by heart years ago. (_With sudden bitterness._) Oh,
it was my own fault. Why didn't I get out of it? Well, I didn't. I was
always going to--to-morrow--and to-morrow never came. I got in a
rut--and stayed put. People seem to get that way, somehow--in that
town. It's in the air. All the boys I grew up with--nearly all, at
least--took root in the same way. It took pleurisy, followed by T.B.,
to blast me loose.

EILEEN (_wonderingly_). But--your family--didn't they live there?

MURRAY. I haven't much of a family left. My mother died when I was a
kid. My father--he was a lawyer--died when I was nineteen, just about
to go to college. He left nothing, so I went to work on the paper
instead. And there I've been ever since. I've two sisters, respectably
married and living in another part of the state. We don't get
along--but they are paying for me here, so I suppose I've no kick.
(_Cynically._) A family wouldn't have changed things. From what I've
seen that blood-thicker-than-water dope is all wrong. It's thinner than
table-d'hôte soup. You may have seen a bit of that truth in your own
case already.

EILEEN (_shocked_). How can you say that? You don't know----

MURRAY. Don't I, though? Wait till you've been here three months or
four--when the gap you left has been comfortably filled. You'll see
then!

EILEEN (_angrily, her lips trembling_). You must be crazy to say such
things! (_Fighting back her tears._) Oh, I think it's hateful--when you
see how badly I feel!

MURRAY (_in acute confusion. Stammering_). Look here, Miss Carmody, I
didn't mean to---- Listen--don't feel mad at me, please. My tongue ran
away with me. I was only talking. I'm like that. You mustn't take it
seriously.

EILEEN (_still resentful_). I don't see how you can talk. You
don't--you can't know about these things--when you've just said you had
no family of your own, really.

MURRAY (_eager to return to her good graces_). No. Of course I don't
know. I was just talking regardless for the fun of listening to it.

EILEEN (_after a pause_). Hasn't either of your sisters any children?

MURRAY. One of them has--two of them--ugly, squally little brats.

EILEEN (_disapprovingly_). You don't like babies?

MURRAY (_bluntly_). No. (_Then with a grin at her shocked face._) I
don't get them. They're something I can't seem to get acquainted with.

EILEEN (_with a smile, indulgently_). You're a funny person. (_Then
with a superior, motherly air._) No wonder you couldn't understand how
badly I feel. (_With a tender smile._) I've four of them--my brothers
and sisters--though they're not what you'd call babies, except to me.
Billy is fourteen, Nora eleven, Tom ten, and even little Mary is eight.
I've been a mother to them now for a whole year--ever since our mother
died (_Sadly._) And I don't know how they'll ever get along while I'm
away.

MURRAY (_cynically_). Oh, they'll--(_He checks what he was going to say
and adds lamely_)--get along somehow.

EILEEN (_with the same superior tone_). It's easy for you to say that.
You don't know how children grow to depend on you for everything.
You're not a woman.

MURRAY (_with a grin_). Are you? (_Then with a chuckle._) You're as old
as the pyramids, aren't you? I feel like a little boy. Won't you adopt
me, too?

EILEEN (_flushing, with a shy smile_). Someone ought to. (_Quickly
changing the subject._) Do you know, I can't get over what you said
about hating your work so. I should think it would be wonderful--to be
able to write things.

MURRAY. My job had nothing to do with writing. To write--really
write--yes, that's something worth trying for. That's what I've always
meant to have a stab at. I've run across ideas enough for stories--that
sounded good to me, anyway. (_With a forced, laugh._) But--like
everything else--I never got down to it. I started one or two--but--either
I thought I didn't have the time or---- (_He shrugs his shoulders._)

EILEEN. Well, you've plenty of time now, haven't you?

MURRAY (_instantly struck by this suggestion_). You mean--I could
write--up here? (_She nods. His face lights up with enthusiasm._) Say!
That is an idea! Thank you! I'd never have had sense enough to have
thought of that myself. (Eileen _flushes with pleasure._) Sure there's
time--nothing but time up here----

EILEEN. Then you seriously think you'll try it?

MURRAY (_determinedly_). Yes. Why not? I've got to try and do something
real some time, haven't I? I've no excuse not to, now. My mind isn't
sick.

EILEEN (_excitedly_). That'll be wonderful!

MURRAY (_confidently_). Listen. I've had ideas for a series of short
stories for the last couple of years--small town experiences, some of
them actual. I know that life--too darn well. I ought to be able to
write about it. And if I can sell one--to the _Post_, say--I'm sure
they'd take the others, too. And then--I should worry! It'd be easy
sailing. But you must promise to help--play critic for me--read them
and tell me where they're rotten.

EILEEN (_pleased, but protesting_). Oh, no, I'd never dare. I don't
know anything----

MURRAY. Yes, you do. You're the public. And you started me off on this
thing--if I'm really starting at last. So you've got to back me up now.
(_Suddenly._) Say, I wonder if they'd let me have a typewriter up here?

EILEEN. It'd be fine if they would. I'd like to have one, too--to
practice. I learned stenography at a business college and then I had a
position for a year--before my mother died.

MURRAY. We could hire one--I could. I don't see why they wouldn't allow
it. I'm to be sent to one of the men's huts within the next few days,
and you'll be shipped to one of the women's cottages within ten days.
You're not sick enough to be kept here in bed, I'm sure of that.

EILEEN. I--I don't know----

MURRAY. Here! None of that! You just think you're not and you won't be.
Say, I'm keen on that typewriter idea. They couldn't kick if we only
used it during recreation periods. I could have it a week, and then you
a week.

EILEEN (_eagerly_). And I could type your stories after you've written
them! I _could_ help that way.

MURRAY (_smiling_). But I'm quite able---- (_Then seeing how interested
she is he adds hurriedly._) That'd be great! It'd save so much time.
I've always been a fool at a machine. And I'd be willing to pay
whatever---- (Miss Gilpin _enters from the rear and walks towards
them._)

EILEEN (_quickly_). Oh, no! I'd be glad to get the practice. I wouldn't
accept---- (_She coughs slightly._)

MURRAY (_with a laugh_). Maybe, after you've read my stuff, you won't
type it at any price.

MISS GILPIN. Miss Carmody, may I speak to you for a moment, please.

      (_She takes_ Eileen _aside and talks to her in low tones of
      admonition._ Eileen's _face falls. She nods a horrified
      acquiescence._ Miss Gilpin _leaves her and goes into the office,
      rear._)

MURRAY (_as_ Eileen _comes back. Noticing her perturbation. Kindly_).
Well? Now, what's the trouble?

EILEEN (_her lips trembling_). She told me I mustn't forget to shield
my mouth with my handkerchief when I cough.

MURRAY (_consolingly_). Yes, that's one of the rules, you know.

EILEEN (_falteringly_). She said they'd give me--a--cup to carry
around--(_She stops, shuddering._)

MURRAY (_easily_). It's not as horrible as it sounds. They're only
little paste-board things you carry in your pocket.

EILEEN (_as if speaking to herself_). It's so horrible (_She holds out
her hand to_ Murray.) I'm to go to my room now. Good night, Mr. Murray.

MURRAY (_holding her hand for a moment--earnestly_). Don't mind your
first impressions here. You'll look on everything as a matter of course
in a few days. I felt your way at first. (_He drops her hand and shakes
his finger at her._) Mind your guardian, now! (_She forces a trembling
smile._) See you at breakfast. Good night.

      (Eileen _goes out to the hall in rear._ Miss Howard _comes in
      from the door just after her, carrying a glass of milk._)

MISS HOWARD. Almost bedtime, Mr. Murray. Here's your diet. (_He takes
the glass. She smiles at him provokingly._) Well, is it love at first
sight, Mr. Murray?

MURRAY (_with a grin_). Sure thing! You can consider yourself
heartlessly jilted. (_He turns and raises his glass towards the door
through which_ Eileen _has just gone, as if toasting her._)

    "A glass of milk, and thou
    Coughing beside me in the wilderness--
    Ah--wilderness were Paradise enow!"

      (_He takes a sip of milk._)

MISS HOWARD (_peevishly_). That's old stuff, Mr. Murray. A patient at
Saranac wrote that parody.

MURRAY (_maliciously_). Aha, you've discovered it's a parody, have you,
you sly minx! (Miss Howard _turns from him huffily and walks back
towards the office, her chin in the air._)


THE CURTAIN FALLS




Act Two

Act Two: Scene One


    _The assembly room of the main building of the sanatorium--early in
    the morning of a fine day in June, four months later. The room is
    large, light and airy, painted a fresh white. On the left forward,
    an armchair. Farther back, a door opening on the main hall. To the
    rear of this door, a pianola on a raised platform. At back of the
    pianola, a door leading into the office. In the rear wall, a long
    series of French windows looking out on the lawn, with wooded hills
    in the far background. Shrubs in flower grow immediately outside
    the windows Inside, there is a row of potted plants. In the right
    wall, rear, four windows. Farther forward, a long well-filled
    bookcase, and a doorway leading into the dining-room. Following the
    walls, but about five feet out from them a stiff line of chairs
    placed closely against each other forms a sort of right-angled
    auditorium of which the large, square table that stands at centre,
    forward, would seem to be the stage._

    _From the dining-room comes the clatter of dishes, the confused
    murmur of many voices, male and female--all the mingled sounds of a
    crowd of people at a meal._

    _After the curtain rises,_ Doctor Stanton _enters from the hall,
    followed by a visitor,_ Mr. Sloan, _and the assistant physician,_
    Doctor Simms. Doctor Stanton _is a handsome man of forty-five or so
    with a grave, care-lined, studious face lightened by a kindly,
    humorous smile. His grey eyes, saddened by the suffering they have
    witnessed, have the sympathetic quality of real understanding. The
    look they give is full of companionship, the courage-renewing,
    human companionship of a hope which is shared. He speaks with a
    slight Southern accent, soft and slurring._ Doctor Simms _is a
    tall, angular young man with a long sallow face and a sheepish,
    self-conscious grin._ Mr. Sloan _is fifty, short and stout, well
    dressed--one of the successful business men whose endowments have
    made the Hill Farm a possibility._

STANTON (_as they enter_). This is what you might see in the general
assembly room, Mr. Sloan--where the patients of both sexes are allowed
to congregate together after meals, for diets, and in the evening.

SLOAN (_looking around him_). Couldn't be more pleasant, I must
say--light and airy. (_He walks to where he can take a peep into the
dining-room._) Ah, they're all at breakfast, I see.

STANTON (_smiling_). Yes, and with no lack of appetite, let me tell
you. (_With a laugh of proud satisfaction._) They'd sure eat us out of
house and home at one sitting, if we'd give them the opportunity. (_To
his assistant._) Wouldn't they, Doctor?

SIMMS (_with his abashed grin_). You bet they would, sir.

SLOAN (_with a smile_). That's fine. (_With a nod towards the
dining-room._) The ones in there are the sure cures, aren't they?

STANTON (_a shadow coming over his face_). Strictly speaking, there are
no sure cures in this disease, Mr. Sloan. When we permit a patient to
return to take up his or her activities in the world, the patient is
what we call an arrested case. The disease is overcome, quiescent; the
wound is healed over. It's then up to the patient to so take care of
himself that this condition remains permanent. It isn't hard for them
to do this, usually. Just ordinary, bull-headed common sense--added to
what they've learned here--is enough for their safety. And the
precautions we teach them to take don't diminish their social
usefulness in the slightest, either, as I can prove by our statistics
of former patients. (_With a smile._) It's rather early in the morning
for statistics, though.

SLOAN (_with a wave of the hand_). Oh, you needn't. Your reputation in
that respect, Doctor---- (Stanton _inclines his head in
acknowledgment._ Sloan _jerks his thumb towards the dining-room_.) But
the ones in there _are_ getting well, aren't they?

STANTON. To all appearances, yes. You don't dare swear to it, though.
Sometimes, just when a case looks most favourably, there's a sudden,
unforeseen breakdown, and they have to be sent back to bed, or, if it's
very serious, back to the Infirmary again. These are the exceptions,
however, not the rule. You can bank on most of those eaters being out
in the world and usefully employed within six months.

SLOAN. You couldn't say more than that (_Abruptly._) But--the
unfortunate ones--do you have many deaths?

STANTON (_with a frown_). No. We're under a very hard, almost cruel
imperative which prevents that. If, at the end of six months, a case
shows no response to treatment, continues to go down hill--if, in a
word, it seems hopeless--we send them away, to one of the State Farms
if they have no private means. (_Apologetically._) You see, this
sanatorium is overcrowded and has a long waiting list, most of the
time, of others who demand their chance for life. We have to make
places for them. We have no time to waste on incurables. There are
other places for them--and sometimes, too, a change is beneficial and
they pick up in new surroundings. You never can tell. But we're bound
by the rule. It may seem cruel--but it's as near justice to all
concerned as we can come.

SLOAN (_soberly_). I see. (_His eyes fall on the pianola in surprise._)
Ah--a piano.

STANTON (_replying to the other's thought_). Yes, some patients play
and sing. (_With a smile._) If you'd call the noise they make by those
terms. They'd dance, too, if we permitted it. There's only one big
taboo--Home, Sweet Home. We forbid that--for obvious reasons.

SLOAN. I see. (_With a final look around._) Did I understand you to say
this is the only place where the sexes are permitted to mingle?

STANTON. Yes, sir.

SLOAN (_with a smile_). Not much chance for a love affair then.

STANTON (_seriously_). We do our best to prevent them. We even have a
strict rule which allows us to step in and put a stop to any intimacy
which grows beyond the casual. People up here, Mr. Sloan, are expected
to put aside all ideas except the one--getting well.

SLOAN (_somewhat embarrassed_). A damn good rule, too, I should say,
under the circumstances.

STANTON (_with a laugh_). Yes, we're strictly anti-Cupid, sir, from top
to bottom, (_Turning to the door to the hall._) And now, if you don't
mind, Mr. Sloan, I'm going to turn you loose to wander about the
grounds on an unconducted tour. To-day is my busy morning--Saturday. We
weigh each patient immediately after breakfast.

SLOAN. Every week?

STANTON. Every Saturday. You see we depend on fluctuations in weight to
tell us a lot about the patient's condition. If they gain, or stay at
normal, all's usually well. If they lose week after week without any
reason we can definitely point to, we keep careful watch. It's a sign
that something's wrong. We're forewarned by it and on our guard.

SLOAN (_with a smile_). Well, I'm certainly learning things. (_He turns
to the door._) And you just shoo me off wherever you please and go on
with the good work. I'll be glad of a ramble in the open on such a
glorious morning.

STANTON. After the weighing is over, sir, I'll be free to----

      (_His words are lost as the three go out. A moment later,_ Eileen
      _enters from the dining-room. She has grown stouter, her face has
      more of a healthy, out-of-door colour, but there is still about
      her the suggestion of being worn down by a burden too oppressive
      for her courage. She is dressed in blouse and dark skirt. She
      goes to the armchair, left forward, and sinks down on it. She
      is evidently in a state of nervous depression; she twists her
      fingers together in her lap; her eyes stare sadly before her; she
      clenches her upper lip with her teeth to prevent its trembling.
      She has hardly regained control over herself when_ Stephen Murray
      _comes in hurriedly from the dining-room and, seeing her at his
      first glance, walks quickly over to her chair. He is the picture
      of health, his figure has filled out solidly, his tanned face
      beams with suppressed exultation._)

MURRAY (_excitedly_). Eileen! I saw you leave your table. I've
something to tell you. I didn't get a chance last night after the mail
came. You'd gone to the cottage. Just listen, Eileen--it's too good to
be true--but on that mail--guess what?

EILEEN (_forgetting her depression--with an excited smile_). I know!
You've sold your story!

MURRAY (_triumphantly_). Go to the head of the class. What d'you know
about that for luck! My first, too--and only the third magazine I sent
it to! (_He cuts a joyful caper._)

EILEEN (_happily_). Isn't that wonderful, Stephen! But I knew all the
time you would. The story's so good.

MURRAY. Well, you might have known, but I didn't think there was a
chance in the world. And as for being good--(_With superior air_)--wait
till I turn loose with the real big ones, the kind I'm going to write.
Then I'll make them sit up and take notice. They can't stop me now.
This money gives me a chance to sit back and do what I please for a
while. And I haven't told you the best part. The editor wrote saying
how much he liked the yarn and asked me for more of the same kind.

EILEEN. And you've the three others about the same person--just as
good, too! Why, you'll sell them all! (_She clasps her hands
delightedly._)

MURRAY. And I can send them out right away. They're all typed, thanks
to you. That's what's brought me luck, I know. I never had a bit by
myself. (_Then, after a quick glance around to make sure they are
alone, he bends down and kisses her._) There! A token of
gratitude--even if it is against the rules.

EILEEN (_flushing--with timid happiness_). Stephen! You mustn't!
They'll see.

MURRAY (_boldly_). Let them!

EILEEN. But you know--they've warned us against being so much together,
already.

MURRAY. Let them! We'll be out of this prison soon. (Eileen _shakes her
head sadly, but he does not notice._) Oh, I wish you could leave when I
do. We'd have some celebration together.

EILEEN (_her lips trembling_). I was thinking last night--that you'd
soon be going away. You look so well. Do you think--they'll let you
go--soon?

MURRAY. You bet I do. I'm bound to go now. It's ridiculous keeping me
here when I'm as healthy as a pig. I caught Stanton in the hall last
night and asked him if I could go.

EILEEN (_anxiously_). What did he say?

MURRAY. He only smiled and said: "We'll see if you gain weight
to-morrow." As if that mattered now! Why, I'm way above normal as it
is! But you know Stanton--always putting you off. But I could tell by
the way he said it he'd be willing to consider----

EILEEN (_slowly_). Then--if you gain to-day---

MURRAY. He'll let me go. Yes, I know he will. I'm going to insist on
it.

EILEEN. Then--you'll leave----?

MURRAY. Right away. The minute I can get packed.

EILEEN (_trying to force a smile_). Oh, I'm so glad--for your sake;
but--I'm selfish--it'll be so lonely here without you.

MURRAY (_consolingly_). You'll be going away yourself before long.
(Eileen _shakes her head. He goes on without noticing, wrapped in his
own success._) Oh, Eileen, you can't imagine all it opens up for
me--selling that story. I don't have to go back home to stagnate. I can
go straight to New York, and live, and meet real people who are doing
things. I can take my time, and try and do the work I hope to.
(_Feelingly._) You don't know how grateful I am to you, Eileen--how
you've helped me. Oh, I don't mean just the typing, I mean your
encouragement, your faith! I'd never have had guts enough to stick to
it myself. The stories would never have been written if it hadn't been
for you.

EILEEN (_choking back a sob_). I didn't do--anything.

MURRAY (_staring down at her--with rough kindliness_). Here, here,
that'll never do! You're not weeping about it, are you, silly? (_He
pats her on the shoulder._) What's the matter, Eileen? You didn't eat a
thing this morning. I was watching you. (_With kindly severity._)
That's no way to gain weight, you know. You'll have to feed up. Do you
hear what your guardian commands, eh?

EILEEN (_with dull hopelessness_). I know I'll lose again. I've been
losing steadily the past three weeks.

MURRAY. Here! Don't you dare talk that way! I won't stand for it. Why,
you've been picking up wonderfully--until just lately. You've made such
a game fight for four months. Even the old Doc has told you how much he
admired your pluck, and how much better you were getting. You're not
going to quit now, are you?

EILEEN (_despairingly_). Oh, I don't care! I don't care--now.

MURRAY. Now? What do you mean by that? What's happened to make things
any different?

EILEEN (_evasively_). Oh--nothing. Don't ask me, Stephen.

MURRAY (_with sudden anger_). I don't have to ask you. I can guess.
Another letter from home--or from that ass, eh?

EILEEN (_shaking her head_). No, it isn't that. (_She looks at him as
if imploring him to comprehend._)

MURRAY (_furiously_). Of course, you'd deny it. You always do. But
don't you suppose I've got eyes? It's been the same damn thing all the
time you've been here. After every nagging letter--thank God they don't
write often any more!--you've been all in; and after their Sunday
visits--you can thank God they've been few, too--you're utterly knocked
out. It's a shame! The selfish swine!

EILEEN. Stephen!

MURRAY (_relentlessly._) Don't be sentimental, Eileen. You know it's
true. From what you've told me of their letters, their visits--from
what I've seen and suspected--they've done nothing but worry and
torment you and do their best to keep you from getting well.

EILEEN (_faintly_). You're not fair, Stephen.

MURRAY. Rot! When it isn't your father grumbling about expense, it's
the kids, or that stupid housekeeper, or that slick Aleck, Nicholls,
with his cowardly lies. Which is it this time?

EILEEN (_pitifully_). None of them.

MURRAY (_explosively_). But him, especially--the dirty cad! Oh, I've
got a rich notion to pay a call on that gentleman when I leave and tell
him what I think of him.

EILEEN (_quickly_). No--you mustn't ever! He's not to blame. If you
knew---- (_She stops, lowering her eyes in confusion._)

MURRAY (_roughly_). Knew what? You make me sick, Eileen--always finding
excuses for him. I never could understand what a girl like you could
see---- But what's the use? I've said all this before. You're wasting
yourself on a---- (_Rudely._) Love must be blind. And yet you say you
don't love him, really?

EILEEN (_shaking her head--helplessly_). But I do--like Fred. We've
been good friends so many years. I don't want to hurt him--his
pride----

MURRAY. That's the same as answering no to my question. Then, if you
don't love him, why don't you write and tell him to go to--break it
off? (Eileen _bows her head, but doesn't reply. Irritated,_ Murray
_continues brutally._) Are you afraid it would break his heart? Don't
be a fool! The only way you could do that would be to deprive him of
his meals.

EILEEN (_springing to her feet--distractedly_). Please stop, Stephen!
You're cruel! And you've been so kind--the only real friend I've had up
here. Don't spoil it all now.

MURRAY (_remorsefully_). I'm sorry, Eileen. I was only talking. I won't
say another word. (_Irritably._) Still, someone ought to say or do
something to put a stop to----

EILEEN (_with a broken laugh_). Never mind. Everything will stop--soon,
now!

MURRAY (_suspiciously_). What do you mean?

EILEEN (_with an attempt at a careless tone_). Nothing. If you can't
see---- (_She turns to him with sudden intensity._) Oh, Stephen, if you
only knew how wrong you are about everything you've said. It's all
true; but it isn't that--any of it--any more--that's---- Oh, I can't
tell you!

MURRAY (_with great interest_). Please do, Eileen!

EILEEN (_with a helpless laugh_). No.

MURRAY. Please tell me what it is! Let me help you.

EILEEN. No. It wouldn't be any use, Stephen.

MURRAY (_offended_). Why do you say that? Haven't I helped before?

EILEEN. Yes--but this----

MURRAY. Come now! 'Fess up! What is "this"?

EILEEN. No. I couldn't speak of it here, anyway. They'll all be coming
out soon.

MURRAY (_insistently_). Then when? Where?

EILEEN. Oh, I don't know--perhaps never, nowhere. I don't know----
Sometime before you leave, maybe.

MURRAY. But I may go to-morrow morning--if I gain weight and Stanton
lets me.

EILEEN (_sadly_). Yes, I was forgetting--you were going right away.
(_Dully_). Then nowhere, I suppose--never. (_Glancing towards the
dining-room._) They're all getting up. Let's not talk about it any
more--now.

MURRAY (_stubbornly_). But you'll tell me later, Eileen? You must.

EILEEN (_vaguely_). Perhaps. It depends----

      (_The patients, about forty in number, straggle in from the
      dining-room by twos and threes, chatting in low tones. The men
      and women with few exceptions separate into two groups, the
      women congregating in the left right angle of chairs, the men
      sitting or standing in the right right angle. In appearance, most
      of the patients are tanned, healthy, and cheerful-looking. The
      great majority are under middle age. Their clothes are of the
      cheap, ready-made variety. They are all distinctly of the
      wage-earning class. They might well be a crowd of cosmopolitan
      factory workers gathered together after a summer vacation. A
      hollow-chestedness and a tendency to round shoulders may be
      detected as a common characteristic. A general air of tension,
      marked by frequent bursts of laughter in too high a key, seems to
      pervade the throng._ Murray _and_ Eileen, _as if to avoid contact
      with the others, come over to the right in front of the
      dining-room door._)

MURRAY (_in a low voice_). Listen to them laugh. Did you ever
notice--perhaps it's my imagination--how forced they act on Saturday
mornings before they're weighed?

EILEEN (_dully_). No.

MURRAY. Can't you tell me that secret now? No one'll hear.

EILEEN (_vehemently_). No, no, how could I? Don't speak of it!

      (_A sudden silence falls on all the groups at once. Their eyes,
      by a common impulse, turn quickly towards the door to the
      hall._)

A WOMAN (_nervously--as if this moment's silent pause oppressed her._)
Play something, Peters. They ain't coming yet.

      (Peters, _a stupid-looking young fellow with a sly, twisted
      smirk which gives him the appearance of perpetually winking his
      eye, detaches himself from a group on the right. All join in with
      urging exclamations: "Go on, Peters! Go to it! Pedal up, Pete!
      Give us a rag! That's the boy, Peters!" etc._)

PETERS. Sure, if I got time.

      (_He goes to the pianola and puts in a roll. The mingled
      conversation and laughter bursts forth again as he sits on the
      bench and starts pedalling._)

MURRAY (_disgustedly_). It's sure good to think I won't have to
listen to that old tin-pan being banged much longer!

      (_The music interrupts him--a quick rag. The patients brighten,
      hum, whistle, sway their heads or tap their feet in time to the
      tune._ Doctor Stanton _and_ Doctor Simms _appear in the
      doorway from the hall. All eyes are turned on them._)

STANTON (_raising his voice_). They all seem to be here, Doctor. We
might as well start.

      (Mrs. Turner, _the matron, comes in behind them--a stout,
      motherly, capable-looking woman with grey hair. She hears_
      Stanton's _remark._)

MRS. TURNER. And take temperatures after, Doctor?

STANTON. Yes, Mrs. Turner. I think that's better to-day.

MRS. TURNER. All right, Doctor.

      (Stanton _and the assistant go out._ Mrs. Turner _advances a step
      or so into the room and looks from one group of patients to the
      other, inclining her head and smiling benevolently. All force
      smiles and nod in recognition of her greeting._ Peters, _at the
      pianola, lets the music slow down, glancing questioningly at the
      matron to see if she is going to order it stopped. Then,
      encouraged by her smile, his feet pedal harder than ever._)

MURRAY. Look at old Mrs. Grundy's eyes pinned on us! She'll accuse us
of being too familiar again, the old wench!

EILEEN. Sssh. You're wrong. She's looking at me, not at us.

MURRAY. At you? Why?

EILEEN. I ran a temperature yesterday. It must have been over a hundred
last night.

MURRAY. (_with consoling scepticism_). You're always looking for
trouble, Eileen. How do you know you ran a temp? You didn't see the
stick, I suppose?

EILEEN. No--but--I could tell. I felt feverish and chilly. It must have
been way up.

MURRAY. Bosh! If it was you'd have been sent to bed.

EILEEN. That's why she's looking at me. (_Piteously._) Oh, I do hope I
won't be sent back to bed! I don't know what I'd do. If I could only
gain this morning. If my temp has only gone down! (_Hopelessly._) But I
feel---- I didn't sleep a wink--thinking----

MURRAY. (_roughly_). You'll persuade yourself you've got leprosy in a
second. Don't be silly! It's all imagination, I tell you. You'll gain.
Wait and see if you don't.

      (Eileen _shakes her head. A metallic rumble and jangle comes
      from the hallway. Everyone turns in that direction with nervous
      expectancy._)

MRS. TURNER (_admonishingly_). Mr. Peters!

PETERS. Yes, ma'am.

      (_He stops playing and rejoins the group of men on the right.
      In the midst of a silence broken only by hushed murmurs of
      conversation,_ Doctor Stanton _appears in the hall doorway.
      He turns to help his assistant wheel in a Fairbanks scale on
      castors. They place the scale against the wall immediately to the
      rear of the doorway._ Doctor Simms _adjusts it to a perfect
      balance._)

DOCTOR STANTON (_takes a pencil from his pocket and opens the record
book he has in his hand_). All ready, Doctor?

DOCTOR SIMMS. Just a second, sir.

      (_A chorus of coughs comes from the impatient crowd, and
      handkerchiefs are hurriedly produced to shield mouths._)

MURRAY (_with a nervous smile_). Well, we're all set. Here's hoping!

EILEEN. You'll gain, I'm sure you will. You look so well.

MURRAY. Oh--I--I wasn't thinking of myself, I'm a sure thing. I was
betting on you. I've simply got to gain to-day, when so much depends on
it.

EILEEN. Yes, I hope you---- (_She falters brokenly and turns away from
him._)

DOCTOR SIMMS (_straightening up_). All ready, Doctor?

STANTON (_nods and glances at his book--without raising his
voice--distinctly_). Mrs. Abner.

      (_A middle-aged woman comes and gets on the scale._ Simms
      _adjusts it to her weight of the previous week, which_ Stanton
      _reads to him from the book in a low voice, and weighs her._)

MURRAY (_with a relieved sigh_). They're off. (_Noticing_ Eileen's
_downcast head and air of dejection._) Here! Buck up, Eileen! Old Lady
Grundy's watching you--and it's your turn in a second.

      (Eileen _raises her head and forces a frightened smile._ Mrs.
      Abner _gets down off the scale with a pleased grin. She has
      evidently gained. She rejoins the group of women, chattering
      volubly in low tones. Her exultant "gained half a pound" can be
      heard. The other women smile their perfunctory congratulations,
      their eyes absent-minded, intent on their own worries._ Stanton
      _writes down the weight in the book._)

STANTON. Miss Bailey. (_A young girl goes to the scales._)

MURRAY. Bailey looks bad, doesn't she?

EILEEN (_her lips trembling_). She's been losing, too.

MURRAY. Well, _you're_ going to gain to-day. Remember, now!

EILEEN (_with a feeble smile_). I'll try to obey your orders.

      (Miss Bailey _goes down off the scales. Her eyes are full of
      despondency although she tries to make a brave face of it,
      forcing a laugh as she joins the women. They stare at her with
      pitying looks and murmur consoling phrases._)

EILEEN. She's lost again. Oh, I wish I didn't have to get weighed----

STANTON. Miss Carmody.

      (Eileen _starts nervously._)

MURRAY (_as she leaves him_). Remember now! Break the scales!

      (_She walks quickly to the scales, trying to assume an air of
      defiant indifference. The balance stays down as she steps up._
      Eileen's _face shows her despair at this._ Simms _weighs her and
      gives the poundage in a low voice to_ Stanton. Eileen _steps down
      mechanically, then hesitates as if not knowing where to turn, her
      anguished eyes flitting from one group to another._)

MURRAY (_savagely_). Damn!

      (Doctor Stanton _writes the figures in his book, glances sharply
      at_ Eileen, _and then nods significantly to_ Mrs. Turner _who is
      standing beside him._)

STANTON (_calling the next_). Miss Doeffler.

      (_Another woman comes to be weighed._)

MRS. TURNER. Miss Carmody! Will you come here a moment, please?

EILEEN (_her face growing very pale_). Yes, Mrs. Turner.

      (_The heads of the different groups bend together. Their eyes
      follow_ Eileen _as they whisper._ Mrs. Turner _leads her down
      front, left. Behind them the weighing of the women continues
      briskly. The great majority have gained. Those who have not have
      either remained stationary or lost a negligible fraction of a
      pound. So, as the weighing proceeds, the general air of smiling
      satisfaction rises among the groups of women. Some of them, their
      ordeal over, go out through the hall doorway by twos and threes
      with suppressed laughter and chatter. As they pass behind_ Eileen
      _they glance at her with pitying curiosity._ Doctor Stanton's
      _voice is heard at regular intervals calling the names in
      alphabetical order: Mrs. Elbing, Miss Finch, Miss Grimes, Miss
      Haines, Miss Hayes, Miss Jutner, Miss Linowski, Mrs. Marini, Mrs.
      McCoy, Miss McElroy, Miss Nelson, Mrs. Nott, Mrs. O'Brien, Mrs.
      Olson, Miss Paul, Miss Petrovski, Mrs. Quinn, Miss Robersi, Mrs.
      Stattler, Miss Unger._)

MRS. TURNER (_putting her hand on_ Eileen's _shoulder--kindly_). You're
not looking so well lately, my dear, do you know it?

EILEEN (_bravely_). I feel--fine. (_Her eyes, as if looking for
encouragement, seek_ Murray, _who is staring at her worriedly._)

MRS. TURNER (_gently_). You lost weight again, you know.

EILEEN, I know--but----

MRS. TURNER. This is the fourth week.

EILEEN. I--I know it is----

MRS. TURNER. I've been keeping my eye on you. You seem--worried. Are
you upset about--something we don't know?

EILEEN (_quickly_). No, no! I haven't slept much lately. That must be
it.

MRS. TURNER. Are you worrying about your condition? Is that what keeps
you awake?

EILEEN. No.

MRS. TURNER. You're sure it's not that?

EILEEN. Yes, I'm sure it's not, Mrs. Turner.

MRS. TURNER. I was going to tell you if you were: Don't do it! You
can't expect it to be all smooth sailing. Even the most favourable
cases have to expect these little setbacks. A few days' rest in bed
will start you on the right trail again.

EILEEN (_in anguish, although she had realised this was coming_). Bed?
Go back to bed? Oh, Mrs. Turner!

MRS. TURNER (_gently_). Yes, my dear, Doctor Stanton thinks it best. So
when you go back to your cottage----

EILEEN. Oh, please--not to-day--not right away!

MRS. TURNER. You had a temperature and a high pulse yesterday, didn't
you realise it? And this morning you look quite feverish. (_She tries
to put her hand on_ Eileen's _forehead, but the latter steps away
defensively._)

EILEEN. It's only--not sleeping last night. I was nervous. Oh, I'm sure
it'll go away.

MRS. TURNER (_consolingly_). When you lie still and have perfect rest,
of course it will.

EILEEN (_with a longing look over at_ Murray). But not to-day--please,
Mrs. Turner.

MRS. TURNER (_looking at her keenly_). There is something upsetting
you. You've something on your mind that you can't tell me, is that it?
(Eileen _maintains a stubborn silence._) But think--_can't_ you tell
me? (_With a kindly smile._) I'm used to other people's troubles. I've
been playing mother-confessor to the patients for years now, and I
think I've usually been able to help them. Can't you confide in me,
child? (Eileen _drops her eyes, but remains silent._ Mrs. Turner
_glances meaningly over at_ Murray, _who is watching them whenever he
thinks the matron is not aware of it--a note of sharp rebuke in her
voice._) I think I can guess your secret, my dear, even if you're too
stubborn to tell. This setback is your own fault. You've let other
notions become more important to you than the idea of getting well. And
you've no excuse for it. After I had to warn you a month ago, I
expected _that_ silliness to stop instantly.

EILEEN (_her face flushed--protesting_). There never was anything.
Nothing like that has anything to do with it.

MRS. TURNER (_sceptically_). What is it that has, then?

EILEEN (_lying determinedly_). It's my family. They keep writing--and
worrying me--and---- That's what it is, Mrs. Turner.

MRS. TURNER (_not exactly knowing whether to believe this or
not--probing the girl with her eyes_). Your father?

EILEEN. Yes, all of them. (_Suddenly seeing a way to discredit all of
the matron's suspicions--excitedly._) And principally the young man I'm
engaged to--the one who came to visit me several times----

MRS. TURNER (_surprised_). So--you're engaged? (Eileen _nods._ Mrs.
Turner _immediately dismisses her suspicions._) Oh, pardon me. I didn't
know that, you see, or I wouldn't---- (_She pats_ Eileen _on the
shoulder comfortingly._) Never mind. You'll tell me all about it, won't
you?

EILEEN (_desperately_). Yes. (_She seems about to go on, but the matron
interrupts her._)

MRS. TURNER. Oh, not here, my dear. Now now. Come to my room--let me
see--I'll be busy all the morning--some time this afternoon. Will you
do that?

EILEEN. Yes. (_Joyfully._) Then I needn't go to bed right away?

MRS. TURNER. No--on one condition. You mustn't take any exercise. Stay
in your recliner all day and rest and remain in bed to-morrow morning.
And promise me you will rest and not worry any more about things we can
easily fix up between us.

EILEEN. I promise, Mrs. Turner.

MRS. TURNER (_smiling in dismissal_). Very well, then. I must speak to
Miss Bailey. I'll see you this afternoon.

EILEEN. Yes, Mrs. Turner.

      (_The matron goes to the rear where_ Miss Bailey _is sitting
      with_ Mrs. Abner. _She beckons to_ Miss Bailey, _who gets up with
      a scared look, and they go to the far left corner of the room._
      Eileen _stands for a moment hesitating--then starts to go to_
      Murray, _but just at this moment_ Peters _comes forward and
      speaks to_ Murray.)

PETERS (_with his sly twisted grin_). Say, Carmody musta lost fierce.
Did yuh see the Old Woman handin' her an earful? Sent her back to bed,
I betcha. What d'yuh think?

MURRAY (_impatiently, showing his dislike_). How the hell do I know?

PETERS (_sneeringly_). Huh, you don't know nothin' 'bout her, I s'pose?
Where d'yuh get that stuff? Think yuh're kiddin' me?

MURRAY (_with cold rage before which the other slinks away_). Peters,
the more I see of you the better I like a skunk! If it wasn't for other
people losing weight you couldn't get any joy out of life, could you?
(_Roughly._) Get away from me! (_He makes a threatening gesture._)

PETERS (_beating a snarling retreat_). Wait 'n' see if yuh don't lose
too, yuh stuck-up boob!

      (_Seeing that_ Murray _is alone again,_ Eileen _starts towards
      him, but this time she is intercepted by_ Mrs. Abner, _who stops
      on her way out. The weighing of the women is now finished, and
      that of the men, which proceeds much quicker, begins._)

STANTON. Anderson!

      (_Anderson comes to the scales. The men all move down to the
      left to wait their turn, with the exception of_ Murray, _who
      remains by the dining-room door, fidgeting impatiently, anxious
      for a word with_ Eileen.)

MRS. ABNER (_taking_ Eileen's _arm_). Coming over to the cottage,
dearie?

EILEEN. Not just this minute, Mrs. Abner. I have to wait----

MRS. ABNER. For the Old Woman? You lost to-day, didn't you? Is she
sendin' you to bed, the old devil?

EILEEN. Yes, I'm afraid I'll have to----

MRS. ABNER. She's a mean one, ain't she? I gained this week--half a
pound. Lord, I'm gittin' fat! All my clothes are gittin' too small for
me. Don't know what I'll do. Did you lose much, dearie?

EILEEN. Three pounds.

MRS. ABNER. Ain't that awful! (_Hastening to make up for this
thoughtless remark._) All the same, what's three pounds! You can git
them back in a week after you're resting more. You been runnin' a temp,
too, ain't you? (_Eileen nods._) Don't worry about it, dearie. It'll go
down. Worryin's the worst. Me, I don't never worry none. (_She chuckled
with satisfaction--then soberly._) I just been talkin' with Bailey.
She's got to go to bed, too, I guess. She lost two pounds. She ain't
runnin' no temp though.

STANTON. Barnes! (_Another man comes to the scales._)

MRS. ABNER (_in a mysterious whisper_). Look at Mr. Murray, dearie.
Ain't he nervous to-day? I don't know as I blame him, either. I heard
the doctor said he'd let him go home if he gained to-day. Is it true,
d'you know?

EILEEN (_dully_). I don't know.

MRS. ABNER. Gosh, I wish it was me! My old man's missin' me like the
dickens, he writes. (_She starts to go._) You'll be over to the cottage
in a while, won't you? Me 'n' you'll have a game of casino, eh?

EILEEN (_happy at this deliverance_). Yes, I'll be glad to.

STANTON. Cordero!

      (Mrs. Abner _goes out._ Eileen _again starts towards_ Murray,
      _but this time_ Flynn, _a young fellow with a brick-coloured,
      homely, good-natured face, and a shaven-necked haircut, slouches
      back to_ Murray. Eileen _is brought to a halt in front of the
      table where she stands, her face working with nervous strain,
      clasping and unclasping her trembling hands._)

FLYNN (_curiously_). Say, Steve, what's this bull about the Doc lettin'
yuh beat it if yuh gain to-day? Is it straight goods?

MURRAY. He said he might, that's all. (_Impatiently._) How the devil
did that story get travelling around?

FLYNN (_with a grin_). Wha' d'yuh expect with this gang of skirts
chewin' the fat? Well, here's hopin' yuh come home a winner, Steve.

MURRAY (_gratefully_). Thanks. (_With confidence._) Oh, I'll gain all
right; but whether he'll let me go or not---- (_He shrugs his
shoulders._)

FLYNN. Make 'em believe. I wish Stanton'd ask waivers on me. (_With a
laugh._) I oughter gain a ton to-day. I ate enough spuds for breakfast
to plant a farm.

STANTON. Flynn!

FLYNN. Me to the plate! (_He strides to the scales._)

MURRAY. Good luck!

      (_He starts to join_ Eileen, _but_ Miss Bailey, _who has finished
      her talk with_ Mrs. Turner, _who goes out to the hall,
      approaches_ Eileen _at just this moment._ Murray _stops in his
      tracks, fuming. He and_ Eileen _exchange a glance of helpless
      annoyance._)

MISS BAILEY (_her thin face full of the satisfaction of misery finding
company--plucks at_ Eileen's _sleeve_). Say, Carmody, she sent you back
to bed, too, didn't she?

EILEEN (_absent-mindedly_). I suppose----

MISS BAILEY. You suppose? Don't you know? Of course she did. I got to
go, too. (_Pulling_ Eileen's _sleeve._) Come on. Let's get out of here.
I hate this place, don't you?

STANTON (_calling the next_). Hopper!

FLYNN (_shouts to_ Murray _as he is going out to the hall_). I hit 'er
for a two-bagger, Steve. Come on now, Bo, and bring me home! 'Atta,
boy! (_Grinning gleefully, he slouches out._ Doctor Stanton _and all
the patients laugh._)

MISS BAILEY (_with irritating persistence_). Come on, Carmody. You've
got to go to bed, too.

EILEEN (_at the end of her patience--releasing her arm from the other's
grasp_). Let me alone, will you? I don't have to go to bed now--not
till to-morrow morning.

MISS BAILEY (_despairingly, as if she couldn't believe her ears_). You
don't have to go to bed?

EILEEN. Not now--no.

MISS BAILEY (_in a whining rage_). Why not? You've been running a temp,
too, and I haven't. You must have a pull, that's what! It isn't fair.
I'll bet you lost more than I did, too! What right have you got----
Well, I'm not going to bed if you don't. Wait 'n' see!

EILEEN (_turning away, revolted_). Go away! Leave me alone, please.

STANTON. Lowenstein!

MISS BAILEY (_turns to the hall door, whining_). All right for you! I'm
going to find out. It isn't square. I'll write home.

      (_She disappears in the hallway._ Murray _strides over to_
      Eileen, _whose strength seems to have left her and who is leaning
      weakly against the table._)

MURRAY. Thank God--at last! Isn't it hell--all these fools! I couldn't
get to you. What did Old Lady Grundy have to say to you? I saw her
giving me a hard look. Was it about us--the old stuff? (Eileen _nods
with downcast eyes._) What did she say? Never mind now. You can tell me
in a minute. It's my turn next. (_His eyes glance towards the scales._)

EILEEN (_intensely_). Oh, Stephen, I wish you weren't going away!

MURRAY (_excitedly_). Maybe I'm not. It's exciting--like gambling--if I
win----

STANTON. Murray!

MURRAY. Wait here, Eileen.

      (_He goes to the scales._ Eileen _keeps her back turned. Her body
      stiffens rigidly in the intensity of her conflicting emotions.
      She stares straight ahead, her eyes full of anguish._ Murray
      _steps on the scales nervously. The balance rod hits the top
      smartly. He has gained. His face lights up and he heaves a great
      sigh of relief._ Eileen _seems to sense this outcome and her head
      sinks, her body sags weakly and seems to shrink to a smaller
      size._ Murray _gets off the scales, his face beaming with a
      triumphant smile._ Doctor Stanton _smiles and murmurs something
      to him in a low voice._ Murray _nods brightly; then turns back
      to_ Eileen.)

STANTON. Nathan! (_Another patient advances to the scales._)

MURRAY (_trying to appear casual_). Well--three rousing cheers! Stanton
told me to come to his office at eleven. That means a final exam--and
release!

EILEEN (_dully_). So you gained?

MURRAY. Three pounds.

EILEEN. Funny--I lost three. (_With a pitiful effort at a smile_.) I
hope you gained the ones I lost. (_Her lips tremble._) So you're surely
going away.

MURRAY (_his joy fleeing as he is confronted with her sorrow--slowly_).
It looks that way, Eileen.

EILEEN (_in a trembling whisper broken by rising sobs_). Oh--I'm so
glad--you gained--the ones I lost, Stephen---- So glad! (_She breaks
down, covering her face with her hands, stifling her sobs._)

MURRAY (_alarmed_). Eileen! What's the matter? (_Desperately._) Stop
it! Stanton'll see you!


THE CURTAIN FALLS




Act Two: Scene Two


    _Midnight of the same day. A cross-road near the sanatorium. The
    main road comes down forward from the right. A smaller road,
    leading down from the left, joins it towards left centre._

    _Dense woods rise sheer from the grass and bramble-grown ditches at
    the roadsides. At the junction of the two roads there is a
    signpost, its arms pointing towards the right and the left, rear. A
    pile of round stones is at the road corner, left forward. A full
    moon, riding high overhead, throws the roads into white, shadowless
    relief and masses the woods into walls of compact blackness. The
    trees lean heavily together, their branches motionless, unstirred
    by any trace of wind._

    _As the curtain rises,_ Eileen _is discovered standing in the
    middle of the road, front centre. Her face shows white and clear in
    the bright moonlight as she stares with anxious expectancy up the
    road to the left. Her body is fixed in an attitude of rigid
    immobility as if she were afraid the slightest movement would break
    the spell of silence and awaken the unknown. She has shrunk
    instinctively as far away as she can from the mysterious darkness
    which rises at the roadsides like an imprisoning wall. A sound of
    hurried footfalls, muffled by the dust, comes from the road she is
    watching. She gives a startled gasp. Her eyes strain to identify
    the oncomer. Uncertain, trembling with fright, she hesitates a
    second; then darts to the side of the road and crouches down in the
    shadow._

    Stephen Murray _comes down the road from the left. He stops by the
    signpost and peers about him. He wears a cap, the peak of which
    casts his face into shadow. Finally he calls in a low voice._

MURRAY. Eileen!

EILEEN (_coming out quickly from her hiding-place--with a glad little
cry_). Stephen! At last! (_She runs to him as if she were going to
fling her arms about him, but stops abashed. He reaches out and takes
her hands._)

MURRAY. At last? It can't be twelve yet. (_He leads her to the pile of
stones on the left._) I haven't heard the village clock.

EILEEN. I must have come early. It seemed as if I'd been waiting for
ages. I was so anxious----

MURRAY. How your hands tremble! Were you frightened?

EILEEN (_forcing a smile_). A little. The woods are so black--and
queer-looking. I'm all right now.

MURRAY. Sit down. You must rest. (_In a tone of annoyed reproof._) I'm
going to read you a lecture, young lady. You shouldn't ever have done
this--running a temp and---- Good heavens, don't you want to get well?

EILEEN (_dully_). I don't know----

MURRAY (_irritably_). You make me ill when you talk that way, Eileen.
It doesn't sound like you at all. What's come over you lately? Get a
grip on yourself, for God's sake. I was--knocked out--when I read the
note you slipped me after supper. I didn't get a chance to read it
until late, I was so busy packing, and by that time you'd gone to your
cottage. If I could have reached you any way I'd have refused to come
here, I tell you straight. But I couldn't--and I knew you'd be here
waiting--and--still, I feel guilty. Damn it, this isn't the thing for
you! You ought to be in bed asleep. Can't you look out for yourself?

EILEEN (_humbly_). Please, Stephen, don't scold me.

MURRAY. How the devil did you ever get the idea--meeting me here at
this ungodly hour?

EILEEN. You'd told me about your sneaking out that night to go to the
village, and I thought there'd be no harm this one night--the last
night.

MURRAY. But I'm well. I've been well. It's different. You---- Honest,
Eileen, you shouldn't lose sleep and tax your strength.

EILEEN. Don't scold me, please. I'll make up for it. I'll rest all the
time--after you're gone. I just had to see you some way--somewhere
where there weren't eyes and ears on all sides--when you told me after
dinner that Doctor Stanton had examined you and said you could go
to-morrow---- (_A clock in the distant village begins striking._)
Sssh! Listen.

MURRAY. That's twelve now. You see I was early.

      (_In a pause of silence they wait motionlessly until the last
      mournful note dies in the hushed woods._)

EILEEN (_in a stifled voice_). It isn't to-morrow now, is it? It's
to-day--the day you're going.

MURRAY (_something in her voice making him avert his face and kick at
the heap of stones on which she is sitting--brusquely_). Well, I hope
you took precautions so you wouldn't be caught sneaking out.

EILEEN. I did just what you'd told me you did--stuffed the pillows
under the clothes so the watchman would think I was there.

MURRAY. None of the patients on your porch saw you leave, did they?

EILEEN. No. They were all asleep.

MURRAY. That's all right, then. I wouldn't trust any of that bunch of
women. They'd be only too glad to squeal on you. (_There is an
uncomfortable pause._ Murray _seems waiting for her to speak. He looks
about him at the trees, up into the moonlit sky, breathing in the fresh
air with a healthy delight._ Eileen _remains with downcast head,
staring at the road._) It's beautiful to-night, isn't it? Worth losing
sleep for.

EILEEN (_dully_). Yes. (_Another pause--finally she murmurs faintly._)
Are you leaving early?

MURRAY. The ten-forty. Leave the San at ten, I guess.

EILEEN. You're going home?

MURRAY. Home? You mean to the town? No. But I'm going to see my
sisters--just to say hello. I've got to, I suppose. I won't stay more
than a few days, if I can help it.

EILEEN. I'm sure--I've often felt--you're unjust to your sisters.
(_With conviction._) I'm sure they must both love you.

MURRAY (_frowning_). Maybe, in their own way. But what's love without a
glimmer of understanding--a nuisance! They have never seen the real me
and never have wanted to--that's all.

EILEEN (_as if to herself_). What is--the real you? (Murray _kicks at
the stones impatiently without answering._ Eileen _hastens to change
the subject._) And then you'll go to New York?

MURRAY (_interested, at once_). Yes. You bet.

EILEEN. And write more?

MURRAY. Not in New York, no. I'm going there to take a vacation, and
live, really enjoy myself for a while. I've enough money for that as it
is, and if the other stories you typed sell--I'll be as rich as
Rockefeller. I might even travel---- No, I've got to make good with my
best stuff first. I'll save the travelling as a reward, a prize to
gain. That'll keep me at it. I know what I'll do. When I've had enough
of New York, I'll rent a place in the country--some old farmhouse--and
live alone there and work. (_Lost in his own plans--with pleasure._)
That's the right idea, isn't it?

EILEEN (_trying to appear enthused_). It ought to be fine for your
work. (_After a pause._) They're fine, those stories you wrote here.
They're--so much like you. I'd know it was you wrote them even if--I
didn't know.

MURRAY (_pleased_). Wait till you read the others I'm going to do!
(_After a slight pause--with a good-natured grin._) Here I am talking
about myself again! Why don't you call me down when I start that
drivel? But you don't know how good it is to have your dreams coming
true. It'd make an egotist out of anyone.

EILEEN (_sadly_). No. I don't know. But I love to hear you talk of
yours.

MURRAY (_with an embarrassed laugh_). Thanks. Well, I've certainly told
you all of them. You're the only one---- (_He stops and abruptly
changes the subject._) You said in your note that you had something
important to tell me. (_He sits down beside her, crossing his legs._)
Is it about your interview with Old Mrs. Grundy this afternoon?

EILEEN. No, that didn't amount to anything. She seemed mad because I
told her so little. I think she guessed I only told her what I did so
she'd let me stay up, maybe--your last day,--and to keep her from
thinking what she did--about us.

MURRAY (_quickly, as if he wishes to avoid this subject_). What is it
you wanted to tell me, then?

EILEEN (_sadly_). It doesn't seem so important now, somehow. I suppose
it was silly of me to drag you out here, just for that. It can't mean
anything to you--much.

MURRAY (_encouragingly_). How do you know it can't?

EILEEN (_slowly_). I only thought--you might like to know.

MURRAY (_interestedly_). Know what? What is it? If I can help----

EILEEN. No. (_After a moment's hesitation._) I wrote to him this
afternoon.

MURRAY. Him?

EILEEN. The letter you've been advising me to write.

MURRAY (_as if the knowledge of this alarmed him--haltingly_). You
mean--Fred Nicholls?

EILEEN. Yes.

MURRAY (_after a pause--uncomfortably_). You mean--you broke it all
off?

EILEEN. Yes--for good. (_She looks up at his averted face. He remains
silent. She continues apprehensively._) You don't say anything. I
thought--you'd be glad. You've always told me it was the honourable
thing to do.

MURRAY (_gruffly_). I know. I say more than my prayers, damn it! (_With
sudden eagerness._) Have you mailed the letter yet?

EILEEN. Yes. Why?

MURRAY (_shortly_). Humph. Oh--nothing.

EILEEN (_with pained disappointment_). Oh, Stephen, you don't think I
did wrong, do you--now--after all you've said?

MURRAY (_hurriedly_). Wrong? No, not if you were convinced it was the
right thing to do yourself--if you know you don't love him. But I'd
hate to think you did it just on my advice. I shouldn't---- I didn't
mean to interfere. I don't know enough about your relations for my
opinion to count.

EILEEN (_hurt_). You know all there is to know.

MURRAY. I didn't mean--anything like that. I know you've been frank.
But him--I don't know him. How could I, just meeting him once? He may
be quite different from my idea. That's what I'm getting at. I don't
want to be unfair to him.

EILEEN (_bitterly scornful_). You needn't worry. You weren't unfair.
And you needn't be afraid you were responsible for my writing. I'd been
going to for a long time before you ever spoke.

MURRAY (_with a relieved sigh_). I'm glad of that--honestly, Eileen. I
felt guilty. I shouldn't have knocked him behind his back without
knowing him at all.

EILEEN. You said you could read him like a book from his letters I
showed you.

MURRAY (_apologetically_). I know. I'm a fool.

EILEEN (_angrily_). What makes you so considerate of Fred Nicholls all
of a sudden? What you thought about him was right.

MURRAY (_vaguely_). I don't know. One makes mistakes.

EILEEN (_assertively_). Well, I know! You needn't waste pity on him.
He'll be only too glad to get my letter. He's been anxious to be free
of me ever since I was sent here, only he thought it wouldn't be decent
to break it off himself while I was sick. He was afraid of what people
would say about him when they found it out. So he's just gradually
stopped writing and coming for visits, and waited for me to realise.
And if I didn't, I know he'd have broken it off himself the first day I
got home. I've kept persuading myself that, in spite of the way he's
acted, he did love me as much as he could love anyone, and that it
would hurt him if I---- But now I know that he never loved me, that he
couldn't love anyone but himself. Oh, I don't hate him for it. He can't
help being what he is. And all people seem to be--like that, mostly.
I'm only going to remember that he and I grew up together, and that he
was kind to me then when he thought he liked me--and forget all the
rest. (_With agitated impatience._) Oh, Stephen, you know all this I've
said about him. Why don't you admit it? You've read his letters.

MURRAY (_haltingly_). Yes, I'll admit that was my opinion--only I
wanted to be sure you'd found out for yourself.

EILEEN (_defiantly_). Well, I have! You see that now, don't you?

MURRAY. Yes; and I'm glad you're free of him, for your own sake. I knew
he wasn't the person. (_With an attempt at a joking tone._) You must
get one of the right sort--next time.

EILEEN (_springing to her feet with a cry of pain_). Stephen!

      (_He avoids her eyes, which search his face pleadingly._)

MURRAY (_mumbling_). He wasn't good enough--to lace your shoes--nor
anyone else, either.

EILEEN (_with a nervous laugh_). Don't be silly. (_After a pause,
during which she waits hungrily for some word from him--with a sigh of
despair--faintly._) Well, I've told you--all there is. I might as well
go back.

MURRAY (_not looking at her--indistinctly_). Yes. You mustn't lose too
much sleep. I'll come to your cottage in the morning to say good-bye.
They'll permit that, I guess.

EILEEN (_stands looking at him imploringly, her face convulsed with
anguish, but he keeps his eyes fixed on the rocks at his feet. Finally
she seems to give up and takes a few uncertain steps up the road
towards the right--in an exhausted whisper_). Good night, Stephen.

MURRAY (_his voice choked and husky_). Good night, Eileen.

EILEEN (_walks weakly up the road, but, as she passes the signpost, she
suddenly stops and turns to look again at_ Murray, _who has not moved
or lifted his eyes. A great shuddering sob shatters her pent-up
emotions. She runs back to_ Murray, _her arms outstretched, with a
choking cry_). Stephen!

MURRAY (_startled, whirls to face her and finds her arms thrown around
his neck--in a terrified tone_). Eileen!

EILEEN (_brokenly_). I love you, Stephen--you! That's what I wanted to
tell!

      (_She gazes up into his eyes, her face transfigured by the joy
      and pain of this abject confession._)

MURRAY (_wincing as if this were the thing he had feared to hear_).
Eileen!

EILEEN (_pulling down his head with fierce strength and kissing him
passionately on the lips_). I love you! I will say it! There! (_With
sudden horror._) Oh, I know I shouldn't kiss you! I mustn't! You're
all well--and I----

MURRAY (_protesting frenziedly_). Eileen! Damn it! Don't say that! What
do you think I am!

      (_He kisses her fiercely two or three times until she forces a
      hand over her mouth._)

EILEEN (_with a hysterically happy laugh_). No! Just hold me in your
arms--just a little while--before----

MURRAY (_his voice trembling_). Eileen! Don't talk that way!
You're--it's killing me. I can't stand it!

EILEEN (_with soothing tenderness_). Listen, dear--listen--and you
won't say a word--I've so much to say--till I get through--please, will
you promise?

MURRAY (_between clinched teeth_). Yes--anything, Eileen!

EILEEN. Then I want to say--I know your secret. You don't love
me--Isn't that it? (Murray _groans._) Sssh! It's all right, dear. You
can't help what you don't feel. I've guessed you didn't--right along.
And I've loved you--such a long time now--always, it seems. And you've
sort of guessed--that I did--didn't you? No, don't speak! I'm sure
you've guessed--only you didn't want to know--that--did you?--when you
didn't love me. That's why you were lying--but I saw, I knew! Oh, I'm
not blaming you, darling. How could I--never! You mustn't look so--so
frightened. I know how you felt, dear. I've--I've watched you. It was
just a flirtation for you at first. Wasn't it? Oh, I know. It was just
fun, and---- Please don't look at me so. I'm not hurting you, am I? I
wouldn't for worlds, dear--you know--hurt you! And then afterwards--you
found we could be such good friends--helping each other--and you wanted
it to stay just like that always, didn't you?--I know--and then I had
to spoil it all--and fall in love with you--didn't I? Oh, it was
stupid--I shouldn't--I couldn't help it, you were so kind and--and
different--and I wanted to share in your work and--and everything. I
knew you wouldn't want to know I loved you--when you didn't--and I
tried hard to be fair and hide my love so you wouldn't see--and I did,
didn't I, dear? You never knew till just lately--maybe not till just
to-day--did you?--when I knew you were going away so soon--and couldn't
help showing it. You never knew before, did you? Did you?

MURRAY (_miserably_). No. Oh, Eileen--Eileen, I'm so sorry!

EILEEN (_in heart-broken protest_). Sorry? Oh, no, Stephen, you mustn't
be! It's been beautiful--all of it--for me! That's what makes your
going--so hard. I had to see you to-night--I'd have gone--crazy--if I
didn't know you knew, if I hadn't made you guess. And I thought--if you
knew about my writing to Fred--that--maybe--it'd make some difference.
(Murray _groans--and she laughs hysterically._) I must have been
crazy--to think that--mustn't I? As if that could--when you don't love
me. Sshh! Please! Let me finish. You mustn't feel sad--or anything.
It's made me happier than I've ever been--loving you--even when I did
know--you didn't. Only now--you'll forgive me telling you all this,
won't you, dear? Now, it's so terrible to think I won't see you any
more. I'll feel so--without anybody.

MURRAY (_brokenly_). But I'll--come back. And you'll be out soon--and
then----

EILEEN (_brokenly_). Sshh! Let me finish. You don't know how alone I am
now. Father--he'll marry that housekeeper--and the children--they've
forgotten me. None of them need me any more. They've found out how to
get on without me--and I'm a drag--dead to them--no place for me home
any more--and they'll be afraid to have me back--afraid of catching--I
know she won't want me back. And Fred--he's gone--he never mattered,
anyway. Forgive me, dear--worrying you--only I want you to know how
much you've meant to me--so you won't forget--ever--after you've gone.

MURRAY (_in grief-stricken tones_). Forget? Eileen! I'll do anything in
God's world----

EILEEN. I know--you like me a lot even if you can't love me--don't you?
(_His arms tighten about her as he bends down and forces a kiss on her
lips again._) Oh, Stephen! That was for good-bye. You mustn't come
to-morrow morning. I couldn't bear having you--with people watching.
But you'll write after--often--won't you? (_Heart-brokenly._) Oh,
please do that, Stephen!

MURRAY. I will! I swear! And when you get out I'll--we'll--I'll find
something. (_He kisses her again._)

EILEEN (_breaking away from him with a quick movement and stepping back
a few feet_). Good-bye, darling. Remember me--and perhaps--you'll find
out after a time--I'll pray God to make it so! Oh, what am I saying?
Only--I'll hope--I'll hope--till I die!

MURRAY (_in anguish_). Eileen!

EILEEN (_her breath coming in tremulous heaves of her bosom_).
Remember, Stephen--if ever you want--I'll do anything--anything you
want--no matter what--I don't care--there's just you and--don't hate
me, dear. I love you--love you--remember! (_She suddenly turns and runs
away up the road._)

MURRAY. Eileen! (_He starts to run after her, but stops by the signpost
and stamps on the ground furiously, his fists clenched in impotent rage
at himself and at fate. He curses hoarsely._) Christ!


THE CURTAIN FALLS




Act Three


    _Four months later. An isolation room at the Infirmary with a
    sleeping porch at the right of it. Late afternoon of a Sunday
    towards the end of October. The room, extending two-thirds of the
    distance from left to right, is, for reasons of space economy,
    scantily furnished with the bare necessities--a bureau with mirror
    in the left corner, rear--two straight-backed chairs--a table with
    a glass top in the centre. The floor is varnished hardwood. The
    walls and furniture are painted white. On the left, forward, a door
    to the hall. On the right, rear, a double glass door opening on the
    porch. Farther front two windows. The porch, a screened-in
    continuation of the room, contains only a single iron bed, painted
    white, and a small table placed beside the bed._

    _The woods, the leaves of the trees rich in their autumn colouring,
    rise close about this side of the Infirmary. Their branches almost
    touch the porch on the right. In the rear of the porch they have
    been cleared away from the building for a narrow space, and through
    this opening the distant hills can be seen with the tree tops
    glowing in the sunlight._

    _As the curtain rises,_ Eileen _is discovered lying in the bed on
    the porch, propped up into a half-sitting position by pillows under
    her back and head. She seems to have grown much thinner. Her face
    is pale and drawn, with deep hollows under her cheek-bones. Her
    eyes are dull and lustreless. She gazes straight before her into
    the wood with the unseeing stare of apathetic indifference. The
    door from the hall in the room behind her is opened, and_ Miss
    Howard _enters, followed by_ Bill Carmody, Mrs. Brennan, _and_
    Mary. Carmody's _manner is unwontedly sober and subdued. This air
    of respectable sobriety is further enhanced by a black suit,
    glaringly new and stiffly pressed, a new black derby hat, and shoes
    polished like a mirror. His expression is full of a bitter, if
    suppressed, resentment. His gentility is evidently forced upon him
    in spite of himself and correspondingly irksome._ Mrs. Brennan _is
    a tall, stout woman of fifty, lusty and loud-voiced, with a broad,
    snub-nosed, florid face, a large mouth, the upper lip darkened by a
    suggestion of moustache, and little round blue eyes, hard and
    restless with a continual fuming irritation. She is got up
    regardless in her ridiculous Sunday-best._ Mary _appears tall and
    skinny-legged in a starched, outgrown frock. The sweetness of her
    face has disappeared, giving way to a hang-dog sullenness, a
    stubborn silence, with sulky, furtive glances of rebellion directed
    at her step-mother._

MISS HOWARD (_pointing to the porch_). She's out there on the porch.

MRS. BRENNAN (_with dignity_). Thank you, ma'am.

MISS HOWARD (_with a searching glance at the visitors as if to appraise
their intentions_). Eileen's been very sick lately, you know, so be
careful not to worry her about anything. Do your best to cheer her up.

CARMODY (_mournfully_). We'll try to put life in her spirits, God help
her. (_With an uncertain look at_ Mrs. Brennan.) Won't we, Maggie?

MRS. BRENNAN (_turning sharply on_ Mary, _who has gone over to examine
the things on the bureau_). Come away from that, Mary. Curiosity killed
a cat. Don't be touchin' her things. Remember what I told you. Or is it
admirin' your mug in the mirror you are? (_Turning to_ Miss Howard _as_
Mary _moves away from the bureau, hanging her head--shortly._) Don't
you worry, ma'am. We won't trouble Eileen at all.

MISS HOWARD. Another thing. You mustn't say anything to her of what
Miss Gilpin just told you about her being sent away to the State Farm
in a few days. Eileen isn't to know till the very last minute. It would
only disturb her.

CARMODY (_hastily_). We'll not say a word of it.

MISS HOWARD (_turning to the hall door_). Thank you.

      (_She goes out, shutting the door._)

MRS. BRENNAN (_angrily_). She has a lot of impudent gab, that one, with
her don't do this and don't do that! It's a wonder you wouldn't speak
up to her and shut her mouth, you great fool, and you payin' money to
give her her job. (_Disgustedly._) You've no guts in you.

CARMODY (_placatingly_). Would you have me raisin' a shindy when
Eileen's leavin' here in a day or more? What'd be the use?

MRS. BRENNAN. In the new place she's goin' you'll not have to pay a
cent, and that's a blessing! It's small good they've done her here for
all the money they've taken. (_Gazing about the room critically._) It's
neat and clean enough; and why shouldn't it, a tiny room and the lot of
them nothing to do all day but scrub. (_Scornfully._) Two sticks of
chairs and a table! They don't give much for the money.

CARMODY. Catch them! It's a good thing she's clearin' out of this, and
her worse off after them curin' her eight months than she was when she
came. She'll maybe get well in the new place.

MRS. BRENNAN (_indifferently_). It's God's will, what'll happen.
(_Irritably._) And I'm thinkin' it's His punishment she's under now for
having no heart in her and never writin' home a word to you or the
children in two months or more. If the doctor hadn't wrote us himself
to come see her, she was sick, we'd have been no wiser.

CARMODY. Whisht! Don't be blamin' a sick girl.

MARY (_who has drifted to one of the windows at right--curiously_).
There's somebody in bed out there. I can't see her face. Is it Eileen?

MRS. BRENNAN. Don't be goin' out there till I tell you, you imp! I must
speak to your father first. (_Coming closer to him and lowering her
voice._) Are you going to tell her about it?

CARMODY (_pretending ignorance_). About what?

MRS. BRENNAN. About what, indeed! Don't pretend you don't know. About
our marryin' two weeks back, of course. What else?

CARMODY (_uncertainly_). Yes--I disremembered she didn't know. I'll
have to tell her, surely.

MRS. BRENNAN (_flaring up_). You speak like you wouldn't. Is it shamed
of me you are? Are you afraid of a slip of a girl? Well, then, I'm not!
I'll tell her to her face soon enough.

CARMODY (_angry in his turn--assertively_). You'll not, now! Keep your
mouth out of this and your rough tongue! I tell you I'll tell her.

MRS. BRENNAN (_satisfied_). Let's be going out to her, then. (_They
move towards the door to the porch._) And keep your eye on your watch.
We mustn't miss the train. Come with us, Mary, and remember to keep
your mouth shut.

      (_They go out on the porch and stand just outside the door
      waiting for_ Eileen _to notice them; but the girl in bed
      continues to stare into the woods, oblivious to their presence._)

MRS. BRENNAN (_nudging_ Carmody _with her elbow--in a harsh whisper_).
She don't see us. It's a dream she's in with her eyes open. Glory be,
it's bad she's lookin'. The look on her face'd frighten you. Speak to
her, you!

      (Eileen _stirs uneasily as if this whisper had disturbed her
      unconsciously._)

CARMODY (_wetting his lips and clearing his throat huskily_). Eileen.

EILEEN (_startled, turns and stares at them with frightened eyes. After
a pause she ventures uncertainly, as if she were not sure hut what
these figures might be creatures of her dream_). Father. (_Her eyes
shift to_ Mrs. Brennan's _face and she shudders._) Mrs. Brennan.

MRS. BRENNAN (_quickly--in a voice meant to be kindly_). Here we are,
all of us, come to see you. How is it you're feelin' now, Eileen?

      (_While she is talking she advances to the bedside, followed by_
      Carmody, _and takes one of the sick girl's hands in hers._ Eileen
      _withdraws it as if stung and holds it out to her father._ Mrs.
      Brennan's _face flushes angrily and she draws back from the
      bedside._)

CARMODY (_moved--with rough tenderness patting her hand_). Ah, Eileen,
sure it's a sight for sore eyes to see you again! (_He bends down as if
to kiss her, but, struck by a sudden fear, hesitates, straightens
himself, and shamed by the understanding in_ Eileen's _eyes, grows red
and stammers confusedly._) How are you now? Sure it's the picture of
health you're lookin'.

      (Eileen _sighs and turns her eyes away from him with a resigned
      sadness._)

MRS. BRENNAN. What are you standin' there for like a stick, Mary?
Haven't you a word to say to your sister?

EILEEN (_twisting her head around and seeing_ Mary _for the first
time--with a glad cry_). Mary! I--why, I didn't see you before! Come
here.

      (Mary _approaches gingerly with apprehensive side glances at_
      Mrs. Brennan, _who watches her grimly._ Eileen's _arms reach out
      for her hungrily. She grasps her about the waist and seems trying
      to press the unwilling child to her breast._)

MARY (_fidgeting nervously--suddenly in a frightened whine_). Let me
go! (Eileen _releases her, looks at her face dazedly for a second, then
falls back limply with a little moan and shuts her eyes._ Mary, _who
has stepped back a pace, remains fixed there as if fascinated with
fright by her sister's face. She stammers._) Eileen--you look so--so
funny.

EILEEN (_without opening her eyes--in a dead voice_). You, too! I never
thought you---- Go away, please.

MRS. BRENNAN (_with satisfaction_). Come here to me, Mary, and don't be
botherin' your sister.

      (Mary _avoids her step-mother, but retreats to the far end of the
      porch where she stands shrunk back against the wall, her eyes
      fixed on_ Eileen _with the same fascinated horror._)

CARMODY (_after an uncomfortable pause, forcing himself to speak_). Is
the pain bad, Eileen?

EILEEN (_dully--without opening her eyes_). There's no pain. (_There is
another pause--then she murmurs indifferently._) There are chairs in
the room you can bring out if you want to sit down.

MRS. BRENNAN (_sharply_). We've not time to be sittin'. We've the train
back to catch.

EILEEN (_in the same lifeless voice_). It's a disagreeable trip. I'm
sorry you had to come.

CARMODY (_fighting against an oppression he cannot understand, bursts
into a flood of words_). Don't be talking of the trip. Sure we're glad
to take it to get a sight of you. It's three months since I've had a
look at you, and I was anxious. Why haven't you written a line to us?
You could do that without trouble, surely. Don't you ever think of us
at all any more? (_He waits for an answer, but_ Eileen _remains silent
with her eyes closed._ Carmody _starts to walk up and down, talking
with an air of desperation._) You're not asking a bit of news from
home. I'm thinkin' the people out here have taken all the thought of us
out of your head. We're all well, thank God. I've another good job on
the streets from Murphy and one that'll last a long time, praise be!
I'm needin' it surely, with all the expenses--but no matter. Billy had
a raise from his old skinflint of a boss a month back. He's gettin'
seven a week now and proud as a turkey. He was comin' out with us
to-day, but he'd a date with his girl. Sure, he's got a girl now, the
young bucko! What d'you think of him? It's old Malloy's girl he's
after--the pop-eyed one with glasses, you remember--as ugly as a blind
sheep, only he don't think so. He said to give you his love. (Eileen
_stirs and sighs wearily, a frown appearing for an instant on her
forehead._) And Tom and Nora was comin' out too, but Father Fitz had
some doin's or other up to the school, and he told them to be there, so
they wouldn't come with us, but they sent their love to you, too.
They're growin' so big you'd not know them. Tom's no good at the
school. He's like Billy was. I've had to take the strap to him often.
He's always playin' hooky and roamin' the streets. And Nora. (_With
pride._) There's the divil for you! Up to everything she is and no
holdin' her high spirits. As pretty as a picture, and the smartest girl
in her school, Father Fitz says. Am I lyin', Maggie?

MRS. BRENNAN (_grudgingly_). She's smart enough--and too free with her
smartness.

CARMODY (_pleased_). Ah, don't be talkin'! She'll know more than the
lot of us before she's grown even. (_He pauses in his walk and stares
down at_ Eileen, _frowning._) Are you sick, Eileen, that you're keepin'
your eyes shut without a word out of you?

EILEEN (_wearily_). No. I'm tired, that's all.

CARMODY (_resuming his walk_). And who else is there, let me think? Oh,
Mary--she's the same as ever, you can see for yourself.

EILEEN (_bitterly_). The same? Oh, no!

CARMODY. She's grown, you mean? I suppose. You'd notice, not seeing her
so long?

      (_He can think of nothing else to say, but walks up and down with
      a restless, uneasy expression._)

MRS. BRENNAN (_sharply_). What time is it gettin'?

CARMODY (_fumbles for his watch_). Half-past four, a bit after.

MRS. BRENNAN. We'll have to leave soon. It's a long jaunt down that
hill in that buggy.

      (_She catches his eye and makes violent signs to him to tell_
      Eileen _what he has come to tell._)

CARMODY (_after an uncertain pause--clenching his fists and clearing
his throat_). Eileen.

EILEEN. Yes.

CARMODY (_irritably_). Can't you open your eyes on me? It's like
talkin' to myself I am.

EILEEN (_looking at him--dully_). What is it?

CARMODY (_stammering--avoiding her glance_). It's this, Eileen--me and
Maggie--Mrs. Brennan, that is--we----

EILEEN (_without surprise_). You're going to marry her?

CARMODY (_with an effort_). Not goin' to. It's done.

EILEEN (_without a trace of feeling_). Oh, so you've been married
already?

      (_Without further comment, she closes her eyes._)

CARMODY. Two weeks back we were, by Father Fitz.

      (_He stands staring down at his daughter, irritated, perplexed
      and confounded by her silence, looking as if he longed to shake
      her._)

MRS. BRENNAN (_angry at the lack of enthusiasm shown by_ Eileen). Let
us get out of this, Bill. We're not wanted, that's plain as the nose on
your face. It's little she's caring about you, and little thanks she
has for all you've done for her and the money you've spent.

CARMODY (_with a note of pleading_). Is that a proper way to be
treatin' your father, Eileen, after what I've told you? Have you no
heart in you at all? Is it nothin' to you you've a good, kind woman now
for mother?

EILEEN (_fiercely, her eyes flashing open on him_). No, no! Never!

MRS. BRENNAN (_plucking at_ Carmody's _elbow. He stands looking at_
Eileen _helplessly, his mouth open, a guilty flush spreading over his
face_). Come out of here, you big fool, you! Is it to listen to insults
to your livin' wife you're waiting? Am I to be tormented and you never
raise a hand to stop her?

CARMODY (_turning on her threateningly_). Will you shut your gab?

EILEEN (_with a moan_). Oh, go away, Father! Please! Take her away!

MRS. BRENNAN (_pulling at his arm_). Take me away this second or I'll
go on without you and never speak again to you till the day I die!

CARMODY (_pushes her violently away from him--his fist uplifted_). Shut
your gab, I'm saying!

MRS. BRENNAN. The divil mend you and yours then! I'm leavin' you. (_She
starts for the door._)

CARMODY (_hastily_). Wait a bit, Maggie. I'm comin'. (_She goes into
the room, slamming the door, but once inside she stands still, trying
to listen._ Carmody _glares down at his daughter's pale twitching face
with the closed eyes. Finally he croaks in a whining tone of fear._) Is
your last word a cruel one to me this day, Eileen?

      (_She remains silent. His face darkens. He turns and strides out
      of the door._ Mary _darts after him with a frightened cry of
      "Papa."_ Eileen _covers her face with her hands and a shudder of
      relief runs over her body._)

MRS. BRENNAN (_as_ Carmody _enters the room--in a mollified tone_). So
you've come, have you? Let's go, then? (Carmody _stands looking at her
in silence, his expression full of gloomy rage. She bursts out
impatiently._) Are you comin' or are you goin' back to her? (_She
grabs_ Mary's _arm and pushes her towards, the door to the hall._) Are
you comin' or not, I'm askin'?

CARMODY (_sombrely--as if to himself_). There's something wrong in the
whole of this--that I can't make out. (_With sudden fury he brandishes
his fists as though defying someone and growls threateningly._) And
I'll get drunk this night--dead, rotten drunk! (_He seems to detect
disapproval in_ Mrs. Brennan's _face, for he shakes his fist at her and
repeats like a solemn oath._) I'll get drunk this night, I'm sayin'!
I'll get drunk if my soul roasts for it--and no one in the whole world
is strong enough to stop me!

      (Mrs. Brennan _turns from him with a disgusted shrug of her
      shoulders and hustles_ Mary _out of the door._ Carmody, _after a
      second's pause, follows them._ Eileen _lies still, looking out
      into the woods with empty, desolate eyes._ Miss Howard _comes
      into the room from the hall and goes to the porch, carrying a
      glass of milk in her hand._)

MISS HOWARD. Here's your diet, Eileen. I forgot it until just now.
Sundays are awful days, aren't they? They get me all mixed up in my
work, with all these visitors around. Did you have a nice visit with
your folks?

EILEEN (_forcing a smile_). Yes.

MISS HOWARD. You look worn out. I hope they didn't worry you over home
affairs?

EILEEN. No.

      (_She sips her milk and sets it back on the table with a shudder
      of disgust._)

MISS HOWARD (_with a smile_). What a face! You'd think you were taking
poison.

EILEEN. I hate it! (_With deep passion._) I wish it was poison!

MISS HOWARD (_jokingly_). Oh, come now! That isn't a nice way to feel
on the Sabbath. (_With a meaning smile._) I've some news that'll cheer
you up, I bet. (_Archly._) Guess who's here on a visit?

EILEEN (_startled--in a frightened whisper_). Who?

MISS HOWARD. Mr. Murray. (Eileen _closes her eyes wincingly for a
moment and a shadow of pain comes over her face._) He just came about
the time your folks did. I saw him for a moment, not to speak to. He
was going to the main building--to see Doctor Stanton, I suppose.
(_Beaming--with a certain curiosity._) What do you think of that for
news?

EILEEN (_trying to conceal her agitation and assume a casual tone_). He
must have come to be examined.

MISS HOWARD (_with a meaning laugh_). Oh, I'd hardly say that was his
main reason. He does look much thinner and very tired, though. I
suppose he's been working too hard. (_In business-like tones._) Well,
I've got to get back on the job. (_She turns to the door calling back
jokingly._) He'll be in to see you, of course, so look your prettiest.

      (_She goes out and shuts the door to the porch._ Eileen _gives a
      frightened gasp and struggles up in bed as if she wanted to call
      the nurse to return. Then she lies back in a state of great
      nervous excitement, twisting her head with eager, fearful glances
      towards the door, listening, clasping and unclasping her thin
      fingers on the white spread. As_ Miss Howard _walks across the
      room to the hall door, it is opened and_ Stephen Murray _enters.
      A great change is visible in his face. It is much thinner and the
      former healthy tan has faded to a sallow pallor. Puffy shadows of
      sleeplessness and dissipation are marked under his heavy-lidded
      eyes. He is dressed in a well-fitting, expensive dark suit, a
      white shirt with a soft collar and bright-coloured tie._)

MISS HOWARD (_with pleased surprise, holding out her hand_). Hello, Mr.
Murray.

MURRAY (_shaking her hand--with a forced pleasantness_). How are you,
Miss Howard?

MISS HOWARD. Fine as ever. It certainly looks natural to see you around
here again--not that I hope you're here to stay, though. (_With a
smile._) I suppose you're on your way to Eileen now. Well, I won't keep
you. I've stacks of work to do. (_She opens the hall door. He starts
for the porch._) Oh, I was forgetting--Congratulations! I've read those
stories--all of us have. They're great. We're all so proud of you.
You're one of our graduates, you know.

MURRAY (_indifferently_). Oh,--that stuff.

MISS HOWARD (_gaily_). Don't be so modest. Well, see you later, I hope.

MURRAY. Yes. Doctor Stanton invited me to stay for supper and I may----

MISS HOWARD. Fine! Be sure to!

      (_She goes out._ Murray _walks to porch door and steps out. He
      finds_ Eileen's _eyes waiting for him. As their eyes meet she
      gasps involuntarily and he stops short in his tracks. For a
      moment they remain looking at each other in silence._)

EILEEN (_dropping her eyes--faintly_). Stephen.

MURRAY (_much moved, strides to her bedside and takes her hands
awkwardly_). Eileen. (_Then after a second's pause, in which he
searches her face and is shocked by the change illness has
made--anxiously._) How are you feeling, Eileen? (_He grows confused
by her gaze and his eyes shift from hers, which search his face with
wild yearning._)

EILEEN (_forcing a smile_). Oh, I'm all right. (_Eagerly._) But you,
Stephen? How are you? (_Excitedly._) Oh, it's good to see you again!
(_Her eyes continue fixed on his face pleadingly, questioningly._)

MURRAY (_haltingly_). And it's sure great to see you again, Eileen.
(_He releases her hand and turns away._) And I'm fine and dandy. I
look a little done up, I guess, but that's only the result of too much
New York.

      (Eileen, _sensing from his manner that whatever she has hoped for
      from his visit is not to be, sinks back on the pillows, shutting
      her eyes hopelessly, and cannot control a sigh of pain._)

MURRAY (_turning to her anxiously_). What's the matter, Eileen? You're
not in pain, are you?

EILEEN (_wearily_). No.

MURRAY. You haven't been feeling badly lately, have you? Your letters
suddenly stopped--not a line for the past three weeks--and I----

EILEEN (_bitterly_). I got tired of writing and never getting any
answer, Stephen.

MURRAY (_shame-faced_). Come, Eileen, it wasn't as bad as that. You'd
think I never--and I did write, didn't I?

EILEEN. Right after you left here, you did, Stephen. Lately----

MURRAY. I'm sorry, Eileen. It wasn't that I didn't mean to--but--in New
York it's so hard. You start to do one thing and something else
interrupts you. You never seem to get any one thing done when it ought
to be. You can understand that, can't you, Eileen?

EILEEN (_sadly_). Yes. I understand everything now.

MURRAY (_offended_). What do you mean by everything? You said that so
strangely. You mean you don't believe---- (_But she remains silent with
her eyes shut. He frowns and takes to pacing up and down beside the
bed._) Why have they got you stuck out here on this isolation porch,
Eileen?

EILEEN (_dully_). There was no room on the main porch, I suppose.

MURRAY. You never mentioned in any of your letters----

EILEEN. It's not very cheerful to get letters full of sickness. I
wouldn't like to, I know.

MURRAY (_hurt_). That isn't fair, Eileen. You know I---- How long have
you been back in the Infirmary?

EILEEN. About a month.

MURRAY (_shocked_). A month! But you were up and about--on exercise,
weren't you--before that?

EILEEN. No. I had to stay in bed while I was at the cottage.

MURRAY. You mean--ever since that time they sent you back--the day
before I left?

EILEEN. Yes.

MURRAY. But I thought from the cheery tone of your letters that you
were----

EILEEN (_uneasily_). Getting better? I am, Stephen. I'm strong enough
to be up now, but Doctor Stanton wants me to take a good long rest this
time so that when I do get up again I'll be sure---- (_She breaks off
impatiently._) But don't let's talk about it. I'm all right. (Murray
_glances down at her face worriedly. She changes the subject._) You've
been over to see Doctor Stanton, haven't you?

MURRAY. Yes.

EILEEN. Did he examine you?

MURRAY. Yes. (_Carelessly._) Oh, he found me O.K. I'm fine and dandy,
as I said before.

EILEEN. I'm glad, Stephen. (_After a pause._) Tell about yourself--what
you've been doing. You've written a lot lately, haven't you?

MURRAY (_frowning_). No. I haven't been able to get down to
it--somehow. There's so little time to yourself once you get to know
people in New York. The sale of the stories you typed put me on easy
street as far as money goes, so I've felt no need---- (_He laughs
weakly._) I guess I'm one of those who have to get down to hard pan
before they get the kick to drive them to hard work.

EILEEN (_surprised_). Was it hard work writing them up here? You used
to seem so happy just in doing them.

MURRAY. I was--happier than I've been before or afterwards.
(_Cynically._) But--I don't know--it was a new game to me then and I
was chuck full of illusions about the glory of it. (_He laughs
half-heartedly._) Now I'm hardly a bit more enthusiastic over it than I
used to be over newspaper work. It's like everything else, I guess.
When you've got it, you find you don't want it.

EILEEN (_looking at him wonderingly--disturbed_). But isn't just the
writing itself worth while?

MURRAY (_as if suddenly ashamed of himself--quickly_). Yes. Of course
it is. I'm talking like a fool. I'm sore at everything because I'm
dissatisfied with my own cussedness and laziness--and I want to pass
the buck. (_With a smile of cheerful confidence._) It's only a fit.
I'll come out of it all right and get down to brass tacks again.

EILEEN (_with an encouraging smile_). That's the way you ought to feel.
It'd be wrong--I've read the two stories that have come out so far over
and over. They're fine, I think. Every line in them sounds like you,
and at the same time sounds natural and like people and things you see
every day. Everybody thinks they're fine, Stephen.

MURRAY (_pleased, but pretending cynicism_). Then they must be rotten.
(_Then with self-assurance._) Well, I've plenty more of those stories
in my head. Every time I think of my home town there seems to be a new
story in someone I've known there. (_Spiritedly._) Oh, I'll pound them
out some time when the spirit moves; and I'll make them so much better
than what I've done so far, you won't recognise them. I feel it's in
me to do it. (_Smiling._) Darn it, do you know just talking about it
makes me feel as if I could sit right down now and start in on one.
Is it the fact I've worked here before--or is it seeing you, Eileen.
(_Gratefully._) I really believe it's you. I haven't forgotten how you
helped me before.

EILEEN (_in a tone of pain_). Don't, Stephen. I didn't do anything.

MURRAY (_eagerly_). Yes, you did. You made it possible. I can't tell
you what a help you were. And since I've left the San, I've looked
forward to your letters to boost up my spirits. When I felt down in the
mouth over my own idiocy, I used to re-read them, and they always were
good medicine. I can't tell you how grateful I've felt, honestly!

EILEEN (_faintly_). You're kind to say so, Stephen--but it was nothing,
really.

MURRAY. And I can't tell you how I've missed those letters for the past
three weeks. They left a big hole in things. I was worried about
you--not having heard a word. (_With a smile._) So I came to look you
up.

EILEEN (_faintly. Forcing an answering smile_). Well, you see now I'm
all right.

MURRAY (_concealing his doubt_). Yes, of course you are. Only I'd a
darn sight rather see you up and about. We could take a walk,
then--through the woods. (_A wince of pain shadows_ Eileen's _face. She
closes her eyes_. Murray _continues softly, after a pause._) You
haven't forgotten that last night--out there--Eileen?

EILEEN (_her lips trembling--trying to force a laugh_). Please don't
remind me of that, Stephen. I was so silly and so sick, too. My temp
was so high it must have made me--completely crazy--or I'd never
dreamed of doing such a stupid thing. My head must have been full of
wheels because I don't remember anything I did or said, hardly.

MURRAY (_his pride taken down a peg by this--in a hurt tone_). Oh!
Well--I haven't forgotten and I never will, Eileen. (_Then his face
clears up as if a weight had been taken off his conscience._) Well--I
rather thought you wouldn't take it seriously--afterwards. You were all
up in the air that night. And you never mentioned it in your
letters----

EILEEN (_pleadingly_). Don't talk about it! Forget it ever happened. It
makes me feel--(_with a half-hysterical laugh_)--like a fool!

MURRAY (_worried_). All right, Eileen. I won't. Don't get worked up
over nothing. That isn't resting, you know. (_Looking down at her
closed eyes--solicitously._) Perhaps all my talking has tired you out?
Do you feel done up? Why don't you try and take a nap now?

EILEEN (_dully_). Yes, I'd like to sleep.

MURRAY (_clasps her hands gently_). I'll leave you then, I'll drop back
to say good-bye and stay awhile before I go. I won't leave until the
last train. (_As she doesn't answer._) Do you hear, Eileen?

EILEEN (_weakly_). Yes. You'll come back--to say good-bye.

MURRAY. Yes. I'll be back sure.

      (_He presses her hand and after a kindly glance of sympathy down
      at her face, tiptoes to the door and goes into the room, shutting
      the door behind him. When she hears the door shut Eileen
      struggles up in bed and stretches her arms after him with an
      agonised sob "Stephen!" She hides her face in her hands and sobs
      brokenly._ Murray _walks across to the hall door and is about to
      go out when the door is opened and_ Miss Gilpin _enters._)

MISS GILPIN (_hurriedly_). How do you do, Mr. Murray. Doctor Stanton
just told me you were here.

MURRAY (_as they shake hands--smiling_). How are you, Miss Gilpin?

MISS GILPIN. He said he'd examined you, and that you were O.K. I'm
glad. (_Glancing at him keenly._) You've been talking to Eileen?

MURRAY. Just left her this second. She wanted to sleep for a while.

MISS GILPIN (_wonderingly_). Sleep? (_Then hurriedly._) It's too bad. I
wish I'd known you were here sooner. I wanted very much to talk to you
before you saw Eileen. You see, I knew you'd pay us a visit some time.
(_With a worried smile._) I still think I ought to have a talk with
you.

MURRAY. Certainly, Miss Gilpin.

MISS GILPIN (_takes a chair and places it near the hall door_). Sit
down. She can't hear us here. Goodness knows this is hardly the place
for confidences, but there are visitors all over and it'll have to do.
Did you close the door tightly? She mustn't hear me above all. (_She
goes to the porch door and peeps out for a moment; then comes back to
him with flashing eyes._) She's crying! What have you been saying to
her? Oh, it's too late, I know! The fools shouldn't have permitted you
to see her before I---- What has happened out there? Tell me! I must
know.

MURRAY (_stammering_). Happened? Nothing. She's crying? Why, Miss
Gilpin--you know I wouldn't hurt her for worlds.

MISS GILPIN (_more calmly_). Intentionally. I know you wouldn't. But
something has happened. (_Then briskly._) We're talking at cross
purposes. Since you don't seem inclined to confide in me, I'll have to
in you. You noticed how badly she looks, didn't you?

MURRAY. Yes, I did.

MISS GILPIN (_gravely_). She's been going down hill
steadily--(_meaningly_)--ever since you left. She's in a very serious
state, let me impress you with that. We've all loved her, and felt so
sorry for her and admired her spirit so--that's the only reason she's
been allowed to stay here so long after her time. We've kept hoping
she'd start to pick up--in another day--in another week. But now that's
all over. Doctor Stanton has given up hope of her improving here, and
her father is unwilling to pay for her elsewhere now he knows there's a
cheaper place--the State Farm. So she's to be sent there in a day or
so.

MURRAY (_springing to his feet--horrified_). To the State Farm!

MISS GILPIN. Her time here is long past. You know the rule--and she
isn't getting better.

MURRAY (_appalled_). That means----!

MISS GILPIN (_forcibly_). Death! That's what it means for her!

MURRAY (_stunned_). Good God, I never dreamed----

MISS GILPIN. With others it might be different. They might improve
under changed surroundings. In her case, it's certain. She'll die. And
it wouldn't do any good to keep her here, either. She'd die here.
She'll die anywhere. She'll die because lately she's given up hope, she
hasn't wanted to live any more. She's let herself go--and now it's too
late.

MURRAY. Too late? You mean there's no chance--now? (Miss Gilpin _nods._
Murray _is overwhelmed--after a pause--stammering._) Isn't
there--anything--we can do?

MISS GILPIN (_sadly_). I don't know. I should have talked to you before
you---- You see, she's seen you now. She knows. (_As he looks mystified
she continues slowly._) I suppose you know that Eileen loves you, don't
you?

MURRAY (_as if defending himself against an accusation--with confused
alarm_). No--Miss Gilpin. You're wrong, honestly. She may have felt
something like that--once--but that was long ago before I left the San.
She's forgotten all about it since, I know she has. (Miss Gilpin
_smiles bitterly._) Why, she never even alluded to it in any of her
letters--all these months.

MISS GILPIN. Did you in yours?

MURRAY. No, of course not. You don't understand. Why--just now--she
said that part of it had all been so silly she felt she'd acted like a
fool and didn't ever want to be reminded of it.

MISS GILPIN. She saw that you didn't love her--any more than you did in
the days before you left. Oh, I used to watch you then. I sensed what
was going on between you. I would have stopped it then out of pity for
her, if I could have, if I didn't know that any interference would only
make matters worse. And then I thought that it might be only a surface
affair--that after you were gone it would end for her. (_She
sighs--then after a pause._) You'll have to forgive me for speaking to
you so boldly on a delicate subject. But, don't you see, it's for her
sake. I love Eileen. We all do. (_Averting her eyes from his--in a low
voice._) I know how Eileen feels, Mr. Murray. Once--a long time ago--I
suffered as she is suffering--from this same mistake. But I had
resources to fall back upon that Eileen hasn't got--a family who loved
me and understood--friends--so I pulled through. But it spoiled my life
for a long time. (_Looking at him again and forcing a smile._) So I
feel that perhaps I have a right to speak for Eileen who has no one
else.

MURRAY (_huskily--much moved_). Say anything to me you like, Miss
Gilpin.

MISS GILPIN (_after a pause--sadly_). You don't love her--do you?

MURRAY. No--I--I don't believe I've ever thought much of loving
anyone--that way.

MISS GILPIN (_sadly_). Oh, it's too late, I'm afraid. If we had only
had this talk before you had seen her! I meant to talk to you frankly
and if I found out you didn't love Eileen--there was always the forlorn
hope that you might--I was going to tell you not to see her, for her
sake--not to let her face the truth. For I am sure she continued to
hope in spite of everything, and always would--to the end--if she
didn't see you. I was going to implore you to stay away, to write her
letters that would encourage her hope, and in that way she would never
learn the truth. I thought of writing you all this--but--it's so
delicate a matter--I didn't have the courage. (_With intense grief._)
And now Doctor Stanton's decision to send her away makes everything
doubly hard. When she knows _that_--she will throw everything that
holds her to life--out of the window! And think of it--her dying there
alone!

MURRAY (_very pale_). Don't! That shan't happen. I can at least save
her from that. I have money enough--I'll make more--to send her to any
place you think----

MISS GILPIN. That is something--but it doesn't touch the source of her
unhappiness. If there were only some way to make her happy in the
little time that is left to her! She has suffered so much through you.
Oh, Mr. Murray, can't you tell her you love her?

MURRAY (_after a pause--slowly_). But she'll never believe me, I'm
afraid, now.

MISS GILPIN (_eagerly_). But you must make her believe! And you must
ask her to marry you. If you're engaged it will give you the right in
her eyes to take her away. You can take her to some private San.
There's a small place, but a very good one, at White Lake. It's not too
expensive, and it's a beautiful spot, out of the world, and you can
live and work near by. And she'll be happy to the very last. Don't you
think that's something--the best you have--the best you can give in
return for her love for you?

MURRAY (_slowly--deeply moved_). Yes. (_Then determinedly._) But I
won't go into this thing by halves. It isn't fair to her. I'm going to
marry her--yes, I mean it. I owe her that if it will make her happy.
But to ask her without really meaning it--knowing she--no, I can't do
that.

MISS GILPIN (_with a sad smile_). I'm glad you feel that way. It
shouldn't be hard now for you to convince her. But I know Eileen. She
will never consent--for your sake--until she is well again. And stop
and think, Mr. Murray. Even if she did consent to marry you right now
the shock--the excitement--it would be suicide for her. I would have to
warn her against it myself; and you wouldn't propose it if you knew the
danger to her in her present condition. She hasn't long to live, at
best. I've talked with Dr. Stanton. I know. God knows I would be the
first one to hold out hope if there was any. There isn't. It's merely a
case of prolonging the short time left to her and making it happy. You
must bear that in mind--as a fact!

MURRAY (_dully_). All right. I'll remember. But it's hell to
realise---- (_He turns suddenly towards the porch door._) I'll go out
to her now while I feel--that--yes, I know I can make her believe me
now.

MISS GILPIN. You'll tell me--later on?

MURRAY. Yes. (_He opens the door to the porch and goes out._ Miss
Gilpin _stands for a moment looking after him worriedly. Then she sighs
helplessly and goes out to the hall._ Murray _steps noiselessly out on
the porch._ Eileen _is lying motionless with her eyes closed._ Murray
_stands looking at her, his face showing the emotional stress he is
under, a great pitying tenderness in his eyes. Then he seems to come to
a revealing decision on what is best to do for he tiptoes to the
bedside and bending down with a quick movement, takes her in his arms
and kisses her._) Eileen!

EILEEN (_startled at first, resists automatically for a moment_).
Stephen! (_Then she succumbs and lies back in his arms with a happy
sigh, putting both hands to the sides of his face and staring up at him
adoringly._) Stephen, dear!

MURRAY (_quickly questioning her before she can question him_). You
were fibbing--about that night--weren't you? You do love me, don't you,
Eileen?

EILEEN (_breathlessly_). Yes--I--but you, Stephen--you don't love me.
(_She makes a movement as if to escape from his embrace._)

MURRAY (_genuinely moved--with tender reassurance_). Why do you suppose
I came up here if not to tell you I did? But they warned me--Miss
Gilpin--that you were still weak and that I mustn't excite you in any
way. And I--I didn't want--but I had to come back and tell you in spite
of them.

EILEEN (_convinced--with a happy laugh_). And is that why you acted so
strange--and cold? Aren't they silly to tell you that! As if being
happy could hurt me! Why, it's just that, just you I've needed!

MURRAY (_his voice trembling_). And you'll marry me, Eileen?

EILEEN (_a shadow of doubt crossing her face momentarily_). Are you
sure--you want me, Stephen?

MURRAY (_a lump in his throat--huskily_). Yes. I do want you, Eileen.

EILEEN (_happily_). Then I will--after I'm well again, of course. (_She
kisses him._)

MURRAY (_chokingly_). That won't be long now, Eileen.

EILEEN (_joyously_). No--not long--now that I'm happy for once in my
life. I'll surprise you, Stephen, the way I'll pick up and grow fat and
healthy. You won't know me in a month. How can you ever love such a
skinny homely thing as I am now! (_With a laugh._) I couldn't if I was
a man--love such a fright.

MURRAY. Sssh!

EILEEN (_confidently_). But you'll see now. I'll make myself get well.
We won't have to wait long, dear. And can't you move up to the town
near here where you can see me every day, and you can work and I can
help you with your stories just as I used to--and I'll soon be strong
enough to do your typing again. (_She laughs._) Listen to me--talking
about helping you--as if they weren't all your own work, those blessed
stories!--as if I had anything to do with it!

MURRAY (_hoarsely_). You had! You did! They're yours. (_Trying to calm
himself._) But you mustn't stay here, Eileen. You'll let me take you
away, won't you?--to a better place--not far away--White Lake, it's
called. There's a small private sanatorium there. Doctor Stanton says
it's one of the best. And I'll live near by--it's a beautiful spot--and
see you every day.

EILEEN (_in the seventh heaven_). And did you plan out all this for
me beforehand, Stephen? (_He nods with averted eyes. She kisses his
hair._) You wonderful, kind dear! And it's a small place--this White
Lake? Then we won't have so many people around to disturb us, will
we? We'll be all to ourselves. And you ought to work so well up
there. I know New York wasn't good for you--alone--without me. And
I'll get well and strong so quick! And you say it's a beautiful
place? (_Intensely._) Oh, Stephen, any place in the world would
be beautiful to me--if you were with me! (_His face is hidden in
the pillow beside her. She is suddenly startled by a muffled
sob--anxiously._) Why--Stephen--you're--you're crying! (_The tears
start to her own eyes._)

MURRAY _(raising his face which is this time alight with a passionate
awakening--a revelation_). Oh, I do love you, Eileen. I do! I love you,
love you!

EILEEN (_thrilled by the depth of his present sincerity--but with a
teasing laugh_). Why, you say that as if you'd just made the discovery,
Stephen!

MURRAY. Oh, what does it matter, Eileen! I love you! Oh, what a blind,
selfish ass I've been! I love you! You are my life--everything! I love
you, Eileen! I do! I do! And we'll be married----

      (_Suddenly his face grows frozen with horror as he remembers the
      doom. For the first time the grey spectre of Death confronts him
      face to face as a menacing reality._)

EILEEN (_terrified by the look in his eyes_). What is it, Stephen?
What----?

MURRAY (_with a groan--protesting half-aloud in a strangled voice_).
No! No! It can't be----! My God! (_He clutches her hands and hides his
face in them._)

EILEEN (_with a cry_). Stephen! What is the matter? (_Her face suddenly
betrays apprehension, an intuitive sense of the truth._) Oh--Stephen----
(_Then with a childish whimper of terror._) Oh, Stephen, I'm going to
die! I'm going to die!

MURRAY (_lifting his tortured face--wildly_). No!

EILEEN (_her voice sinking to a dead, whisper_). I'm going to die.

MURRAY (_seizing her in his arms in a passionate frenzy and pressing
his lips to hers_). No, Eileen, no, my love, no! What are you saying?
What could have made you think it? You--die? Why, of course, we're all
going to die--but--Good God! What damned nonsense! You're getting
well--every day. Everyone--Miss Gilpin--Stanton--everyone told me that.
I swear before God, Eileen, they did! You're still weak, that's all.
They said--it won't be long. You mustn't think that--not now.

EILEEN (_miserably--unconvinced_). But why did you look at me--that
way--with that awful look in your eyes----?

      (_While she is speaking_ Miss Gilpin _enters the room from the
      corridor. She appears worried, agitated. She hurries towards the
      porch, but stops inside the doorway, arrested by_ Murray's
      _voice._)

MURRAY (_takes_ Eileen _by the shoulders and forces her to look into
his eyes_). I wasn't thinking about you then---- No, Eileen--not you. I
didn't mean you--but me--yes, me! I couldn't tell you before. They'd
warned me--not to excite you--and I knew that would--if you loved me.

EILEEN (_staring at him with frightened amazement_). You mean
you--you're sick again?

MURRAY (_desperately striving to convince her_). Yes. I saw Stanton. I
lied to you before--about that. It's come back on me, Eileen--you see
how I look--I've let myself go. I don't know how to live without you,
don't you see? And you'll--marry me now--without waiting--and help me
to get well--you and I together--and not mind their lies--what they say
to prevent you? You'll do that, Eileen?

EILEEN. I'll do anything for you---- And I'd be so happy---- (_She
breaks down._) But, Stephen, I'm so afraid. I'm all mixed up. Oh,
Stephen, I don't know what to believe!

MISS GILPIN (_who has been listening thunderstruck to_ Murray's _wild
pleading, at last summons up the determination to interfere--steps out
on the porch--a tone of severe remonstrance_). Mr. Murray!

MURRAY (_starts to his feet with wild, bewildered eyes--confusedly_).
Oh--you---- (Miss Gilpin _cannot restrain an exclamation of dismay as
she sees his face wrung by despair._ Eileen _turns her head away with a
little cry, as if she would hide her face in the bedclothes. A sudden
fierce resolution lights up_ Murray's _countenance--hoarsely._) You're
just in the nick of time, Miss Gilpin! Eileen! Listen! You'll believe
Miss Gilpin, won't you? She knows all about it. (Eileen _turns her eyes
questioningly on the bewildered nurse._)

MISS GILPIN. What----?

MURRAY (_determinedly_). Miss Gilpin, Doctor Stanton has spoken to you
since he examined me. He must have told you the truth about me. Eileen
doesn't believe me--when I tell her I've got T.B. again. She thinks--I
don't know what. I know you're not supposed to, but can't you make an
exception--in this case? Can't you tell Eileen the truth?

MISS GILPIN (_stunned by being thus defiantly confronted--stammeringly_).
Mr. Murray! I--I--how can you ask----

MURRAY (_quickly_). Eileen has a right to know. She loves me--and
I--I--love her! (_He holds her eyes and speaks with a passion of
sincerity that compels belief._) I love her, do you hear?

MISS GILPIN (_falteringly_). You--love--Eileen?

MURRAY. Yes! I do! (_Entreatingly._) So--tell her--won't you?

MISS GILPIN (_swallowing hard, her eyes full of pity and sorrow fixed
on_ Eileen). Yes--Eileen--it's true. (_She turns away slowly towards
the door._)

EILEEN (_with a little cry of alarmed concern, stretches out her hands
to_ Murray _protectingly_). Poor Stephen--dear! (_He grasps her hands
and kisses them._)

MISS GILPIN (_in a low voice_). Mr. Murray. May I speak to you for a
moment?

MURRAY (_with a look of questioning defiance at her_). Certainly.

MISS GILPIN (_turns to_ Eileen _with a forced smile_). I won't steal
him away for more than a moment, Eileen. (Eileen _smiles happily._)

MURRAY (_follows_ Miss Gilpin _into the room. She leads him to the far
end of the room near the door to the hall, after shutting the porch
door carefully behind him. He looks at her defiantly_). Well?

MISS GILPIN (_in low agitated tones_). What has happened? What is the
meaning--I feel as if I may have done a great wrong to myself--to
you--to her--by that lie. And yet--something impelled me.

MURRAY (_moved_). Don't regret it, Miss Gilpin! It has saved her--us.
Oh, how can I explain what happened? I suddenly saw--how beautiful and
sweet and good she is--how I couldn't bear the thought of life without
her--her love---- That's all. (_Determinedly._) She must marry me at
once and I will take her away--the far West--any place Stanton thinks
can help. And she can take care of me--as she thinks--and I know she
will grow well as I seem to grow well. Oh Miss Gilpin, don't you see?
No half and half measures--no promises--no conditional engagements--can
help us--help her. We love too much! (_Fiercely, as if defying her._)
But we'll win together. We can! We must! There are things your doctors
cannot value--cannot know the strength of! (_Exultantly._) You'll see!
I'll make Eileen get well, I tell you! Happiness will cure! Love is
stronger than---- (_He suddenly breaks down before the pitying negation
she cannot keep from her eyes. He sinks on a chair, shoulders bowed,
face hidden in his hands, with a groan of despair._) Oh, why did you
give me a hopeless hope?

MISS GILPIN (_putting her hand on his shoulder--with tender compassion--sadly_).
Isn't everything we know--just that--when you think of it? (_Her face
lighting up with a consoling revelation._) But there must be something
behind it--some promise of fulfilment,--somehow--somewhere--in the
spirit of hope itself.

MURRAY (_dully_). Yes--but what do words mean to me now? (_Then
suddenly starting to his feet and flinging off her hand with disdainful
strength--violently and almost insultingly._) What damned rot! I tell
you we'll win! We must! Oh, I'm a fool to waste words on you! What can
you know? Love isn't in the materia medica. Your predictions--all the
verdicts of all the doctors--what do they matter to me? This is--beyond
you! And we'll win in spite of you! (_Scornfully._) How dare you use
the word hopeless--as if it were the last! Come now, confess, damn it!
There's always hope, isn't there? What do you _know_? Can you say you
_know_ anything?

MISS GILPIN (_taken aback by his violence for a moment, finally bursts
into a laugh of helplessness which is close to tears_). I? I know
nothing--absolutely nothing! God bless you both!

      (_She raises her handkerchief to her eyes and hurries out to the
      corridor without turning her head._ Murray _stands looking after
      her for a moment; then strides out to the porch._)

EILEEN (_turning and greeting him with a shy smile of happiness as he
comes and kneels by her bedside_). Stephen! (_He kisses her. She
strokes his hair and continues in a tone of motherly, self-forgetting
solicitude._) I'll have to look out for you, Stephen, won't I? From now
on? And see that you rest so many hours a day--and drink your milk when
I drink mine--and go to bed at nine sharp when I do--and obey
everything I tell you--and----


THE CURTAIN FALLS






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Straw, by Eugene O'Neill

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STRAW ***

***** This file should be named 22638-8.txt or 22638-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/2/6/3/22638/

Produced by Martin Agren and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
