                          PERSONS REPRESENTED.


Councillor of Commerce Muhlingk
Amalie                                                   _His wife_
Kurt        \
              >                                    _Their children_
Leonore     /
Lothar Brandt
Hugo Stengel
Count Von Trast-Saarberg
Robert Heinecke
Old Heinecke
His Wife
Auguste     \
              >                                   _Their daughters_
Alma        /
Michalski                             _A joiner, Auguste's husband_
Frau Hebenstreit   _The_ \
       _Gardener's wife_  \
                           >                _In Muhlingk's service_
Wilhelm      _A servant_  /
Johann        _Coachman_ /
Indian Servant of Count Trast

_The action takes place in the vicinity of Charlottenburg, now a part
of Berlin_.





                                 HONOR




                                 ACT I.


Scene:--_A room in_ Heinecke's _house--The cheap, lower middle-class
decorations and tawdry furnishings are in sharp contrast with two
silk-upholstered arm-chairs, which are covered during the first part of
the act--and a large gilded mirror. A chest of drawers and several
shelves are covered with various worn articles of household use. To the
right of the spectator, below the traditional German sofa, is a table
with a coffee service. To the left is a long, rough-hewn work-table;
upon it are pieces of cardboard, a pile of cardboard boxes and a large
paste-pot. Beside the table is a workstool._


(Frau Heinecke _is busily engaged in cleaning the room_. Frau
Hebenstreit _stands on the threshold of the door to the left_.)


Frau Hebenstreit. So it's really true?--Your son is home?

Frau Heinecke. Sh! sh!--for the Lord's sake--he's asleep!

Frau Hebenstreit. There is Alma's bedroom?

Frau Heinecke. Yes!--I don't know what I'm about!--I'm actually dizzy
from joy! (_Drops into_ the work-stool)

Frau Hebenstreit. Do the folks on the avenue know about it yet?[1]

Frau Heinecke. He had to report to 'em to-day because they're his boss.
To-morrow he'll make the visit.

Frau Hebenstreit. How long has he been gone, anyway?

Frau Heinecke. Seven--eight--nine and a half years. It's as long as
that since I've seen my boy! (_She sobs_)

Frau Hebenstreit. And did you recognize him right off?

Frau Heinecke. Well, how should I? Last night about eight--Heinecke was
half asleep over the Lokal Anzeiger.[2] and I'm sitting there sewing a
lace hem on Alma's underwaist,--that girl's always got to have
something new for her underwear!--Well, all of a sudden there was a
knock, and a man come in, and Lord save us if there didn't stand a
gentleman, a fine gentleman in a beaver coat--there it hangs!--just
feel that beaverskin once!--I thought to myself: it's one of Alma's
swell acquaintances, one of young Herr Kurt's friends----

Frau Hebenstreit. (_Listening attentively_) Ah----

Frau Heinecke. For they ain't too stuck up to come around and see us
poor folks on the alley--Well, as I was saying, he throws his hat and
coat on the floor--a real top hat--right down on the floor, mind
you!--and he gets right down on his knees in front of me--well, I
thought I was losing my mind, but when he calls out; "Mother, Father,
don't you know me?--It's me, Robert, your son Robert"--Well, Frau
Hebenstreit, it was just too good to be true! I'll never get over it!
(_She cries_)

Frau Hebenstreit. Don't get excited, neighbor; the pleasure won't last!
Every rat has a head and tail--and a rat's tail is poison, they do say.

Frau Heinecke. How can you say a thing like that! My son is a good son,
a fine son.

Frau Hebenstreit. Too fine, Frau Heinecke! When a person's been
traveling around in all them foreign lands and living in silks and
satins----

Frau Heinecke. He can have all that here--(_Indicating the silk
upholstered chairs_)

Frau Hebenstreit. (_With a grimace_) Yes, yes,--but whether he will or
not----

Frau Heinecke. Whether he will or not, Frau Hebenstreit! A mother's
heart don't reckon with rank and society!--And--Good Lord! Here
I am a-standing--Where on earth can Heinecke be? Have you seen
Heinecke?--The way he has to hobble along with his lame leg!

Frau Hebenstreit. I saw him standing outside with a sign as big as all
outdoors, drying his sign he said--and the thermometer at thirty above
zero!

Frau Heinecke. Let the old man enjoy himself. He was working on that
sign half the night. Couldn't sleep a wink--neither of us--we was so
happy----


(Heinecke _enters, limping, with a huge placard. One of his arms is
stiff. _)


Heinecke. Hurrah! Now we've----

Frau Heinecke. Will you be still!

Heinecke. (_Reading the placard_) "Welcome, beloved son, to your
father's house." Fine, eh?

Frau Hebenstreit. Looks for all the world like a target!

Heinecke. With a heart in the middle! You old--!

Frau Heinecke. Hold your tongue!--(_To_ Frau Hebenstreit) You know how
he is!


(Heinecke _takes a hammer and tacks and climbs on chair to tack up the
placard. _)

Frau Hebenstreit. I wonder where your son got all his fine manners
anyway? Not from _his_ family, did he?

Frau Heinecke. No, nor mine either. It was seventeen years ago, when
our boss on the avenue got his title of Councillor of Commerce--there
was a great time: carriages and fireworkings and free beer for all the
workmen in the factory. Well, my husband was a little bit full--and why
not?--Pa, quit pounding! when it didn't cost nothing? Well, one of the
carriages run over him,--broke his leg and his arm!

Heinecke. (_Standing on the stool_) Talking about me? Yes, that wasn't
no joke, neither! (_Whistles_)

Frau Heinecke. Don't whistle! The folks in front can hear that from the
balcony, and they'll send round to find out what's the matter with our
family affairs!--And the boss was so tickled over his new title, that
he was feelin' free with his pocket-book and he promised to take care
of us and give our oldest an education.

Frau Hebenstreit. And did he stick to it?

Heinecke. (_Working_) Ah, there!

Frau Heinecke. Couldn't 've done better! They gave us a place here on
the alley, where, thank God, we still are, and they sent Robert off to
the school where he got his learning. And when he came back home on his
vacations, he was always invited over on the avenue to drink chocolate
with whip-cream,--on purpose to play with the little Miss. Young Herr
Kurt was still sucking a rubber nipple then.

Frau Hebenstreit. That was all before Alma--?

Frau Heinecke. (_More quietly_) What do you mean by that?

Frau Hebenstreit. Aw, nothing, I----

Frau Heinecke. And then afterwards they sent him to Hamburg to learn
about the foreign business, you know--and when he was seventeen off he
goes to India, where they say it's so outlandish hot! The Councillor's
nephew is out there. He's got a big coffee and tea plantation!

Heinecke. It grows out there just like daisies do around here! (_Gets
down from the stool_) Fine, eh?

Frau Heinecke. And he got along pretty well out there, and, Lord, here
he is home again and I stand around and----

Frau Hebenstreit. I'm a-going. Good-bye, and don't forget the poison in
the rat's tail! (_Aside_) It's a pretty kettle of fish! (_She goes
out_)

Heinecke. She's an old poison-toad herself!

Frau Heinecke. Jealousy--jealousy--jealousy!

Heinecke. Well! Where did you get the pound-cake!

Frau Heinecke. The cook brought it, with the compliments of the Miss.

Heinecke. (_Turning away_) What comes from the avenue don't interest
me! The boy must have had enough sleep by this time. The factory
whistle will blow for the second lunch[3] in a minute! (_Looking
lovingly at the placard_) "Welcome, beloved son----"

Frau Heinecke. (_Suddenly_) Father, he's here!

Heinecke. Who?

Frau Heinecke. Our boy!

Heinecke. (_Pointing to placard_) We're ready for him!

Frau Heinecke. Shh! I heard something! (_Listening_) Yes, I told you!
He's putting on his shoes. When I think of it! There he is a-sitting
putting on his shoes, and in a minute he'll come through this door----

Heinecke. All I'll say is: "Welcome, beloved"--did you put some of that
swell soap of Alma's on his washstand?

Frau Heinecke. And how many times have I set here and thought to
myself: has he even got a decent bed under him?--and--and--have the
savages eaten him up already? And now all of a sudden here he is,
Father--Father we've got him again! May the luck keep up!

Heinecke. Look here a minute--does this look all right?

Frau Heinecke. Quiet!--He's coming. Your tie's slipped up again! I'm
ashamed of you! (_Smoothes the cover of the arm-chair_) Lord, how
nervous I am!

(Robert _bursts into the room and runs to his parents, who stand
stiffly before him, embarrassed._)

Robert. Good morning. Father!--Good morning, Mother I (_He
embraces his mother and repeatedly kisses her hand_) I
am--absolutely--inhumanly--happy!

Heinecke. "Welcome, beloved son"--(_As_ Robert _bows over his hand he
rubs it on his trousers_) You're going to kiss my hand?!!

Robert. Certainly, if you'll let me!

Heinecke. (_Extending his hand_) Now you can see what a good son he is!

Robert. (_Looking about_) And here is where I once--I hardly know--is
it really possible?--Or am I actually dreaming still? That would
be too bad--Oh,--and the homesickness!--Lord in heaven, that
homesickness!--Just think! You sit out there at night in some corner,
and everything you have left appears about you, living;--mother,
father,--the court, the garden, the factory--and then all of a sudden
you see the long palm branches waving over you, or a parrot screams in
the distance and you come to yourself and realise that you are all
alone at the other end of the world! Brrr!

Heinecke. Parrots? That must be nice! Here only the rich folks can have
'em!

Robert. Yes, and if you only knew how I worried these last years, and
even on the journey home, for fear I shouldn't find everything the way
my longing had painted it!

Heinecke. Why?

Robert. There was a man--otherwise a dear friend, my best friend,
too--who tried to prepare me for disappointment. You have become
foreign, he said, and you shouldn't try to put together what Fate has
separated so long ago--Heaven knows what else he said--and I was almost
afraid of him, and you, and myself too! Thank God that doesn't bother
me any more; every single thing has come out as I hoped! Everything
I had imagined for ten years is exactly as I expected--there is
Father--there's Mother, sweet and simple and (_Tenderly_) a bit of a
chatterbox! (_Stretching himself_) But what are these two young arms
for? Just watch! They've learned to make money!---And the sisters
will soon be ready too! Just see!--And here is father's old
paste-pot--(_Strokes the paste-pot_) And my confirmation
certificate--framed! And the machinery makes the same, dear old noise!

Frau Heinecke. You never slept a wink on account of that old
machine--eh? It bumps and bangs the whole night!

Robert. I was never sung to sleep by a sweeter lullaby, Mother. When I
was almost asleep I kept saying: snort if you want, puff if you like,
you old horse! Keep at it, but work as you will while I am lying here
in bed, _you_ can't do anything for the glory of the house of Muhlingk.
_Here_ is a lever that must be reckoned with! Wasn't that a proud
thought?--And then my heart warmed for our benefactor.

Heinecke. Huh!

Robert. What, Father?

Heinecke. Aw, nuthin'!

Robert. And I have sworn that I won't slacken in his service until I've
drawn my last breath!

Heinecke. I should think by this time you'd have done about enough for
them!

Frau Heinecke. You've scraped and slaved for them for ten years!

Robert. Oh, it wasn't as bad as that, Mother. But now let's not talk
about them this way any more. Every day we have one reason or other for
thanking the Muhlingks. The letters I had from the Councillor, and from
Kurt especially,--he's a partner now,--were like letters from a close
friend.

Heinecke. Kurt--Oh, he's a fine young gentleman! But as for the
rest--"The Moor has paid his debt"[4] as the Berliner says--show me the
rabble! (Robert _swallows his answer and turns away, frowning_) But,
Bobby, look around! Don't you notice anything? He don't see anything,
Mother!

Frau Heinecke. Oh, stop your chatter!

Heinecke. Chatter! Ho! When I try to welcome my dear son back to his
father's house, then it's chatter! (_Leads_ Robert _to the placard_)
W--what do you say to that, eh?

Robert. Did you make that, Father, you with your lame arm?

Heinecke. Ah! I make lots of things. If the poor old cripple didn't
take a hand this fine family would have starved long ago!--(_Rather
roughly_) What are you standing there staring at. Mother? Where's the
coffee?

Frau Heinecke. Well, well! (_Starts to go_)

Robert. (_Hurrying after her_) Oh, Mother, he didn't mean anything!

Frau Heinecke. Mean anything? Ha! Ha! he's only talking that way to
make you think he's the man of the house! (_She goes out_)

Robert. (_After a pause, he tries to soothe over the unpleasantness_)
You still paste boxes. Father?

Heinecke. Still at it!

Robert. And the arm doesn't bother you?

Heinecke. My arm, ha! ha! ha! my arm! Do you want to see how I do it!
First the pasteboard--so--then the fold--so! (_With great speed he
sweeps the pastebrush across two sheets of cardboard, pressing them
into place with his left elbow_) Who could beat your old cripple at
that?

Robert. You are a regular juggler.

Heinecke. That's what! But who admits it? Who appreciates me? Who
appreciates me? Nobody! How could the daughters--one of 'em already a
Missus--respect me when their own mother gives 'em such a bad example!

Robert. (_Indignantly_) Father!

Heinecke. Yes, you're a long way from her lap--far away cows have long
horns--There, it's "dear little Mother! sweet little sister!"--But
if you knew what I've had to stand! Not once does she give me
horse-car-fare when I want to go to town for a glass of beer!

Robert. Are you quite fair to her? Doesn't she cherish you as the apple
of her eye?

Heinecke. Lord, I didn't mean to say anything against her--shh!--here
she comes! (_Enter_ Frau Heinecke _with a steaming coffee-pot_) Sit
down, Bobby,--No, here in the arm-chair! Wait a minute! (_Pulls off the
covering from the chair_) Such a fine gentleman ought to sit on pure
silk!

Frau Heinecke. Yes, and the other's just the same! Two pieces we've
got! And have you seen the pier-glass? All gold creepers, and the glass
in one piece! Augusta's husband says it cost at least two hundred
marks!

Robert. Where did all these wonderful things come from.

Frau Heinecke. From the Councillor!

Robert. He gives you things like this?

Heinecke. Naw, only----

Frau Heinecke. (_Aside_) Ssh! don't you know that Herr Kurt doesn't
want it known? (_To_ Robert) Yes, last Christmas he gave us the mirror,
and this Christmas the two chairs. Father, quit boring holes in the
pound cake!

Robert. Really, I don't like this sort of generosity!

Frau Heinecke (_Pouring out coffee_) This furniture 'd be too good
for some people! But when we have such fine visitors and such a
distinguished gentleman for a son, and such an awful talented
daughter----

Robert. Alma?

Heinecke. Yessir! We did everything for our girl we were able to do.

Frau Heinecke. And you always sent money----

Robert. So that she should have a proper schooling, and learn millinery
and bookkeeping. That's what we agreed on.

Frau Heinecke. Yes--that was before--!

Robert. Before? Hasn't she the same position now?

Frau Heinecke. Not for the last six months.

Robert. What is she doing now?

Heinecke. (_Proudly_) She is cultivating her voice!

Robert. Why, I never heard she was musical!

Heinecke. Awful musical!

                       (_They drink the coffee._)

Frau Heinecke. She was examined by some Italian singer--Seenyora or
something--she said she had never heard anything like it before and she
would take it as an honor to develop Alma's voice herself at her own
cost.

Robert. But why did you keep that from me?

Frau Heinecke. Oh, it was such a long way, clear out to India, you
forget such things--and then, we wanted to give you a surprise!

Robert. (_Gets up and walks excitedly up and down_) Auguste really
takes good care of her?

Frau Heinecke. Certainly. She never lets her eye off her. Alma eats at
her house and practises at her house and when she stays too late to
catch the horsecar she sleeps there--same as she did last night.

Robert. And when she stays away all night, doesn't that worry you?

Heinecke. Huh! Big girl like that!

Frau Heinecke. No, not when we've brought her up so well--and she's
with Auguste, too! She ought to be here soon. The milk-man took the
letter over early. How surprised she'll be!

Robert. And Auguste is happy?

Frau Heinecke. Oh, so--so. Her husband boozes a little, and when it
comes to working, he ain't much, but----

Heinecke. But when it comes to sulking and raising Cain, he's right at
home!

Frau Heinecke. But, all in all, they get along all right. Auguste has
furnished up two swell rooms, and rented 'em to a gentleman from
Potsdam that ain't there half the time, but pays for the whole month!
That brings in many a pretty penny. He pays a whole mark just for his
coffee in the morning, (_Goes to the window_) There she comes! And
she's brought her husband along, too!

Robert. What? Isn't Alma with her?


                  (Auguste _and_ Michalski _come in._)


Auguste. Well, well, here you are! (_They kiss each other_) Everything
has been going fine with you, hasn't it? What's the use of asking? When
a man goes around in clothes like those!--Of course everything ain't
gold that glitters--here's my husband!

Robert. Well, brother-in-law, give me your hand,--one of the family!

Michalski. Honored! Don't often happen that a horny hand like this is
so honored!

Robert. That doesn't sound very brotherly. (_To Auguste_) Where's Alma?

Auguste. Our Princess was afraid she wasn't beautiful enough for the
foreign brother! She had to stay and burn her bangs first. (Robert _is
deeply concerned_) She'll probably come by the next car. Where did you
get the pound-cake? (Frau Heinecke _passes the cake around and_
Michalski _and_ Auguste _eat_)

Frau Heinecke. Eat another piece, Bobby!


(Robert _refuses, but the others eat._)


Heinecke. (_After a pause_) What do you say to that, Michalski,
"Welcome, beloved son."

Michalski. (_Eating_) Nonsense!

Robert. (_Surprised_) Brother-in-law!

Heinecke. What? What I did with this noble heart and this lame arm!


                        (Robert _pacifies him._)


Michalski. I'm a simple man and I ain't afraid to say what I think!
I've got no use for that kind of rot and nonsense! When a man has got
to work the way we do with his stomach empty and a whip at his back----

Heinecke. 'Specially when a man goes walking at eleven o'clock and eats
pound-cake to boot!

Auguste. Are you two at it again? (_To_ Michalski) Will you never shut
up? Can't you see he's in his second childhood?

Heinecke. I'm in--Good!--Now you see! That's the way I'm treated by my
own children!

Robert. (_Aside to_ Auguste) Really, sister, I never thought you would
say a thing like that!

Auguste. What are you talking about?


                           (_Enter_ Wilhelm.)

All. (_Except_ Robert) It's Wilhelm! Good morning, Wilhelm! (Heinecke
_and_ Michalski _shake hands with him_)

Frau Heinecke. Who is the pretty bouquet for? That must be for somebody
in the city.

Wilhelm. No, it's for you ... You are the young gentleman? (Robert
_nods--cordially_) Awful glad to know you! (_About to offer his hand_)

Robert. (_Smiling_) Very kind of you.

Wilhelm. The honorable family sends you a hearty welcome and these
flowers. They are the rarest in the conservatory. But, between you and
me, the flowers came from the Gnadiges Fraulein. And the Gnadiges
Fraulein was pretty anxious to----

Robert. Were you commissioned to say that, too? (_Controlling his
feelings_)

Wilhelm. No, not----

Robert. Then keep it to yourself!

                     (_The servant starts to go._)


Frau Heinecke. Wouldn't you like to have a piece of pound-cake with us,
Wilhelm? There's plenty left!

Robert. Please, Mother! (_Gives_ Wilhelm _a gold-piece_) The man has
his pay--Tell the Councillor that the Count von Trast-Saarburg and I
beg the honor of a meeting with him at three o'clock! You may go!
(Wilhelm _goes_)

Frau Heinecke. A count! What sort of a count?

Robert. A friend of mine, Mother, to whom I am under great obligation.

Auguste. (_Softly to_ Michalski) He pretends to have a count for a
friend!

Frau Heinecke. Wait, I'll put the flowers in water. But you oughtn't to
have been so harsh with Wilhelm, Bobby! He's a good friend of ours.

Auguste. Us common folks don't have counts for friends!

Michalski. We have to be contented with servants!

Frau Heinecke. Yes, you must be nice to Wilhelm, Robert, for our sakes;
he can do a lot for us! How many pieces of roasts and how many bottles
of wine has he slipped us!

Robert. And you accepted them, Mother?

Frau Heinecke. Why not, my boy! We're poor folks--we ought to be glad
to get things like that for nothing!

Robert. Mother, I'll double my efforts; I'll give you what I can spare
for my bare living expenses. But promise me you won't take anything
more from that servant, will you?

Frau Heinecke. Oh, that would be foolish pride and waste! You should
not look a gift-horse in the mouth! And he only wanted to do you a
favor, when he told you that about the Gnadiges Fraulein! That's
something special! Whenever I met her in the court, there wasn't a
single time when she didn't stop me and ask if there was any news from
you, and how you got on with the hot weather and all! And at the same
time she smiled so friendly--if you were a smart boy, Robert----

Robert. For heaven's sake. Mother, stop!

Heinecke. That wouldn't be so bad--two millions!

Michalski. Would you lend me a little then, eh, Brother-in-law?

Robert. (_To himself_) How much longer must I be tortured?


(Alma _appears at the half-open door. She wears a yellow jacket and a
coquettish little hat. She wears suede gloves and many bracelets. She
carries a fancy parasol._)


Alma. Good morning, everybody.

Robert. (_Runs to her and embraces her_) Alma! Thank God!

Michalski. (_To_ Auguste) The two swells of the family!

Auguste. (_Lovingly_) Listen: little sister, if you were as ugly as you
are pretty, you wouldn't take long to find out that your brother hated
you.

Alma. Auguste, that's mean.

Robert. Oh, she didn't mean anything. Now be good again!

Alma. (_Affected_) My own dear brother!

Auguste. (_Aside_) Lord, ain't it touching!


          (Frau Heinecke _helps_ Alma _off with her jacket._)


Heinecke. Now what do you say? (_Stroking her cheek_) Are you my little
treasure or not, eh?

Alma. (_Trilling_) "Oui, cher papa! c'est Girofla!"

Heinecke. Do you hear how she sings? Real Italian!

Robert. Now what's this I hear: you want to be a great singer?

Alma. Well, I'd not object to that!

Frau Heinecke. Won't you cat a little piece of pound-cake, Alma?

Alma. Merci beaucoup! (_Goes about in front of the mirror, eating_)

Robert. And you are studying hard?

Alma. (_Her mouth full of cake_) I have lessons every afternoon--Do,
re, mi, fa, sol, la, si--si, la, sol,--fa--Oh, those scales! Terrible
bore! And practice--Eternal practice!--My nerves are ruined already!

Frau Heinecke. Poor child!

Alma. "Oh, yes. Ma!"[5] I've been studying English, too! I'm awfully
cultured.--Oh, what I've learned!

Heinecke. Yes sir! D'ye see!

Alma. And above all--we only live once--have a good time, that's the
main thing! Are you happy, too, brother?

Robert. Certainly, when I have reason to be.

Alma. The great art is to be happy without any reason. Why are we
young? Oh, it's good to live! Every day something new!--And Berlin is
so lovely! You know--the Linden!--and the electric light! Have you seen
it yet? That's what I like the best of all. Everybody is so pretty and
pale, so interesting!--And the restaurants have all got electric lights
now, too. Grand!--I saw a chandelier in a cafe in the Donhoffplatz--it
was a great big wreath of flowers and every flower had a light in it!

Robert. Were you in the cafe?

Alma. I? How could I be? Through the window it was! You don't have
things like that in India? Do you?

Robert. No, we certainty don't.

Alma. We're pretty far advanced in culture here. Somebody told me that
Berlin was almost as beautiful as Paris. Is that so?

Robert. I don't know Paris, dear.

Alma. Ugh! That's a shame! Every young man ought to know Paris.

Robert. (_Charmed, yet shocked by her vulgarity_) You little silly!

Alma. Ha I ha! ha! I'm a funny one! don't you think? Ha! ha! Yes,
that's the way! (_She goes about laughing, and rocks back and forth.
She takes a little handkerchief, which she carries folded in triangular
form in her belt; and holds it under_ Auguste's _nose_) Smell it?

Auguste. (_Aside_) Fine! What's that?

Alma. (_Aside_) Ixora, the very latest from Paris--got it to-day!

Auguste. Coming out to-night?

Alma. Don't know! He'll send me word--But to-morrow evening we're going
to the masked ball! Ha! ha!

Robert. Now let's be sensible again, little one. Come here--Sit
down--Here! Here!

Alma. Heavens! How you act! This is going to be a regular
cross-examination!

Robert. I'm going to ask you a lot of questions.


(Frau _and_ Herr Heinecke _group themselves about_ Alma's _chair_.
Michalski _sits on the work table_, Auguste _beside him on the stool._)


Alma. Go ahead! S'il vous plait. Monsieur!

Michalski. (_Aside to_ Auguste) This will be a nice mess!

Robert. How did you happen to discover this talent?

Alma. It comes like love--can't tell how!

Robert. (_Unpleasantly affected_) Hum--But someone must have told you
about it!


                     (Alma _shrugs her shoulders._)

Frau Heinecke. Don't you remember, child? It was Herr Kurt that----

Robert. The young manager?

Heinecke. Certainly.

Robert. But how did he know----?

Frau Heinecke. He heard her singing--through the window on the court.
And the next thing, he said it was a sin and a shame that a voice like
hers----

Robert. But why do you let Mother tell everything, Alma?

Auguste. (_To_ Michalski) She's so modest.

Alma. That a voice like mine should be wasted here in the alley--and
that _I_ should not be wasted here in the alley, for that matter! It's
really an imposition on you, Gnadiges Fraulein, he said!

Frau Heinecke. I heard that myself: "Gnadiges Fraulein!"

Heinecke. My daughter, yes sir!

Robert. Go ahead. Alma!

Alma. My parents took care of your brother, he said,--I'll take care of
you!--Well, and then he found a teacher for me who held a _cercle
musical_--that means a musical circle--made up of young ladies of the
best families.--One is engaged to a lieutenant of the Hussars.

Robert. And what is the teacher's name?

Alma. (_Suspiciously_) What do you want to know for?

Robert. Because it can't be any secret!

Alma. Her name is Signora Paulucci.

Heinecke. (_Enthusiastically_) Real Italian!

Robert. (_Taking out his note-book_) And her address?

Alma. (_Quickly_) You don't need to go there. It's true!

Robert. Of course it's true. But I'd like to hear the teacher's own
opinion about your voice. (Alma _looks quickly toward_ Auguste)

Auguste. You can go to her lesson with her tomorrow.

Alma. Yes, to-morrow!

Robert. Good! (_Gets up and walks back and forth excitedly_) I don't
want to make you feel badly, dear, but I must admit I don't share your
great hopes.

Heinecke. Eh?

Robert. How many a young girl is enticed into these things purely
through ambition and vanity! And it's dangerous! More dangerous than
you realize--Of course I am sure that the young manager has the highest
and the noblest of motives, but--Well, however that may be, to-morrow
I'll hear myself what the teacher says, and if my doubts are
groundless, I promise to take care of you myself, and we shan't rest a
moment until you have reached the climax of your art! (Alma _takes the
vase from the table and buries her face in the flowers_) Wouldn't
it be strange if we were to owe everything--even this piece of good
fortune--to the house of Muhlingk!


                    (Michalski _laughs mockingly._)


Alma. Mama, who sent me this bouquet?

Frau Heinecke. That's a welcome to--(_Indicates_ Robert) from the
Gnadiges Fraulein!

Alma. Oh, from her! (_She puts down the vase_)

Robert. Wait a minute! One question! It seems that every time I mention
the "Avenue" or any of the family, someone bursts out laughing, or
makes some disapproving remark. Herr Muhlingk junior is the only one
who seems to meet with your approval. Now, frankly, what have you
against our benefactor? What has he done to offend you? (_A pause_)
You, for instance. Brother-in-law, what made you laugh so scornfully?
(_Silence_) Or you. Alma, that you won't have anything to do with the
flowers that came from Miss Muhlingk! Mother just told me how kind she
has always been!

Alma. Kind, is she? She's a stuck-up thing, that can't poke her nose
high enough in the air when she meets me!--Never says a word to me;
why, it's all she can do to return my bow! Oh, she----!

Auguste. She's the same way to me.

Robert. (_Sorrowfully, to himself_) That isn't like her!

Frau Heinecke. (_Tenderly_) Just wait till she marries my boy!

Robert. (_Shocked,--interrupting her_) Mother! But I'd forgotten: I've
brought some presents for my sisters, and you, too, Brother-in-law.

Auguste. (_Jumping up greedily_) What have you got? Where is it?

Robert. In the bed-room. There's a card with each one's name on it.


        (_The three_, Auguste _ahead, hurry into the bedroom._)

Heinecke. And you've got nothing for us?

Robert. There wasn't anything out there good enough for you, dear
parents. Tell me what you want?

Frau Heinecke. If I should see the day when I had a sofa to match them
arm-chairs--(_She sees that_ Robert _is staring ahead without listening
to her_) But you ain't listening!

Robert. (_Sadly reproving_) No, mother, I wasn't listening!

Heinecke. (_Defiantly_) And I want a new paste-pot--you ought to be
able to afford that! (_The three come back from the bedroom_. Auguste
_carries a colored shawl_, Alma _a jewel-case_, Michalski _a Turkish
pipe. They surround_ Robert _and thank him_)

Auguste. What a pity they don't wear Indian shawls any more!

Michalski. (_Puffing at the stem of his pipe_) Course it don't draw!

Robert. (_To_ Alma, _who is playing with her jewels_) Are you
satisfied, Alma? Look at the three blue stones, they are Indian
sapphire.

Alma. Very pretty! But to tell the truth, I like the dark-blue
sapphires more! They have such beautiful brilliancy!

Robert. How do you know so much about such things?

Alma. Oh--from the shop windows! People of our sort like to look in
windows!

Robert. And what's that shining in your ear?

Alma. Paste, that's all! Two Marks a pair!

Robert. Dear, you mustn't wear things like that!--Promise me you'll
take them off this minute--and I'll show you another special surprise
that I've brought you.

Alma. (_Sullenly, taking off the ear-rings_) As you please!

Robert. It's the dress of a hindoo Princess--looted on a military
invasion undertaken by a friend of mine. Think of it! Pink and gold!

Alma. (_Joyfully_) Oh, how heavenly!

Michalski. (_Laughing_) And I s'pose you hung her up stark naked on a
tree!


                       (Robert _stares at him._)


Alma. (_Lovingly_) You're a dear, sweet, old brother!


             (_A coachman in livery knocks at the window._)


Frau Heinecke. Go, see what Johann wants, Father.

Alma. (_To_ Auguste) Oh, but they'll all turn green with envy when I
wear this to the masked ball to-morrow.

Auguste. Shh!

Heinecke. (_From the window_) Johann says Herr Kurt is going to drive
to the city at three, and he wants to know if you'd like to go along.

                (Alma _and_ Auguste _exchange glances._)

Robert. What does that mean?

Auguste. Simple enough! Herr Kurt has his carriage, and since he's an
obliging young man he gave Alma a standing invitation to ride to the
city with him.

Robert. What? She allowed that? You, sister, you accepted that?

Alma. A poor girl ought to be glad enough to ride in a carriage once in
a while!

Frau Heinecke. And you save car-fare!

Robert. Good heavens! And what do the ladies on the Avenue say to that?

Alma. Oh, they don't know anything about it! When I ride with him he
stops the carriage at the back doorway where only the tradespeople go
in.

Robert. So much the worse! What a disgusting implication in all this
secrecy! Alma, haven't you felt that yourself?--Alma, come here!--Look
me in the eyes.

Alma. (_Staring at him_) Well?

Robert. (_Takes her head in both his_) You are pure!--you are--(_He
kisses her cheeks and forehead_)

Heinecke. Decide, now! Johann is waiting!

Robert. Tell Johann, Father, that I'll speak to his master about it
first.

Alma. What for? It's all been arranged already.

Robert. You won't use Herr Muhlingk's carriage any more! For a girl of
your--our position, there is always the street-car!


                   (Alma _begins to cry defiantly._)


Frau Heinecke. The poor child!

Auguste. You seem to want to turn everything in this house upside down!


             (_Children's voices are heard in the court._)

Heinecke. Come here!--Quick!--A Moor!--in a turban!

All. (_Except_ Robert, _who remains, troubled, rush to the window_)
That's not a Moor!

Alma. (_Still sobbing_) Robert--is that--a Moor?

Robert. (_Darkly_) No, that's my friend's Indian servant.

Frau Heinecke. Your friend?--is that the count?

Robert. Yes.


          (_The servant comes in, and they crowd about him._)

Robert. Ragharita, your master is welcome in the house of my father!


(_Servant goes out. Great excitement_. Frau Heinecke _draws out the
arm-chairs and polishes the mirror_.)

Alma. (_From the mirror_) Is your count young or old? (Robert _makes no
answer_) My eyes are red!--Red as fire, aren't they, Auguste? And he
may be young! (_She goes out, left_)

Michalski. Come, Auguste, we won't disturb the great gentlemen!

Heinecke. Herr Count, I'll say, take a seat in this arm-chair, I'll
say! Oh, we know how to act with the nobility!

Frau Heinecke. There was a baron here once--a gentleman friend of Herr
Kurt. Don't you remember, Father? He came to ask after Alma--But a
count! we never had a count!

Robert. Who did you say had been here, Mother?


(_Enter_ Count Trast, _a man between forty and fifty, with gray hair
and a long, blond beard. He is dressed with careless foreign elegance_.
Robert _rushes to him and takes his hand._)


Trast. (_Aside to_ Robert) How is this? Hasn't the home fever abated
yet! (_Aloud_) So here we have the long-expected son! (_Shakes his
hand_) Do you know, my fine people, that a sort of foster-son of yours
is standing here? The friendship with this dear old comrade of mine
gives me almost a right to that title!


                 (Heinecke _tiptoes out of the door._)


Frau Heinecke. Wouldn't the Count like a piece of pound-cake? There is
still some there.

Trast. Thanks, I shall be glad--I certainly shall!


              (Frau Heinecke _curtseys out of the room._)

Trast. You're pale, my boy, and your hands are shaking--what's wrong?

Robert. Oh, nothing! The happiness--the excitement! It's only natural!

Trast. Naturally! (_Aside_) He's lying! (_To_ Robert) Tell me, how long
do you intend to stay here? I want to regulate my stay in this great
Europe by that!

Robert. That's impossible, my friend! Our ways will have to part!

Trast. Nonsense!

Robert. I shall ask my employer to give me a position here. The climate
in India--you understand----?

Trast. That's pleasant! He doesn't want to leave his mother's
apron-strings again, eh?

Robert. Don't make fun of me. Since we're going to part--I have to
say it some time--I thank you, you kind old wicked fellow, for all
you've done for me. It was the most fortunate moment of my life when
you saw me standing feverishly behind my young employer in the Club at
Buitenzorg, when he was throwing one hundred-gulden note after the
other onto the green cloth.

Trast. Why was I such a fool? If you're going to--Ugh! It isn't decent!

Robert. Trast! don't hurt me. See, I owe everything to you. When I
heard your name then--the name of Trast and Company that is known from
Yokohama to Aden, I felt as though I were standing before the Kaiser
himself!

Trast. Kaiser, by the grace of coffee!

Robert. Muhlingk's undertaking in Batavia was on the road to ruin that
minute.

Trast. No wonder, when it had the worst good-for-nothing in the
Archipelago for its head.

Robert. There was nothing ahead of me but failure and discharge. And
then you took the poor home-sick clerk under your pinion, your name
opened a hundred doors for me and I grew up into manhood under your
care! And Herr Benno Muhlingk led his merry life as he pleased, and I
ran the entire business.

Trast. And the end of the story is that the firm of Muhlingk, along
with its clever representative, is a few thousands richer because of
us. It's a shame! you ought to have profited by it yourself. Well, I'll
open your employer's eyes to the kind of a man you've been! If he
doesn't at least make you a partner, I shall declare such a corner in
coffee, in my righteous wrath, that the noble German oak-leaf[6] shall
be valued as never before. But, seriously, why do you insist on this
caprice of remaining with the Muhlingks? I offer you a tremendous
salary and a pair of trousers every Christmas. (Robert _shakes his
head_) It isn't only gratitude that makes a man cling to such an insane
idea! Of course if the inventory of the firm included a fair German
maiden--(_Aside_) Aha! (_To_ Robert) Speaking of maidens, just listen
to what happened to me last night. After we had left each other I
wandered aimlessly along the street. A friendly poster invited into a
masked ball. A hundred Indian dancers were to present their exciting
dance according to the advertisement--well, that is my specialty--I
went in. Everything seemed arranged to lead a young monk to forget his
oath. And then suddenly there came before me a young girl, tender and
fresh as a half-ripe peach. She seemed to be without a partner. I
presented myself. Not at all bashful, she begged for a little plaything
that hung on my watch-chain, in a little baby voice. It was my patron
saint Ganesa, god of success, who rides on a little rat. And I smelled
a rat myself. What do you suppose I found beneath her childish
innocence? Naif depravity!

Robert. (_Nervously_) Are such things possible?

Trast. Listen. My heart always beats according to the tempo required by
the custom of the land whose hospitality I am enjoying. I always keep a
harem in the Orient; in Italy I climb the garden wall by moonlight, in
France I pay the dressmaker's bills, and--Lord!--in Germany--well, I
know the return journey from virtue, too! All according to rule! In the
Orient one loves with his senses, in Italy with his imagination, in
France with his pocketbook, in Germany with his conscience! So I tried
to change this sinning child to a repentant Magdalen. Before I could
get started, however, the champagne had to be uncorked--then came a
gentleman, half demon and half fool, and claimed the lady as his own. I
respected the ancient law of precedence, and went to bed the poorer by
one good act. But I would give a good deal to know how it happened that
a sweet little thing like--(Robert _covers his face with his hands_)
Good Lord!--what is it?--Shh!


                        (_Enter_ Frau Heinecke.)

Frau Heinecke. Bobby!

Robert. Mother!

Frau Heinecke. Have you got a corkscrew by you? (_To_ Trast) My
daughter would like to offer you a bottle of wine. It's no ordinary
wine, either, it's the best there is!

Robert. Comes from the Avenue, I suppose?

Frau Heinecke. (_Proudly_) It does indeed.

Robert. There! (_Throws down his knife on the table_)

Frau Heinecke. How you _do_ act!

Robert. Yes, I forgot!--Forgive me!

                      (Frau Heinecke _goes out._)

Trast. Now confess, my boy! Trust in me!

Robert. Oh, if I had only never seen my home again!

Trast. Ha! so that's where the wind blows from.

Robert. I am ashamed of the position I was born in. My own people have
become nothing to me. My whole being shudders from contact with them. I
can't trust my mind, one mad suspicion follows the other! Trast! I
almost believe I don't even respect the breast that nursed me!

Trast. That's simply rot!

Robert. If I could only explain what I have suffered! Every serious
word strikes me like a blow! And every pleasantry like a slap in the
face! It seems as though they could talk of nothing but what hurts
me--I thought I was coming back to a home,--instead of that it's a
strange world where I dare hardly breathe!--Advise me what to do!

Trast. Pack your trunk!

Robert. That would be a cowardly and heartless retreat! Do they deserve
that--My own parents!

Trast. Listen--drop the pathetic note--The matter is simple enough for
us. We've studied caste in its native wilds. The same castes exist
here. They aren't established by food-laws, or marriage-rules and
religious etiquette; those were simple. The chasm that can't be bridged
is the difference of feeling--each caste has its own sense of honor,
its own nice distinctions, its own ideas, yes, even its own speech.
Unhappy is the man who has fallen out of his own caste and hasn't the
courage to cut himself off from it entirely. Just such a declasse are
you!--and you know, I was the same thing myself! Just what you are
feeling now, I went through years ago. How do you suppose I felt,
_chic_ young cavalry officer, when I woke one morning to the
realization that I had gambled away ninety thousand talers that had to
be paid in twenty-four hours. What good did it do me to ride home and
throw myself at my father's feet? He would have put his head in pawn to
save the honor of our name--but he had already done so! And, since he
had nothing else to give me, he gave me at least his curse!

Robert. (_Brooding_) How you had the courage to live after that!

Trast. Do you know what happened then?

Robert. (_Absently, tortured by his own thoughts_) I know
nothing--nothing--nothing!

Trast. Then listen to me! Perhaps it may be of use to you. When my
comrades said farewell to me they did me the last favor of placing a
cocked revolver on my table. I looked at the matter from all sides. I
took for granted that, without my honor I could not live. Then, as I
pointed the thing to my forehead the thought came to me--this is
brutal, this is silly! How different are you to-day from what you were
three days ago? Perhaps you deserved punishment for having promised
money that you didn't have; but not death! For thousands of years men
have enjoyed the light of the sun without letting the phantom of honor
darken it. To-day nine hundred and ninety thousands of people belong to
that same class, live as they did, and work as they did, and enjoy the
sun as they did! Twelve years later--of course my debt was long since
cancelled--when I came back to Europe a sort of reconciliation took
place between my father and me. But it was only an outward
reconciliation. If he had found me, like a prodigal son, lying on his
doorstep, he would have lifted me up from the dirt with trembling hands
and pressed me to his bosom. Since I carried my head a little defiantly
and was in a position to help him out with half a million or so he
couldn't forgive me. A few weeks later I left. The rich coffee seller
and the poor cavalier had nothing in common.

Robert. And now he's dead!

Trast. May he find peace in the heaven he believed in! Now the moral:
leave your parents their point of view. You can't change that. Give
where there is need--give all you have, and then--come with me!

Robert. I can't! Listen, I'll tell you why. I didn't tell you before
because I was ashamed. I have a little sister, she was a baby when I
left. Oh, how I longed to see her and looked forward to the meeting!
And I wasn't disappointed, for she was prettier and sweeter than I had
hoped! But my love for her before a thousand fears I am afraid to
mention! For what she does and lets others do with her--in perfect
innocence, of course--goes against every feeling of honor I possess!
Just now when you were telling about that girl in the dance-hall; a
cold shiver went through me! Because--no, no, a thousand times no! Here
is my place! I must stay here, to stand or fall!

Trast. I admit you have reasons that are at least worth considering.
But you are excited. I'll wager you are looking at the dark side!

Robert. Would to God! (_He sits down_)


(_Enter_ Alma, _with a tea-tray, upon which is a bottle of wine and
three glasses. The Count makes a start_, Alma _cries out. The tea-tray
almost falls_)


Trast. (_Quickly seizing the situation, steps to her aid_) Came near
being a catastrophe, Fraulein! (_Aside_) It is a catastrophe!

Robert. See, Trast, this is she! Isn't she an angel? There, give him
your hand, and tell him he's welcome!

Alma. (_Aside_) Don't tell on me--eh?

Trast. (_Aside_) Poor devil! How can I get him out of it?


                                CURTAIN.




                                ACT II.


Scene:--_The drawing-room in the_ Muhlingk's _house_ (_The
"Vorderhaus"_). _The furnishings are rich but rather stiff. At the
back, a wide door hung with portieres opens into the dining-room. On
the left, beside a fire-place is a sofa and an oval table. Beside it a
rocking-chair. In the dining-room the richly set table can be seen.
Dinner is over and a servant is clearing away the things_. Herr
Muhlingk, Frau Muhlingk, Kurt _and_ Leonore _are drinking coffee in the
drawing-room. The servant who has passed the cups goes out_.


Kurt. As I remarked before, the black horse is fine!

Kurt. Expensive it certainly is!

Frau Muhlingk. I shall make up the rest of the money, just to stop the
argument.

Kurt. (_Kisses her hand_) My best thanks, Mama;--Now I can show myself
to Berlin mounted and spurred!--You can admire me, too, Lori!

Leonore. (_Without looking up from her book_) Yes, my dear.

Kurt. Lothar Brandt and Hugo Stengel wanted to come out to see the
beast. Perhaps that doesn't interest you either, Lori?

Leonore. They will probably come often. They haven't anything else to
do. (_Looking at the clock--aside_) Oh, how the time drags! (_The
servant goes out_)

Frau Muhlingk. You must not speak so harshly about these gentlemen, my
child. You know Lothar wants to pay court to you.

Leonore. Really?

Frau Muhlingk. Haven't you noticed it?

Leonore. I haven't paid any particular attention.

Frau Muhlingk. (_To her husband_) It's unbearable, Theodore!

Muhlingk. We've had enough of this tone, my child. Even the pride in
your paternal bank account has its limits.

Leonore. (_Looking at him_) Pride in the paternal bank account?

Muhlingk. Well, how can we explain this manner you have assumed for the
last ten years, sending home every rich and respected man who has
proposed to you?--I am a simple, middle-class man. I made my own way
with my own help----

Kurt. That is to say, he married a rich wife.

Muhlingk. What's that, Kurt?

Kurt. An exclamation of admiration, Father; nothing else.

Muhlingk. No, I didn't have it as easy as you, my boy. You might well
follow my example. I don't like to play the spender and I don't care to
see it in my children, either. That is the only way one can live
tastefully!

Kurt. --and cheap, too!

Leonore. Your accusation doesn't apply to me, papa.

Frau Muhlingk. Will you condescend to give us an explanation then?

Leonore. Mama!

Frau Muhlingk. (_Nervously_) Well?

Leonore. (_Rising_) Oh, why can't you let me work out my own salvation?
I am modest enough--I only ask to be allowed to live my own life.

Muhlingk. You call that modest? If that is modest, what is to become of
the sanctity of family ties?

Frau Muhlingk. (_To her husband_) Do you hear that? I haven't slept for
nights and nights!

Leonore. Because of me, mama?

Frau Muhlingk. Every day these mad ideas, these unconventional acts!
Now what does it mean this time, when you plunder the hothouse to send
flowers to a clerk!

Leonore. You mean Robert?

Frau Muhlingk. The young Herr Heinecke, I mean.

Leonore. He isn't a clerk. He is almost a member of the family!

Kurt. Oh, thank you.

Frau Muhlingk. (_Mildly_) That is, we brought him up out of the gutter.

Muhlingk. (_As the servant enters_) Eh?

Wilhelm. The young Herr Heinecke from the alley sends word that he will
take the liberty of----

             (Leonore _looks at the clock involuntarily._)

Muhlingk. Well, well--just like a noble gentleman! That is good!

Wilhelm. --calling, with your permission. He named another gentleman.
Count Trast, or someone----

Muhlingk. (_Jumping up_) What! Count Trast! Trast and Company, Kurt!
The coffee King. (_Motions the servant off_)

Kurt. What luck that clerk has!

Muhlingk. Oh, we must invite him to the house, Amalie.

Frau Muhlingk. Very good,--to-morrow morning.

Leonore. What! and not invite Robert Heinecke too?

Kurt. (_Aside_) Better and better!

Muhlingk. Well, perhaps you are right. When one descends to the level
of these people one really unites their interests with the interests of
the firm. A thing like that often brings in thousands, Kurt. The young
fellow did very well under Benno's direction and inasmuch as I'm
thinking of sending him for ten years into the Antilles, I----

Leonore. (_Indignantly_) Oh, I did not mean it that way, papa!

Muhlingk. Oh, that's all right.

Frau Muhlingk. And, Kurt, you must take care that the young fellow
doesn't make any _faux pas_. He comes from the alley, you know. A thing
like that might spoil the whole affair.

Kurt. (_Standing up_) Pardon me, did you expect I would invite my
friends?

Muhlingk. Certainly, your friends, too! Bachelors always have plenty of
time.

Kurt. (_Standing up_) Pardon me, I should like to ask to be excused
from doing that. I can't be expected to introduce gentlemen of good
family to the son of (_Indicating the alley_) Herr Heinecke.

Leonore. (_Aside_) Would you rather have the brother of Miss Heinecke
here?

Kurt. (_Shocked, then gathering himself together_) What do you mean?

Leonore. Be thankful I don't insist on an answer.

Kurt. Really!

Leonore. Shall I?

Kurt. So you're threatening me, are you?

Muhlingk. My dear children, in this house we won't have any scenes,
please.

Frau Muhlingk. Don't let's pay any attention to it, Theodore. I'll lie
down now and rest for a minute or two--Won't you?


         (Muhlingk _kisses her ceremoniously on the forehead._)


Kurt. (_Aside_) The good old days! Goodbye! (Frau Muhlingk _goes
towards door_. Muhlingk _rings_)


Leonore. (_Hurrying after_ Frau Muhlingk) Mother!

Frau Muhlingk. (_Turns around, speaks nervously, but in a friendly
tone_) Never mind! It's all right! (_She goes out_)

Muhlingk. Ask any visitors to come into my office.


    (Muhlingk _and the_ Servant _go out_. Kurt _also starts to go._)

Leonore. It seems to me we have something to say to each other.

Kurt. We? Oh, no!

Leonore. You don't want to draw me into an argument, perhaps?

Kurt. It doesn't seem to suit you when I take a notion to see a little
of the world. Because you are four years older than I, and because
you taught me to walk, you'd still like to have me tied to your
apron-strings. You--but I can go--alone now. There are ladies who have
said I go too far. Let me find heaven in my own way.

Leonore. I have never interfered with you. Go on, play the
man-of-the world as much as you like, but have the courage to admit it.

Kurt. What good would that do?

Leonore. You play the dutiful son and then make fun of your parents
behind their backs. Believe me, Kurt; you are ruining your character.

Kurt. (_Laughing_) No!

Leonore. There is just one thing I ask of you--at least keep this house
and its surroundings sacred.

Kurt. We'll do that with the help of the Lord!

Leonore. Do you know what they are whispering around the factory?
That you are paying far too much attention to Robert Heinecke's
sister--that you----

Kurt. (_Shrugging his shoulders_) Yes, and you allow yourself to carry
the gossip of the backstairs about----

Leonore. Kurt, not that tone! I defended you from Mama and Papa to-day.
The next time I shan't do it. And remember one thing: Robert has come
back.--If he finds his sister guilty--don't worry, I wouldn't dare
think it!--But the girl is frivolous and vain! If it _were_ so--and you
were to blame, Kurt, take care! He would break you in pieces!

Kurt. Who? My clerk?--with his sample-case?

Leonore. And you stoop to steal this from your clerk.

Kurt. What's that? Steal--steal what?

Leonore. His position in the world! His good name!

Kurt, The good name of Heinecke--bah!


(_Enter a servant with two visiting cards which he hands to_ Leonore.)


Leonore. Visitors for you.

Kurt. Who?

Leonore. Read!

Kurt. Lothar Brandt.--Hugo Stengel.--Show them in. (_Throws the cards
on the table_, Servant _goes out_)


               (Leonore _drops into the rocking-chair._)

Kurt. Signs and miracles! You didn't run away.


           (_Enter_ Hugo Stengel _and_ Lothar Brandt.)


Lothar. 'Morning, old fellow.

Kurt. (_Going to him_) You've come to see my horse. This is very good
of you!

Hugo. (_Bowing to_ Leonore) We took the liberty!

Lothar. (_Bowing to_ Leonore) If we aren't disturbing the Gnadiges
Fraulein.

Leonore. (_Politely_) Certainly not. I seldom go into the stables.


             (Brandt _and_ Stengel _clear their throats._)

Kurt. Won't you sit down?

Lothar. We await the permission of Fraulein Leonore.

Leonore. (_Coolly_) Oh, please! (_She takes a book and begins turning
the leaves_. Kurt _throws her a look. They sit down_)

Kurt. Well, where were you yesterday?

Lothar. (_Affectedly_) Ah, by Jove, you make an awful demand on a man's
memory. What was I doing yesterday? First I went riding, then I had a
conference with Father.--Coffee is sinking again.

Hugo. Alarmingly--53 and a half.

Lothar. Alarmingly, is not the right word. It _is_ sinking. We'll make
a fight. Then I made some visits, then I dined at the Officers'
Association----

Leonore. (_Looking up_) Ah, you are an officer?

Lothar. (_Insulted_) I thought you knew, Gnadiges Fraulein?--I am a
Reserve Lieutenant in the "Crown Prince" Cuirassier regiment.

Leonore. (_Smiling, looking toward the table_) Ah, yes! Note visiting
card!

Kurt. (_Slapping him on the back_) And besides that, boots and saddles
astride Papa's desk chair.

Lothar. (_Sharply_) Oh I say, old fellow!

Leonore. The desk chair isn't the slowest horse in the race for fortune
you know, Herr Lieutenant.

Hugo. Oh, that was good!

Kurt. But I looked for you last evening.

Lothar. The evening.--We were invited somewhere? Where? It isn't quite
clear in my memory now. We won't discuss the matter. You seem to be
amused, Gnadiges Fraulein?

Leonore. Is that forbidden?

Lothar. But really, you know, you in your pride and seclusion, have
hardly an idea what the word _saison_ means in our good German tongue.

Hugo. It is quite two months, Gnadiges Fraulein, that I have done what
you might really call sleeping.

Kurt. And that was on a billiard table.

Lothar. Oh, our respected Kurt meant that as a joke! But if you knew
what it meant to be a martyr to amusement, you would understand what we
mean.

Leonore. I have made such an effort to understand you that I already
begin to feel sorry for you.

Hugo. (_Aside to_ Lothar) I believe the girl is making fun of us.

Lothar. (_Aside, arrogantly_) Every woman tries to be a coquette.

Kurt. (_Who has gone over to_ Lenore, _aside_) You don't need to be so
disagreeable.

Leonore. (_Rocking_) Hm? (_Goes on reading_)

Lothar. Might I ask what it is that takes so much of the Gnadiges
Fraulein's attention.

Kurt. (_To himself_) If he would only let her be!

Leonore. Something that would hardly be of interest to the martyrs of
amusement--for it concerns the martyrs of labor.

Lothar. Ah, I see.

Hugo. (_Getting up_) But weren't we going to see the horse?

Lothar. Ah yes! you two go ahead--The martyrs of labor interest me more
than the Gnadiges Fraulein believes.

Kurt. (_To himself_) Oh, the poor devil!

Hugo. Good heavens!

Kurt. Come, Stengel, come! (_They go out_)

Leonore. (_Looking impatiently at the clock_) In what way can I be of
service to you, Herr Brandt?

Lothar. Gnadiges Fraulein, I very much regret that you quite
misunderstand me, for although I admit that I----

Leonore. And in order to prove that, you are willing to waste----

Lothar. A moment, please!

Leonore. (_Aside_) A proposal!

Lothar. My faults may be without number, but, Gnadiges Fraulein, I am a
man of honor.

Leonore. I should think that that was to be taken for granted from the
son of a respectable family, Herr Brandt, and as little worthy of
praise as the fact that he wears a well-cut coat.

Lothar. Then you respect honor no more?

Leonore. Pardon me. I meant no disrespect to the ill-clad. But one
doesn't bring them into the parlor. But I interrupted you, Herr Brandt.
Perhaps I do misunderstand you. Please continue.

Lothar. I must admit, Gnadiges Fraulein, you have intimidated me. And
that is something! For what is a man without courage?

Leonore. Ah, that is another thing. Courage, I can respect! But what
have you done so far that has shown your courage?

Lothar. Ask my friends. That at least is above reproach.

Leonore. In other words, you have fought a duel.

Lothar. One doesn't discuss such things before ladies.

Leonore. But we hear about them just the same. We are here to offer the
victor his laurels. Did you ever break a lance in defence of a
conviction which you know in your heart you yourself have violated?

Lothar. (_Indignantly_) How can you ask that? Such a thing could never
occur to me!

Leonore. Or have you never silently borne an unworthy suspicion?

Lothar. I? Silently? On the contrary.

Leonore. Never?

Lothar. Never, Fraulein.

Leonore. Then one can't be absolutely certain about your courage,
Herr--may I say Lieutenant?--(_She rises_) First the test, and then
perhaps we can discuss the matter further.

Lothar. (_Trying to hold her back_) Fraulein--


                           (_Enter_ Wilhelm.)

Wilhelm. Will the gentlemen step in here a moment?

Leonore. At last!

    (Robert _and the_ Count _enter_; Lenore _runs to meet_ Robert.)


Trast. (_To himself_) So that's the story! (_To the servant who is
about to go out_) Here, come here! (_He takes one of the cards from the
tray and puts it in his pocket_)


Lothar. (_Looking at_ Robert _and_ Leonore) What does that mean?

Trast. My card is enough.


                          (_The servant goes out._)

Robert. Leonore, I've brought Count Trast, my benefactor and my best
friend.

Leonore. (_Remembering_ Lothar) The gentlemen will permit me to
introduce Herr Lothar Brandt? Herr Count von Trast--Herr Robert
Heinecke, a playmate of my childhood.

Lothar. (_To himself_) She introduces me to Alma's brother--That is
fine!--The gentlemen will pardon me, but my friends--(_Stutters and
clears his throat_)

Trast. Are waiting for you, eh?

Lothar. (_Staring at him_) Exactly! (_As he goes_) What sort of a count
is he? (_Turns at the door and bows stiffly, clicking his heels and
goes out_)

Leonore. You have been away from home a long time, Herr Count?

Trast. I have inhabited the tropics for a quarter century.

Leonore. For pleasure?

Trast. As much as possible. Meanwhile I have been speculator in coffee,
cloves and ivory, and elephant-hunter.

Leonore. (_Laughing_) In which of your many capacities am I to welcome
you then, you many-gifted man?

Trast. You may take your choice, Gnadiges Fraulein.

Wilhelm. (_At the door_) The Herr Councillor is at your disposal.

Robert. I must----

Trast. (_To_ Robert) Stay where you are. I have something to say to the
manager first. (_To_ Leonore) For ten years, he has been singing your
praises; shouldn't you take the trouble to listen to ten minutes'
praise of me?

Leonore. (_Shaking her finger at_ Trast) You are an old rogue!

Trast. A rogue in your own service! (_He goes out_)

Leonore. (_Taking_ Robert's _hand_) At last I have you here again!

Robert. I thank you from the bottom of my heart for those words.

Leonore. Oh, how polite we are!--My words aren't alms! Come here,
(_Leads him to the fireplace_) Sit down--here by the fire--beside me.
You mustn't freeze in cold Germany!--Wait, I'll start up the fire!
(_She blows with the bellows_) These fireplaces are--impractical
things--most impractical, but anyway we can chat in front of it. In
India you don't need fireplaces, do you? (_To herself_) I'm so
happy!--Oh, I'm glad to see you again. And now, out with the "but" that
you have up your sleeve. I'll parry it.

Robert. Don't make my heart too heavy.

Leonore. That's the last thing I want to do.

Robert. But that's what you're doing when you conjure up this ghost of
a happiness that is now forever buried.

Leonore. Oh, if you were only as you used to be.

Robert. So I am. Heaven knows!--but there is a gulf between us!

Leonore. Then there was--yes!

Robert. God!--you must understand me! I cana't say what's in my
heart--do you remember what you said to me when we parted?

Leonore. Well?

Robert. You said: "Be true to me, Robert."

Leonore. Is that what I said? Exactly that?

Robert. Such a thing one doesn't forget.

Leonore. They had forbidden us to call each other by our first names.

Robert. But you did it just the same.

Leonore. And why don't we do it any more?

Robert. You are playing with me.

Leonore. You are right, my friend. And I must not do it. It would look
like coquetry, although it is nothing but the joy of seeing you again.
You have shown me plainly enough that the dream of our childhood is
over.

Robert. It must be. Your father lifted me out of the gutter in a moment
of overflowing generosity. Everything that I think and know and feel I
must thank him for. And for that very reason I have lost the right of
independent action. I am a dependent of this house, and have not the
right to approach its young mistress--in any way whatever.

Leonore. Your own pride punishes your lying words!

Robert. Perhaps it is my pride that forces me to accept this position!

Leonore. And you are not willing to sacrifice a little of it for my
sake?

Robert. Don't torture me! It isn't that alone! Only think what I am
suffering. For the first time, this moment, when I sit opposite you, do
I realize anything like a home-coming! But I would be terribly selfish
if I allowed myself to admit this feeling. Back there in the alley is
my family!--Father, mother, sister--and this family--is my family! Oh,
I tell you things have happened back there that you in your goodness
can't even imagine.

Leonore. My dear friend, one doesn't have to go to India to become
estranged from one's family.

Robert. You, too?

Leonore. It is better not to speak of it. I am ashamed of myself. I am
even more of an outcast than you. I have lost all sense of duty.
A sort of gloomy ill-will has come over me and now it is almost
arrogance--towards my own people and all the others about them--and I'm
not arrogant or proud by nature! Tell me, what is it that----?

Robert. Shh!


              (Trast _and_ Muhlingk _enter at the right._)

Muhlingk. (_To_ Trast) Well, until to-morrow then. Count.--Ah, there is
the young man. (_Extending his hand_) Welcome, welcome, do you want to
go over the report at once?

Robert. I only came to present my respects, Herr Councillor, my papers
aren't unpacked yet.

Muhlingk. Well, well, there's no hurry. But what are you doing here,
Leonore?

Leonore. I simply wanted to say how d'ye do to Robert.

Muhlingk. Mm--But you know that Mama has been asking for you. Come,
young man, I have plans for you; plans. You know, Count, we have no
secrets from you.

Trast. You can get to know him better if you are alone with him. (_To_
Robert) I'll wait for you here.

Leonore. (_Shaking_ Robert's _hand_) Au revoir, Robert.

Muhlingk. Hm! (_Reprovingly. He goes out with_ Robert)

Leonore. Count, you heard--? I must go.

Trast. Gnadiges Fraulein! (Leonore _goes to door, he watches her, she
turns and he shakes his finger at her_)

Leonore. (_Surprised_) What do you mean, Count?

Trast. Hm--I mean! (_He claps his hands_)

Leonore. And what does that mean?

Trast. That means--(_Through his hands_) Bravo!

Leonore. (_Dignified_) I don't understand you. Count--ah! (_She bursts
out laughing and goes up frankly and puts out her hand_) Yes, I do
understand.

Trast. (_Taking her hand in both his_) That's better.

Leonore. Count!

Trast. Fraulein! (Leonore _goes out_) She's a splendid specimen--that
girl! I'll let her have him. He must have her.


                            (_Enter_ Kurt.)


Kurt. (_To_ Stengel _who is coming in_) Courage, courage, my boy! Come
in.

Trast. (_Recognising_ Kurt _as he comes in with_ Brandt) He--here!

Kurt. (_Sees_ Trast; _startled, goes up to him, in a low voice_) You
wished to see me, sir?

Trast. No, but I'm glad to see you.

Kurt. With whom have I the honor----?

Trast. Count Trast.

Kurt. (_Astonished and very polite_) Ah, we may thank--thank--our
employe--er--our--a traveling acquaintanceship, I suppose--for this
visit?

Trast. You are the son of the house?

Kurt. I beg your pardon, yes! At your service! Naturally--ah, Count, we
are both men-of-the world enough to forget the affair of last night.

Trast. You think so?

Kurt. The girl is nice, I ought to know if anyone does. All honor to
your good taste. But you must admit that I was in the right. I hope
there will be no rivalry?

Trast. Especially, as the girl's brother is the best friend I have?

Kurt. (_Frightened, controls himself, then, after a pause_) What do you
intend to do?

Trast. I have not decided as yet. If I can dissuade him from his
imaginary duties to your house, and if I find you prepared to break off
all further relationship, then perhaps I can remain silent.

Kurt. And otherwise?

Trast. That would be a matter for Herr Heinecke to settle.

Kurt. Do you think I would accept a challenge from my clerk?

Trast. Your what?--Oh, I see.

Kurt. Count, do what you please.

Trast. That is a habit of mine. Herr Heinecke is at this moment in your
father's office. Permit me to remain here a few minutes in order that I
may shorten your meeting. I should like to prevent you two from shaking
hands.

Kurt. The room is yours, Count.

Trast. I thank you. (_They separate, and_ Trast _looks at the
pictures_. Kurt _walks excitedly away from the others_)

Lothar. (_To_ Hugo) What happened between those two? If I remember
rightly there was a Count Trast in our regiment who came to a bad end.
Wait a moment.

Hugo. (_Nervously_) You aren't going to start a quarrel?

Lothar. Why not? The other fellow has some scheme. (_He approaches_
Trast) The Count seems to like solitude.

Trast. (_Turning_) Decidedly!

Lothar. That is rather impolite.

Trast. (_Looking at him squarely_) Ah! you seem to be carrying your
sense of honor on your shoulder, Herr--er--pardon!

Lothar. My name is Lothar Brandt and I feel that it is necessary to add
that I am Lieutenant of the Reserves in the Cuirassier Regiment "Crown
Prince."

Trast. (_Politely_) Is that all?

Lothar. (_Threateningly_) Is that all, Count?

Trast. Pardon me! One serves in the Reserves during war time only. When
I came back I hoped that I could live in peace.

Lothar. You are mistaken, Count, one serves in the Reserves during the
rifle practice, as well.

Trast. Do you need me for rifle practice?

Lothar. Permit me, Count, to ask you a question.

Trast. With pleasure.

Lothar. In the regiment to which it is my great honor to belong there
was formerly a young fellow who bore the same name as yours.

Trast. Ah? Then it was probably I.

Lothar. (_Sharply_) The man left the army under a cloud.

Trast. Exactly! Exactly! (_Very polite_) And if you wish to say in
other words, that when we meet on the street you don't care to
recognize me--I release you from the necessity of greeting--I can do
without it. (_Bows and picks up a portfolio which he examines_)

Hugo. (_Enthusiastically_) Well, _I_ was never despatched as elegantly
as that, (_He approaches_ Trast _and bows deeply_)--Permit me--my name
is Stengel!

Trast. (_Turning_) Charmed!

Hugo. Stengel! (Trast _bows--they talk_)

Kurt. (_Comes forward and joins_ Lothar) Man, what are you trying to
do. That's the almighty firm of Trast and Company.--Do you want to ruin
your father's business?

Lothar. (_Dismayed_) Why didn't you tell me before?

Kurt. Whatever happens we must straighten the matter out

Lothar. If you can do it in perfectly good form.

Kurt. Pardon me. Count--my friend regrets----

Lothar. Regrets is hardly the word, Kurt.

Kurt. (_Stuttering_) Well--er--er----

Trast. Perhaps our friend would like to consider our little
conversation as not having taken place?

Lothar. We can go as far as that at least, Kurt.

Trast. I must keep pace with his generosity, and--express the same
desire.

Kurt. Then the matter is settled.

Lothar. And I take the liberty to express my pleasure at meeting
personally, the man whose work I have respected for so many years.

Trast. (_Very politely_) You see, Lieutenant, that it was not entirely
superfluous when I asked "Is that all?" As business men, we can
understand each other perfectly. Gentlemen, Herr Brandt Junior, heir to
the worthy firm of importers, Brandt and Stengel, with which I am
pleased to have business relations, has just given me a little
statement in private on the theme of "Honor." Permit me to make the
answer public. (_They sit down_) In confidence, there is no such thing
as honor, (_All are astonished_) Don't be frightened. It won't hurt
you.

Lothar. And what we call honor?

Trast. What we commonly call honor is nothing more than the shadow we
throw in the sunlight of publicity. But the worst part of it is that we
have as many kinds of honor as we have business circles and strata. How
can one find his way among them?

Lothar. (_Sharply_) You are mistaken. Count. There is only one honor,
just as there is only one sun and one God. One must feel that--or he is
no gentleman.

Trast. Hm!--Permit me to tell you a little tale. In a journey through
Central Asia I stopped at the house of a Thibetan Chief. I was dusty
and footsore. He received me, sitting on his throne. Beside him was his
charming little wife. "Rest yourself, traveler," he said to me, "my
wife will prepare you a bath and then we men shall dine together." And
he gave me over to his young wife.--Gentlemen, if ever in my life my
self-control was put to test it was in that hour--And when I returned
to the hall, what did I find? The attendants under arms, threatening
voices and half-drawn swords. "You must die!" cried my host, "you have
given a deadly insult to the honor of my house. You have scorned to
accept the most sacred thing I could offer you."--You see, gentlemen, I
am still living, for eventually the deficient sense of honor of the
barbaric European was forgiven. (_They laugh_) If you happen to know
any of our modern writers on the theme of adultery you might tell them
this story.


          (_All laugh, and move gradually towards the left._)


Trast. (_Continuing_) Gentlemen, I don't want to be considered immoral.
The study of the puzzles of civilization is a thing apart.--You see it
lies in the nature of your so-called honor, that it may only be
possessed by the certain few, the demi-gods; for it is an emotional
luxury that loses value in direct proportion as it is appropriated by
the rabble.

Kurt. But that is a paradox. Count. Is it not permitted to everyone to
be a man of honor?

Trast. On the contrary. Then the poorest devil in the alley might
dispute the honor of a gentleman. (Kurt _is perplexed_)

Lothar. If he acts according to honor, then he must be a gentleman.

Trast. Hm! Really? May I tell you another, a shorter story?--But I am
afraid I'm boring you.

Lothar _and_ Hugo. (_Laughing_) No!--No!

Trast. It took place somewhere in South America--the Spaniards are the
aristocrats there,--the population is a mixture of negroes, Indians,
and a sort of white trash. A product of this mixed race,--his name
was--hm--Pepe--had the opportunity of being transported to the Spanish
mother country where he (_Breathes on his left elbow_) absorbed a
little of the pure Castillan sense of honor. (Robert _enters without
being heard and listens_) When he came back, after several years, he
found his little sister on all too intimate terms with a young
aristocrat--Gentleman, we mustn't get angry, Considering her origin it
was the girl's destiny. But the young fellow dared to attempt to avenge
his sister's honor, not as a mestizo but as a Hidalgo!

Kurt. (_In a hurt voice_) Listen, that means me!

Trast. You see, gentlemen, that was madness and he was treated as a
madman. Then the fellow showed his real nature. Like a thug he waited
for the young nobleman and he shot him down. He was sentenced, and even
under the very gallows the fool declared,--his name was Pepe--that he
was dying for his honor. Gentlemen, isn't that absurd?

Robert. (_Who has made his appearance unobserved_) You are mistaken, my
friend! This fool was right. I should have acted exactly the same way.

Trast. Oh, oh, it's you! (_Going quickly to him_) You don't know these
people! Don't look around. Come with me. (_Draws him toward the door_)

Robert. Isn't that Kurt?

Trast. They are strangers.--Come. You will excuse me, gentlemen? We are
in a hurry. Goodbye.

Lothar. (_To_ Kurt) Now, I'll settle him. (_To_ Trast) Permit me just
one more question, Count. (_Affectedly_) If you intend to do away with
honor entirely; what do you expect gentlemen of honor to put in its
place?

Trast. (_Straightening up_) Duty, young man--(_To himself_) This is
certainly unpleasant, Gentlemen----

Kurt. (_As_ Trast _and_ Robert _are about to leave_) It was a great
honor to our house, Count.

Robert. Pardon me, but you are Herr Kurt Muhlingk?

Kurt. That is my name?

Robert. (_Confused_) But--aren't--? Of course, you don't recognize me!
I am--(_He is about to offer his hand to_ Kurt)

Trast. (_Stepping between_) You don't shake hands with this man.

Robert. (_Looks about confused, stares at_ Kurt, _then at_ Trast, _then
at_ Kurt _again, gives a little cry, then controls himself_) I should
like to have a word with you--Herr Muhlingk--in private.

Kurt. As you see, I have some guests here now, but in an hour I shall
be at your service.

Robert. In an hour, Herr Muhlingk!

Trast. (_To himself_) He found out quickly enough!

                (Trast _and_ Robert _go to the door as_


                          THE CURTAIN FALLS.)




                                ACT III.


Scene:--_The same as in Act I. A lamp is burning on the table. Daylight
is coming through the window. Up-stage to the left is a bed, turned
down. It has not been slept in_. Robert _sits at the table his face in
his hands_.


       (_Enter_ Frau Heinecke _in night-cap and wearing a woollen
                             under-skirt._)

Frau Heinecke. Good-morning, my son! (_He does not answer_) Poor thing!
he ain't even been to bed! (_Goes to him, wiping her eyes_) Bobby!

Robert. (_Starts up_) What is it? What do you want?

Frau Heinecke. Lord, how you yell at me! And your teeth are chattering
with cold! Won't you drink some coffee? (_He shakes his head
decisively_) Take a little piece of advice from your old mother, Bobby;
even if a person is in trouble, he's got to sleep. Sleep puts marrow in
the bones. (_Puts out the lamp_)

Robert. Mother, Mother, what have you done?

Frau Heinecke. (_Crying_) We aren't to blame, my boy!

Robert. Not to blame!

Frau Heinecke. I brought her up honorably. There has never been a bad
example in this house. I kept her at her schooling and I had her
confirmed, though that ain't even necessary any more. She went up to
the altar in a new black pleated dress. I bought it myself at a
bargain, and I put my own wedding handkerchief into her hand, and the
preacher spoke so movin', so movin'.

Robert. But how could you allow her to have anything to do with
that--fellow!

Frau Heinecke. Perhaps it wasn't really so bad----

Robert. What further proof do you want? Didn't he admit everything to
me with the most brutal frankness? Or did Alma try to lie about it? And
to cap the climax, last evening I was in Michalski's house. Everything
was beautifully arranged. Your dear daughter Auguste had prepared a
secret nest, with curtains and carpets and red hanging lamps. She kept
watch at the door herself and was--paid, paid for it! The cur was in my
hands yesterday. If I had only finished him then!

Frau Heinecke. Why, Robert----

Robert. Be still! He promised satisfaction. I accomplished that much at
least. He saw I was ready for anything. He said he would find means of
giving me satisfaction by to-day. I thought of the poor little girl's
future and let him go.

Frau Heinecke. Well, I never suspected anything wrong.

Robert. You must have seen it coming. What did you think when he
brought her home so late at night?

Frau Heinecke. When a person is asleep, he's glad enough he don't have
to think. Besides, she had a latchkey.

Robert. But you couldn't neglect the fact that if he brought her home
he must have met her somewhere in the city.

Frau Heinecke. Well, yes. I thought she was going with him.

Robert. I don't know what you mean.

Frau Heinecke. She was _going_ with him.

Robert. So you said, but I----

Frau Heinecke. Just like any young girl goes with a young gentleman.

Robert. Goes? Where?

Frau Heinecke. To concerts, to restaurants--If he's got money, to the
theater, and in summer to Grunewald[7] or Treptow.[8]

Robert. Alone?

Frau Heinecke. Alone? (_Clacks her tongue_) No! With the young man!

Robert. I meant: without her parents?

Frau Heinecke. Certainly. Or do you expect the old mother is going to
toddle after the young ones on her weak legs.

Robert. Mm! So you knew she "went" with him?

Frau Heinecke. No, I just thought so.

Robert. And when you asked her?

Frau Heinecke. Why should I ask? That would only be wasting breath. A
girl ought to know herself what's good for her.

Robert. Oh!

Frau Heinecke. But that she--oh, who'd have thought it! Lord, how you
tremble. I must get this room warm for you. (_Goes to stove_)

Robert. (_To himself_) No way out! No way to save things! Shame!--a
life of shame!

Frau Heinecke. (_Into the kitchen_) Father, bring in some coke!
(_Kneels and shakes down the fire_)

Robert. (_To himself_) What sort of satisfaction can he have meant?
Marriage? (_He laughs_) And if it came to that, I'm not sure whether I
should want marriage for her. At least there is the chance of a duel.
If he shoots me down, then I'm saved. But--what will become of these?
(_Gesture_)


(_Enter_ Heinecke _in a torn dressing-gown, and large felt slippers, he
carries a basket of coke._)


Heinecke. (_Gruffly_) Good-morning.

Robert. Good-morning, Father.

Heinecke. (_Muttering_) Yes, yes----

Frau Heinecke. Quit grumbling, Father. Help me make a fire.

Heinecke. Yes--Yes, we'll make a fire, (_They both kneel before the
stove_)

Robert. (_To himself_) And if I kill him? I'll admit that would be a
relief! But the question remains: what will become of them? (_Looking
toward his parents_) I'm afraid that I can't afford the luxury of a
sense of honor. (_Crying out_) Oh, how vile I am!

Heinecke. Something wrong, my boy?

Frau Heinecke. It's because of Alma. He hasn't even been to bed.

Heinecke. Yes, Alma! That's what a man grows gray in honor for. But I
always said it: the Avenue'll bring us trouble some day.

Frau Heinecke. (_To_ Heinecke) Father, don't cry! (_They embrace_)

Robert. (_To himself_) But someone's heart must break!

Heinecke. Oh, I'm not crying! I'm master of this house! I know what
I've got to do! Poor cripple has his honor, too. Think I'll stand for
it! My daughter! She'll see! (_Swinging the poker_) I'll give her my
curse! My paternal curse!

Frau Heinecke. (_Arranging the bed_) Now, now, now----

Heinecke. Yes, you! You don't understand anything about honor.
(_Strikes his breast_) There lies honor! Out into the streets she'll
go! Out into the night and the storm!

Robert. Do you want her to be absolutely ruined?

Frau Heinecke. Let him talk, he don't mean anything.

Robert. Won't you see where she is? I suppose she's ashamed to show
herself.

Frau Heinecke. She wanted to sleep.

Robert. Oh!

Frau Heinecke. (_She goes to the bed-room door_) Alma! (_No answer_)

Robert. Oh, she never should have been left alone.

Frau Heinecke. (_Opens the door_) Just as I said, she's asleep.

Robert. She can sleep!

Frau Heinecke. Will you get up, you worthless girl?

Heinecke. Come, get up, or there'll be trouble.

Robert. Father, Mother, quick, before she comes! Don't be too hard with
her. It will only make her more stubborn.

Frau Heinecke. You are a good deal more clever than your old mother,
but just the same I know how to take care of my children. I'll keep her
like in a reform-school if it breaks my heart:--cleaning boots, peeling
potatoes, cleaning floors, scrubbing steps, she's got to do it all.

Robert. And suppose she runs away some night?

Heinecke. Pah, she'll be locked up. I'll have the key in my pocket.
How'll she run away then?

Robert. But think, she is only a child! And the rest are more to blame
than she. Her own sister--Ah, if you want to be severe you ought to be
severe with that damned procuress!--I hope I can demand once for all
that Alma be taken absolutely away from under the influence of her
sister and that you'll show Auguste and her husband the door!

Heinecke. Certainly, we'll make a clean sweep of that outfit. I've had
enough of Michalski. Now you see. Mother, Robert has to come all the
way from India to say it! You haven't any respect for me, poor old man!

Robert. I beg your pardon. Father--this doesn't concern you.

Heinecke. Just the same----

Frau Heinecke. (_Her apron over her face_) But she is my child, too!
And I love all my children the same!

Robert. Even if they aren't worthy of your love?

Frau Heinecke. Then all the more.

Robert. Shh!


(Alma _appears in the bed-room door dressed in a nightgown and a while
underskirt, her hair is down and she looks fearfully from one to the
other._)


Heinecke. Hoho!

Frau Heinecke. (_Wringing her hands_) Child! child, is this our reward?
Haven't I done everything in the world for you? Haven't I kept you like
a princess? But now it's over. What are you standing there for? Get a
broom! Sweep the room!


(Alma _slips past her with her elbows up, as if fearing a blow, into
the kitchen._)


Heinecke. (_Walking excitedly up and down_) I'm your poor old father
and I tell you I brought you into the world!--Yes, an honest old man!
That I am!


(Alma _appears in the kitchen door with broom and dustpan._)

Robert. (_To himself_) How sweet she looks in her penitence! and
she----

Frau Heinecke. Well, are you going to begin?

Heinecke. (_Ceremoniously_) Alma, my daughter, come here--close!

Alma. Please, please, don't strike me.

Heinecke. That is the least I'll do! I'm an honest old man! Yes, here
lies honor! Do you know what I'm going to do with you now? I'm going to
curse you! What do you say to that?

Alma. Go away--let me alone.

Heinecke. You defy me, do you?--you don't know me yet! you!

Frau Heinecke. Father, be still! she's got to work.

Heinecke. What! I can't be allowed to curse my own disobedient child.

Frau Heinecke. Oh, that only happens in books!

Heinecke. Hey?

Robert. My dear parents! You mustn't go on like this! Please leave me
alone with her a moment. Meanwhile, dress. I daresay there will be
visitors.

Heinecke. And I'm not allowed to curse my--Hmm, wait!


              (Frau Heinecke _pulls him out of the room._)


Robert. (_To himself_) Now I'll see what she really thinks, and what I
have to do! (_Softly_) Come here, sister.

Alma. Mother said I had to clean the room.

Robert. That can wait! (_Takes her hand_) You don't need to be afraid I
won't strike you! And I won't curse you, either. You may be sure you
have one good friend who is willing to keep watch over you--a true and
considerate friend.

Alma. You are too good--Much too good! (_She sinks down before him
weeping_)

Robert. There, there--get up! Sit on the footstool!--There--(_She sits
on the stool_) and straighten up, so I can see your eyes. (_Tries to
lift her head, but she hides it in her lap_) You won't! Well, cry then!
I won't send you away from here--and you will cry for many a day and
many a night when you really understand what you have done! Tell me,
you realize, don't you, that all the rest of your life must be
repentance?

Alma. Yes, I know.

Robert. (_Takes her head in his hands_) Yes, yes, sister, and this is
what a man works ten years in a foreign country to build up a fortune
for--Ten long years! and twenty will hardly be enough to make us forget
this disgrace----

Alma. In twenty years I'll be old.

Robert. Old?--What difference does that make? For us two there is no
more youth.

Alma. Oh, God!

Robert. (_Springing up in excitement_) Don't be afraid, we'll stay
together! We'll find some hiding place; like hunted animals! Yes,
that's what we are! We've been hunted and mangled! (Alma _sinks down,
her face in the empty chair_) Only we two can heal each other's wounds!
You mine, and I yours. (_To himself_) Oh, how she lies there! God in
Heaven, there is only one thing to do!--the pure little child-soul he
has trampled into the dirt, he can never give back--other satisfaction
I don't need!--Alma!

Alma. (_Sitting up_) What?

Robert. You really love him?

Alma. Whom?

Robert. Whom? Him!

Alma. Oh, yes.

Robert. And if you lost him entirely, would you feel that you could not
bear it at all?

Alma. Oh no!

Robert. Good!--You are a brave little girl!--One can learn to
forget!--One can learn--(_He sits down_) Above all, you must work! The
singing nonsense is over, of course! You have learned dressmaking, you
can begin that again! But you mustn't go back into a shop. There are
too many temptations and bad examples there!

Alma. Yes, yes, the girls are bad.

Robert. Let him among you who is without sin--you know! And least of
all, you! Where we shall go I can't say as yet. I couldn't think of
uprooting our old parents; otherwise I should take them along. It
doesn't matter where--only a long, long way, where you will belong only
to me and your work--For you can take my word for it all--tired is
half-happy!--Mother and Father would live with us, and you shall help
me to take care of them. Besides your dressmaking, you'll have to wash
and cook. Will you do that and be patient with Father and Mother?

Alma. If you want me to.

Robert. No, you must want to with a good will, otherwise it is useless.
I ask you again, will you?

Alma. Yes, from to-morrow on, I'll do everything.

Robert. That's right--but why from to-morrow and not from to-day?

Alma. Because to-day I was----

Robert. Well, well?

Alma. Oh, please----

Robert. (_Kindly_) Out with it!

Alma. I wanted--to--go--so bad--to the masked ball! (_There is a long
pause_, Robert _gets up and paces the room_) May I?

Alma. May I?

Robert. Call father and mother.

Alma. Why not? (_Whining_) Just once! Can't a person have just one good
time, if it's to be the last of everything.

Robert. Do you know what you're saying?--You----

Alma. (_Arrogantly_) Yes, I do know what I'm saying! I'm not such a
little fool! I know a few things about life myself--What are you so
excited about, anyway? Isn't it a pretty hard lot when a person has to
sit here for nothing? The sun never shines in an old hole like this,
nor the moon either, and all you hear on every side is jabbering and
scolding!--and nobody with any decent manners. Father scolds, and
mother scolds--and you sew your fingers bloody!--and you get fifty
pfennigs a day and that don't even pay for the kerosene!--and when you
are young and pretty--and you want to have a good time and go in decent
society a little--I was always in favor of something higher--I always
liked to read about it in the stories. And as for getting married? Who
should I marry, then? Such plebeians as those that work down there in
the factory don't interest me! No siree! All they can do is drink up
their pay and come home and beat you!--I want a gentleman and if I
can't have one I don't want anybody! And Kurt has always treated me
decently--I never learned any dirty words from him, I'll tell you--I've
picked them up right here at home! And I'm not going to stay here,
either! And I don't need you to take care of me, either! Girls like me
don't starve to death!

Robert. (_Starts to speak then stops_) Call Father and mother!

Alma. And now I'm going to ask father if I--(_As he threatens her_)
Yes, yes, I'm going! (_She goes out_)

Robert. So that is the way it stands?--That's my sister! Ah, what a
weak fool I was!--Began to sugar this indecency with poetry and
sorrow!--That wasn't seduction--it was in the blood!--Well, I must act,
now! Rough if need be, otherwise everything is lost.


(_Enter_ Frau Heinecke, _pushing_ Alma _before her_, Heinecke _follows,
his mouth full._)

Heinecke. This impudence!

Frau Heinecke. Masked balls cost money. Now, you'll stay at home.

Heinecke. Do you deserve my curse or not? I curse you again, you toad!

Robert. Alma, go into the other room! I have something to say to father
and mother.

Frau Heinecke. And don't slop around so! Dress yourself! The gray dress
with the patches!

Alma. That old thing!

Heinecke. Get out!

Frau Heinecke. And you won't drink any coffee, either! Now, now, don't
cry! (_Aside_) It's on the back of the stove.


                           (Alma _goes out._)

Robert. Father, Mother,--don't be angry with me--I--you--there must be
a great change in your life.

Heinecke. What's the matter?

Robert. I am certain that Alma will be absolutely ruined if she is not
brought into surroundings that make it impossible for her to return to
her previous life.--But what will become of you? You can't stay here,
if you did, you would soon be a prey to the Michalskis. So the long and
short of it is--you must come with me.

Frau Heinecke. (_Frightened_) To India?

Robert. It makes no difference where. Perhaps even as far as India.
Trast's influence reaches a long way. We are in a position to choose.

Heinecke. (_Defiantly_) Oh yes, choose India!

Frau Heinecke. I don't know which end I'm on!

Robert. It will be hard for you! I realize that. But don't worry; it's
not as bad as it seems. You can live a thousand times more comfortably
in the tropics than here. You can have as many servants as you like!

Heinecke. Thousands!

Robert. And your own house!

Heinecke. And palms?

Robert. More than you can use.

Heinecke. And you can pick the fruit right off the trees.

Robert. It picks itself.

Heinecke. And it costs nothing.

Robert. Almost nothing.

Heinecke. And the parrots fly around--and the apes? Like out at the
zoo?

Robert. So you will come?

Frau Heinecke. What do you think. Father?

Heinecke. Well--'s far's I'm concerned, we'll come.

Robert. Thank you, thank you! (_Aside_) Thank God, I didn't have to
force them! And now we mustn't lost a moment. Where is paper and pen?


             (Heinecke _meditatively scratches his head._)


Frau Heinecke. Alma has some. (_She goes into bedroom_)

Heinecke. Of course, she's always writing letters. (_He shuts the stove
door_)

Robert. (_To himself with a sigh of relief_) Oh, now I'm doubly curious
to know what satisfaction he'll offer--and I shall have to refuse!
Refuse a duel!--They'll call me a coward and I'll be dishonored! Oh,
well, I don't need their honor, I have to earn my bread.

Frau Heinecke. (_Entering_) Everything is laid out on the table--or do
you want to write here?

Robert. No, no, I shan't be disturbed in there.

Frau Heinecke. You look tired. You must rest a little!

Robert. (_Shakes his head_) If Herr Muhlingk, Junior, sends word, or
comes himself, call me. (_He goes off_)

Frau Heinecke. (_Sinking to the chair_) India!

Heinecke. Drag us old folks half round the world!

Frau Heinecke. Lord Almighty!

Heinecke. What is it?

Frau Heinecke. Michalskis!

Heinecke. What? Them! (_Buttons his coat_) They'd better come!


                         (_A knock is heard._)


Both. (_Quietly_) Come in!


                   (_Enter_ Michalski _and_ Auguste.)

Michalski. Morning!

Frau Heinecke. Shh!

Heinecke. (_Threatening with his fist_) You--you two--get out of here!

Auguste. (_Sitting down_) It's right cold this morning!

Michalski. (_Sits down and uncorks a bottle_) Here's a bottle of
liqueur I've brought you. Extra fine--Get me a corkscrew.

Frau Heinecke. Some other time! We have orders to throw you out the
door!

Auguste. Who said so?

Frau Heinecke. Shh! Robert!

Auguste. What? You let him order you around in your own house.

Heinecke. (_In an undertone_) Shh! he's In the bedroom there.

Auguste. (_Pityingly_) Poor father! He's trembling with fear!

Michalski. The idea of frightening two honest people like that! The
scoundrel!

Frau Heinecke. He ain't a scoundrel! He's a good boy and he's going to
take care of us!

Heinecke. Even if he does want us to go to India!

Both. What! Where?

Frau Heinecke. To India.

Auguste. What for?

Frau Heinecke. Just because Alma wanted to go to a masked ball.

Michalski. Crazy!

Frau Heinecke. The few pieces of furniture that made the home so
friendly we've got to leave 'em all behind.

Auguste. (_Sentimentally_) And poor me, are you going to leave me,
too?--Are you going to sell 'em?

Frau Heinecke. The furniture? (Auguste _nods_) We'll have to.

Auguste. The mirror and chairs, too? (Frau Heinecke _nods--With
feeling_) If I was in your place, instead of selling them for a song,
I'd give them to your daughter you're leaving behind. Then you'd be
sure they'd be in good hands!

Frau Heinecke. (_Looking at her suspiciously, then confidentially, to
her husband_) Father! she wants the arm-chairs already.

Auguste. (_Returning to the subject_) Or if you will sell 'em, we would
always be the ones to pay the highest, just to keep them in the family.

Heinecke. But we ain't gone yet.

Michalski. If I was in your place----

Frau Heinecke. What'll we do? Now, we're absolutely dependent on him!
When he orders, we've got to obey, or else we're put on your hands.

Auguste. We haven't enough to eat for ourselves.


            (_A knock is heard. Enter_ Councillor Muhlingk.
                      _All start up frightened._)


Muhlingk. Good-morning, my people. Is your son at home?

Heinecke. (_Humbly_) Yes, sir.

Frau Heinecke, (_Opening the door_) Robert! (_Tenderly_) Oh, the dear
boy, he's fallen asleep in his chair! He didn't sleep a wink all
night--Bobby! The Herr Councillor--He's sound asleep!

Muhlingk. (_Kindly_) Ah? so much the better! Don't wake him.

Heinecke. Shut the door!

Frau Heinecke. But didn't he say----

Heinecke.--If the young Herr Muhlingk came, he said--(_He shuts the
door quietly_)

Auguste. (_To_ Michalski, _with gesture of counting money_) Watch!

Muhlingk. (_Who has been looking around the room_) You seem to be
living in a very comfortable place, my good people.

Heinecke. (_Deferentially_) Would the Herr Councillor be so kind as to
sit down?

Muhlingk. Ha! ha! real silk.

Frau Heinecke. Yes, it is silk.

Muhlingk. A present, perhaps?

Frau Heinecke. (_Hesitatingly_) Well, yes, you might say----

Muhlingk. (_Innocently_) From my son?

Heinecke. Yes, sir.           \
                                >  (_Together_)
Frau Heinecke. Sh!            /

Muhlingk. (_Aside_) Rascal! (_Aloud_) By the way, your good son has not
acted in a very dutiful manner toward mine. Frankly, I expected a
little more gratitude. You can tell him that he is discharged and that
I shall give him until four this afternoon to settle his accounts.

Frau Heinecke. Oh, that will make him feel bad.

Heinecke. He loved the Herr Councillor like his own father!

Muhlingk. Really! I'm glad to hear it! But that is not what brought me
here, good people; you have a daughter.

Auguste. (_Advancing_) At your service!

Muhlingk, What can I do for you?

Auguste. (_Deferentially_) I am the daughter.

Muhlingk. Ah! very good, very good. But I was not referring to you. The
girl's name is Alma.

Frau Heinecke. That's it. And a mighty pretty girl, if I do say it
myself.

Muhlingk. Ah! it is always pleasing to see children who make their
parents happy. But there is one thing that I don't like--your daughter
has taken advantage of the fact that I have allowed you to occupy my
house, and has established illicit relations with my son. Frankly, I
expected a little more gratitude.

Frau Heinecke. Oh, Herr Councillor!

Muhlingk. In order to sever all connection whatsoever between your
house and mine, I offer you a cash compensation--which you, my dear
Heinecke, and your daughter Alma, may divide, with the understanding
that half will go to her as a dowry, as soon as she finds someone
who--(_Laughs discreetly_) Well, you understand! Until then, the entire
sum will be at your disposal. Do you agree?

Auguste. (_Behind_ Heinecke) Say yes!

Heinecke. I--I----

Muhlingk. I have offered an unusually large amount in order to free
myself of a promise extracted yesterday by your son from my son.--It
amounts to--a--fifty thousand marks.

Heinecke. (_With an exclamation_) God! Herr Councillor, are you in
earnest?

Frau Heinecke. I'm getting dizzy! (_Sinks into a chair_)

Muhlingk. (_Aside_) I made it too high!--I put the question again, will
you be satisfied with forty thousand marks?

Auguste. (_Nudging her father_) Say yes, quick--or he'll come down
again.

Heinecke. I can't believe it, Herr Councillor! Even the forty--There
isn't that much money--It's nonsense--show me the money.

Muhlingk. It is at the office, waiting for you.

Heinecke. And the cashier won't say: Put the fellow out--he's
drunk!--Oh, he can be right sharp with the poor people when he wants
to--that cashier! (Muhlingk _draws out a check and fills it; hands it
to_ Heinecke: _they all study the writing_) Forty thousand marks!
Always the generous gentleman, Herr Councillor. Give me your hand!

Muhlingk. (_Putting his hand in his pocket_) One thing more: to-morrow
evening a moving van will be in front of your door; within two hours
you will be good enough to leave my property,--and I hope that will be
the last I hear of you.

Heinecke. Don't say that, Herr Councillor! If the visit of an honest
old man isn't disagreeable to you, I'll take the liberty of calling now
and then. Yes, I'm an honest old man!

Muhlingk. Certainly! Good-day, my good people! (_Aside_) Pah! (_He goes
out_)

Heinecke. Mother! Forty thousand! (Michalski _tries to embrace him_)
Three paces to the rear, my son! (_Takes out an old handkerchief and
carefully does up the check in it, then puts it in breast pocket_) Now
you can be as tender as you like.

Frau Heinecke. I'm half sick with joy! (_The two embrace and weep_)
When I think! I don't need to go to market without money any more. And
when I'm cold in the afternoons, I can make a fire without having a bad
conscience--a good fire--and in the evening cold meat!

Heinecke. And in the evening I can take the horse-car whenever I want!

Michalski. Exactly four hundred thousand times, at ten pfennigs per!

Frau Heinecke. And you'll buy me a sofa.

Auguste. Now you won't be going to India.

Frau Heinecke. For the Lord's sake.

Heinecke. Are you crazy?

Auguste. And what will Herr Robert have to say to that?

Frau Heinecke. (_Happily_) Yes--Robert! (_Goes to bedroom door_)

Auguste. (_Holding her back_) I advise you to let him sleep. He'll hear
about it soon enough.

Frau Heinecke. (_Startled_) What d'you mean by that?

Heinecke. (_Pulling at_ Frau Heinecke's _dress and pointing to kitchen
door_) He! he! Her! In there!

Frau Heinecke. Oh, the poor, dear child!

Heinecke. (_Mysteriously_) Well give her a little surprise!--Shh! (_All
tiptoe to the kitchen door_--Heinecke, _who is leading the way, opens
the door suddenly, then with a cry, starts back_) Wha--wh--Mother!
What's that?

Frau Heinecke. (_Clasping her hands above her head_) Good Lord!

Michalski. (_Looking over their shoulders_) The devil!

Heinecke. (_With pretended severity_) You come here!

Alma. (_Outside_) Oh, please--no!

Heinecke. Are you coming?


(_Enter_ Alma _dressed in the robe of the Indian Princess, her hands
covering her face for shame. All laugh and exclaim in surprise at the
costume_. Auguste _feels the material._)


Auguste. The Indian dress.

Michalski. From the stark-naked princess!

Alma. I--just--wanted--to try it on! I'll take it right off!

Frau Heinecke. Ach! what a little angel!

Alma. Aren't you angry with me any more?

Heinecke. Angry! (_Then recalling his severity_) That is--yes--very.
But for once we'll allow mercy to take the place of justice. (_Turning
around_) That was pretty good, eh?

Frau Heinecke. (_Strokes_ Alma's _hair and leads her toward the left_)
Come, sit down. No, here on the arm-chair!

Alma. What is it--what's happened?

Heinecke. Ha! ha!


                 (All _take their places about him._)


Alma. And I can go to the masked ball?

Heinecke. Ha--ha! Yes, you can go to the masked ball.

Auguste. (_Ironically_) The poor child!

Heinecke. (_Jumping up_) I must go this minute to the bank!

Michalski. (_Opening bottle of liqueur_) Wait! We'll wet up our luck so
it'll stick! Alma, some glasses.

Frau Heinecke. (_Getting up_) Let the poor child sit still! I'll 'tend
to that myself! (_She goes to the washstand and brings a set of liqueur
glasses. To_ Auguste) What did you mean before about Robert?

Auguste. You'll see quick enough.

Frau Heinecke. He won't grudge us old folks a little good luck, will
he?

Michalski. (_Sings_) "_So leben wir, so leben wir!_"


             (_The moving of a chair is heard in bedroom._)


Michalski. Ladies and Gentlemen, I drink to Fraulein Alma Heinecke, our
lucky-child, and above all, the House that has always shown itself,
generous----

Heinecke. The house of Muhlingk! Long live the House of Muhlingk!
Hurrah!


                (Robert _appears at the bedroom door._)


All. Hurrah! Hurrah!

Frau Heinecke. (_Startled_) There he is!


                        (_Embarrassed silence._)


Michalski. Morning, brother-in-law.

Robert. Will you kindly explain, Mother, how these two happen to be
sitting at the table of respectable people?

Michalski. Oh!

Heinecke. Don't be so inhospitable!

Frau Heinecke. (_Going toward him_) Bobby, you mustn't be proud,
specially to your own flesh and blood.

Robert. Hm--Alma, what is that? Who gave you permission----?

Heinecke. And you may as well know now as any time, there's no use
having any hopes about India. I prefer to spend my money in Germany.

Robert. (_Confused_) What has happened?

Frau Heinecke. You tell him, Father, you're the one that got the check!

Robert. What check?

Heinecke. (_Assuming a pose_) My son!--one doesn't often seem what one
really is--Such things are deeper--For that reason one must always be
respectful--you can never tell what is hidden under tattered clothes.
Anyone can wear a fur-lined coat.

Robert. Will you please explain what---
Heinecke. Explain?--What is there to explain--Don't look at me like
that! What are you looking at me that way for. Mother, I won't stand
it!

Frau Heinecke. Go on! Go on!

Heinecke. Well, as I said, it's simple enough. The Herr Councillor was
here.

Robert. He? Why didn't you call me.

Heinecke. Ah--In the first place because it was not the young
Muhlingk--When _your_ friend comes, then you can receive him. The old
gentleman is my friend--We've promised to call on each other. And
second: because I don't have to ask my son what is right for me to
do--Now you know--See?

Frau Heinecke. Oh, Father!

Heinecke. Don't interrupt me when I'm giving my son a little
admonition. From now on I'm not going to be fooled with.

Michalski. (_Behind him_) That's the way to talk.

Robert. Was the discussion about Alma?

Heinecke. In the first place the discussion was about you. You have
been discharged from his service, because of insubordination. Frankly,
I expected more gratitude.

Robert. You?

Heinecke. (_Sternly_) Yes, me! Your honest old father!--It isn't
pleasant for me to have my son wander around as a clerk out of a job.
Now you've got till four to settle your accounts or it will go hard
with you.

Robert. (_About to break out--controls himself_) Let's talk about Alma!
Did he offer satisfaction?

Heinecke. Certainly, absolute.

Robert. (_Hesitating, as if saying something foolish _) Ah--marriage?

Heinecke. What marriage?

Robert. With his son----

Heinecke. You must be crazy.

Robert. (_Anxiously_) Well, what else?

Heinecke. (_Slyly in his ear_) Forty thousand marks! (_Aloud_) Fine,
eh?

Robert. (_With a cry_) Money!

Frau Heinecke. (_Frightened_) Lord! I thought so!

Heinecke. Yes, sir! Here it is, good as gold!

Robert. What! you took it?

Heinecke. (_Wonderingly_) Well?

Robert. He offered you money and you took it! (_Against his will he
springs toward his father_)

Michalski. (_Stepping between them_) I advise you to leave the old man
alone!

Robert. (_Reeling back without noticing him_) Mother, you took it!

Frau Heinecke. (_Folding her hands_) We're poor folks, my boy! (Robert
_sinks down with a strange laugh on the work-stool_. Michalski _and_
Auguste _gather about_ Heinecke _and_ Frau Heinecke; Alma _sits
smiling, with folded hands_) God have mercy on us! There's something
wrong with him! (_Puts her hand on his shoulder_) My Boy, take a little
advice from your poor old mother. Don't step on your good fortune's
toes, for pride dies on the straw.

Robert. Straw wouldn't be the worst. Mother--I shall die on the grave's
edge, or in the gutter like a street cur! Only do give the money
back--(_Desperately_) See, I am talking perfectly calmly, perfectly
sensibly, I'll show you as plain as day what you must do. That fellow
has brought us into disgrace--But we are innocent--We needn't be
ashamed before anyone. A man can steal honor just the same as he can
steal a purse. No one can prevent that!--But if we let someone buy our
honor with cold money, then we have no honor at all--and it serves us
right--(Heinecke _turns to_ Michalski, _touching his forehead_) Heaven
knows I understand it all! I'm not critcizing--Really I'm not.--You are
poor and you've always been poor. Such a miserable existence! Nothing
but worry for daily bread destroys all judgment and all dignity. And
now you let yourselves be blinded by a little money!--but believe me,
it will never give you pleasure. Nothing will be left but disgust!
(_Choking_) Ah, the disgust! It chokes----

Frau Heinecke. That kind of talk is enough to turn you cold----

Heinecke. So _that_ is my son!

Robert. And don't imagine that you will lose by taking my advice. Look
at me! I have learned a few things, haven't I? I'm healthy, I can be
trusted, can't I--The few remaining years you can trust to me, can't
you?--Can't you see. I want nothing better than to work for you--I'll
make you rich! Rich! you can do what you like with me! I'll be your
slave! Your pack-horse--Only give back that money!

Heinecke. That's all very well! But a bird in the hand--Let me tell
you!

Michalski. You're right there, Father!

Heinecke. I certainly am right!--You run along and chase your sparrows,
my boy. I'll keep the bird I've got.

Michalski. Bravo!

Robert. And you, Mother?--(_She turns away_) You too?--God, what have I
left?--Alma, what about you? I offer you everything. Only help me! (_He
takes her hand. She struggles a little. He draws her toward the
center_) You've given yourself away. Well, perhaps that's your right.
But you won't _sell_ yourself--you can't sell your love in the public
market. Alma, tell them that!

Alma. (_Angrily_) Let me go!

Auguste. He's breaking the kid's arm.

Alma. You've got nothing to say to me any more. (_She breaks away_)

Robert. Little sister!

Alma. And I'm going to the masked ball, too! Ask mother if I ain't.

Robert. Mother!

Frau Heinecke. Why shouldn't the poor child have a little fun once in a
while?

Robert. (_Overcome_) So we've gone that far?

Michalski. (_Sitting in chair, mockingly_) Yes, we've gone that far!

Robert. You--_Procuror_! Get out of that chair! (Michalski _remains
seated_, Robert _takes hold of the back of the chair_) Get up, I say,
and get out of here, both of you!

Michalski. (_Threateningly_) Now that's a little too fresh!

Robert. (_Who has seized the chair_) Dare to lay a hand on me!

Frau Heinecke. (_Throwing herself between them_) You'll break my
arm-chair.

Robert. I suppose that comes from our friends on the Avenue whom you
hold in such high esteem!

Frau Heinecke. Of course it does!

Robert. From our dear Herr Kurt, I suppose?

Frau Heinecke. Well, yes!

Robert. (_With a wild laugh_) There it is, then! (_He throws the chair
to the floor, breaking it and kicking the pieces away from him_)

Frau Heinecke. (_Weeping_) My beautiful arm-chair! (_She picks up the
pieces carrying them to the left--then she sinks down on stool_)

Heinecke. This is getting uncomfortable! (_He starts to go out, right_)

Robert. (_Standing in his way_) Will you give that blood-money back?
Yes or no?

Heinecke. Give it back? (_Contemptuously_) Huh!

Robert. Then I'm through with you! and you, too, Mother. Is a man
brought into the world for that! To wear dishonor like a birthmark?
Very good! If I had to be born, why didn't you leave me in the dirt
when I first saw the day? Where I've got to wallow for the rest of my
life because my worthy family desires it!

Auguste. Do you hear that, Mother, and he was always your favorite.

Robert. No, no, Mother, don't listen to me! (_Kneeling beside her_) I
said nothing! If I said anything, it was only madness. To-day I feel as
though I were cut loose from everything that is human--or natural!
Mother, have pity on me! You can save me! Come with me!

Frau Heinecke. (_Sobbing_) How do I know you won't break the mirror,
too! in your blind fits.

Robert. (_Looks wildly at mirror, then rises_) We speak different
languages--We can't understand each other.

Michalski. (_Who has been quietly talking to_ Heinecke. _He slaps_
Robert _on the shoulder_) Now you've raised enough hell! Get out of
here!

Robert. (_Pushing him out of the way_) Back! (_As his parents and
sisters surround him with angry cries. Breaks out in hollow laughter_)
Ah, so that's it! You throw me out?

Michalski. (_Opens door_) Get out!


                 (Count Trast _appears on threshold._)


Trast. (_Slapping_ Michalski _on shoulder_) Thank you humbly for the
friendly welcome!

Robert. (_Recognizing_ Trast, _cries out, then extends his arms as if
to urge him away_) What do you want here?--In this dive?--Do you know
who we are?--We sell ourselves!--(_He laughs_) Look at me! No, I can't
bear it! (_He covers his face with hands_)


(_At the sight of_ Trast, Alma _shamefacedly slinks away_. Michalski
_and_ Auguste _follow her into kitchen._)


Trast. Pull yourself together! What has happened?

Heinecke. (_Hat in hand_) He acted very undutifully, Count! First he
wanted to take us off to India, now he wants to take our money away.
I'm just going to the bank--Whole forty thousand marks, Count, I have
the honor--(_Bowing_) Count! (_He goes out_)

Trast. Yes, I understand. (_Lays his hand on_ Robert's _shoulder_) Was
Herr Muhlingk here?

Robert. My friend! Thank you--I had forgotten!

Trast. What is it?

Robert. He wants my accounts. He shall have them. (_Hurries to trunk
which he opens and feverishly looks for something_)

Frau Heinecke. (_Weeping_) You can thank the Lord, Count, you're not
married! There are right ungrateful sons in this world!

Trast. (_To himself_) You talk like a mother--(_Realising what he has
said_) Pah! Trast, that wasn't nice!

Frau Heinecke. Ain't I right?

Trast. (_Takes her hands in his_) A mother is always right. She has
suffered and loved too much to be anything else. (_Shakes her hand_)

Frau Heinecke. But, Count! You shake hands with a poor old woman!

Trast. I have sinned against the mothers, and I must beg forgiveness.
And my own not the least. There are worse sons, than yours, my dear
woman.


(Robert _takes out a leather portfolio, looks through it, and lays it
aside. Then he takes out a revolver which he tests._)


Trast. (_Aside_) Ah, a revolver! This is how he's going to settle
accounts!


(Robert, _seeing he is observed, quickly hides the revolver in his
breast pocket. He takes his hat and portfolio and comes forward._)


Robert. Now I'm ready!

Trast. I'll go with you.

Robert. You?

Trast. Have I the right?

Robert. (_Hesitatingly_) Good, come!

Frau Heinecke. (_Tenderly, in tears_) Robert!

Robert. (_Tries to conceal his excitement_) I--shall come--again--to
say--good-bye! Now I have something important to do. (_He goes towards
the door_)

Frau Heinecke. (_At the door, wringing her hands_) Herr Kurt and him!
Oh, there'll be trouble!

Trast. (_Aside_) Shh! ssh!--Well, are we off?

Robert. (_To his mother, in great excitement, tenderly_) And if
we--don't see each other--(_Controlling himself_) Good! We'll go!

                           (_Both go out as_


                          THE CURTAIN FALLS.)




                                ACT IV.


                      Scene:--_Same as in Act II_.

(Trast, Wilhelm _and_ Robert _discovered_. Robert _carries a portfolio
under his arm._)

Wilhelm. (_Aside to_ Trast) I have strict orders not to let Herr
Heinecke in.

Trast. Nor me?

Wilhelm. Oh, with the Count it is a different matter.

Trast. Thank you for the trust you put in me. Herr Heinecke is
accompanied by me. I shall be responsible for his presence here. We
shall wait for the Herr Councillor.

Wilhelm. But----

Trast. Which do you prefer--specie or paper? (_Looking for money in his
pocket-book_) Is the whole house empty?

Wilhelm. The Herr Councillor has gone to the factory, the Gnadige Frau
has a headache, the Gnadiges Fraulein has gone to the city--Herr Kurt
likewise.

Trast. Together?

Wilhelm. Oh, they never go together--Herr Kurt wanted to countermand
the invitation--because--(_Indicates_ Robert)

Trast. (_Gives him money_) Good! That's all!

Wilhelm. Nothing further, sir?

Trast. Go.


                     (Wilhelm _bows and goes out_)


Trast. Come here, my boy.

Robert. What do you want?

Trast. What do I want? You know I never want anything. These things
don't affect me. But the question is: What do you want here--in this
house?

Robert. I want to settle my account.

Trast. Of course--we know that--But, inasmuch as you are willing to
forego the generous handshake that the workman usually gets at this
proud moment, I should think you would send the accounts to the
office--and--(_With gesture of finality_)

Robert. That would be simple enough.

Trast. My dear man, let me talk to you as a friend!

Robert. Go ahead, talk!

Trast. You are pursuing a phantom!

Robert. Really?

Trast. No one has touched your honor.

Robert. Really!

Trast. Because nobody in the world could do it.

Robert. Really, really!

Trast. This thing that you call honor--this mixture of shame, and
"tempo," and--honesty and pride, things you have acquired through a
civilized existence and as a result of your own loyalty, why this can
no more be taken away from you by a piece of treachery than your
generosity or your judgment! Either it is a part of yourself or else it
doesn't exist at all. The sort of honor that can be destroyed by a blow
from a fop's glove has nothing to do with you! That is nothing but a
mirror for the dandies, a plaything for the indolent and a perfume to
the boulevardier.

Robert. You talk like someone trying to make a virtue out of necessity.

Trast. Perhaps--because every virtue is a direct result of necessity.

Robert. And my family?

Trast. I didn't think you had a family now! (Robert _buries his face in
his hands_) I understand--it's a contraction of the nerves after the
limb is amputated.--Don't deceive yourself! Even though the foot still
pains you, the leg is gone!

Robert. You never had a sister!

Trast.--Tell me, must I, the aristocrat, learn what abasement means
from you, a plebeian? My boy, don't forswear your parents. Don't say
that they are worse than you or I.--They are different, that's all.
Their sensations are sensations that are strange to you, the point of
view they hold is simply beyond your comprehension. Therefore to
criticize them is not only narrow-minded, but presumptuous--And you may
as well know soon as late: in your struggle with your people you have
been wrong from beginning to end!

Robert. Trast, you say that!

Trast. I take the liberty--You come back from a foreign country where
you have been associating with triple-plated gentlemen, and then you
expect your people, in order to please you, to change the very skins
they live in; although they've fitted perfectly all these years! That
is immodest, my boy! And your sister has really received back her honor
from the family Muhlingk; the honor which she can make use of. For
everything on this earth has its price and value. The honor of the
Avenue may be paid for with blood--may be, I said. The honor of the
Alley is restituted with a little capital, _in integrum_. (_As_ Robert
_steps towards him angrily_) Don't eat me up! I haven't finished!
Yes--what other significance has a girl's honor--and that's what we're
concerned with now--than to bring a sort of dowry of pure-heartedness
and honesty to her husband. She is there for one purpose and that is
marriage! Just be so good as to make a few inquiries in the society
from which you come and see if your sister, with the money that has
dropped into her lap, can't make a much better match than she otherwise
could!

Robert. Trast, you are cruel, you are crude!

Trast. Crude like Nature, cruel like Truth! Only the indolent and the
cowardly surround themselves a _tout prix_ with idyllics--But you have
nothing to do with them now. Come, give me your hand, shake the dust of
home off your feet and don't look back!

Robert. First I must have personal satisfaction.

Trast. So you insist on fighting a duel with him?

Robert. Yes.

Trast. Don't be so old-fashioned.

Robert. Old-fashioned--I may be. Perhaps because I came into the world
as a plebeian and because my conception of honor was acquired. I
haven't the strength to rise to the heights of your standpoint. Let me
go down in my own narrowness if I must.

Trast. But suppose he won't give satisfaction?

Robert. I shall find some way to force him.

Trast. Aha! (_Aside_) the revolver!--One thing more, my boy; if you
have made up your mind to let Herr Kurt put a bullet through you, you
must take away every pretext for his refusing.

Robert. Heavens, yes! you are right!

Trast. (_Drawing out his pocket-book_) Does that embarrass you?

Robert. No, you have done too much for me, for me to ask----

Trast. (_Filling out a check_) There!

Robert. And if I can never pay that back?

Trast. Then I'll write it in the largest ledger, where the accounts of
friendships are kept (_Stroking his head_) It won't be as bad as that!
Hm--my boy--one thing you've forgotten.

Robert. What?

Trast. Leonore.

Robert. (_Shuddering_) Don't speak of her!

Trast. You love her.

Robert. Oh!--I shan't answer!

Trast. Would you like to have her think of you as the murderer of her
brother.

Robert. Better than if she had to think of me as a man without honor.

Trast. (_Straightening up_) Am I not a so-called "man without honor?"
And haven't you found me a good fellow? And don't I carry my head as
high as anyone in the world? Shame on you!

Robert. (_After a pause_) Trast--forgive me!

Trast. Forgive--Nonsense, I like you!--That's enough!

Robert. Trast--I--won't fight--the duel!

Trast. Your word?

Robert. My word!

Trast. Come, then.

Robert. Where?

Trast. How do I know? Into the world.

Robert. Forgive me--shall I?


                           (_Enter_ Wilhelm.)


Wilhelm. The Herr Councillor has just come into his office.

Trast. (_Aside_) Kurt not home!--That's good.

Robert. I'll go in. (_He takes his portfolio_)

Trast. Good! Wait for me!

Robert. What do you want here?

Trast. Never mind about that. Come here. (_Aside to_ Robert) Before you
go, give me your revolver.

Robert. (_Startled_) You know?

Trast. Anyone could see it inside your coat

Robert. Please--let me keep it--or can't you trust me?

Trast. I'm afraid that story of Pepe will go to your head.

Robert. Hasn't a word of honor between two dishonored men any value?

Trast. Good! Keep it, (Robert _goes out followed by_ Wilhelm. Trast _is
about to follow him, but stops_)--Perhaps it was imprudent after
all?--But if the youngster comes home, I'll keep them apart. Now there
is something else to attend to. If this girl here is what I think she
is--(_Enter_ Leonore L. _wearing a winter costume_) Ah, this is very
fortunate.

Leonore. (_Giving him her hand. Excitedly_) Count, do you know where
I've been? To your apartment! (_Takes her coat and hat off_) Are you
shocked at my boldness? But you were the only one to whom I could go to
find out what has happened. I was afraid my brother was on the way to
ruin that young girl. I suspected it. Has your friend found out?

Trast. If that were all!

Leonore. What else could there be----

Trast. I admit, I really can't find words to----

Leonore. Please tell me!

Trast. Very well! Your parents have considered it necessary to make
those poor people forget their trouble--so they appealed to them on
their weakest side--namely, by their poverty.

Leonore. Do you mean to say that?--that--they--bought my
brother's--(_As_ Trast _nods_) Oh, God!

Trast. It goes without saying that personally I offer no criticism of
them whatever. That is the customary means of ending such
relationships. But I am afraid for my friend.

Leonore. (_Her face in her hands_) How can I ever make it up to him?

Trast. Do you feel that it is your duty?

Leonore. My duty? My whole being revolts against this disgusting
practice of my home!--Pay!--always pay! pay for honor, pay for love,
pay for justice! We can afford it, we have the money. (_Throws herself
into a chair. Then springing up_) Forgive me! I don't know what I'm
doing! I spoke of my family as though they were strangers.

Trast. Perhaps they are more strangers to you than you think!

Leonore. (_Confused_) If you were only right! (_As he appears to listen
to something outside_) What is it?

Trast. Isn't that your brother's voice?

Leonore. (_At the door_) Yes, with some of his friends.

Trast. (_Aside_) I shouldn't have let him keep the revolver. (_Taking
his hat_) Is he going to the office?

Leonore. No, I think they are coming here.

Trast. (_Putting his hat down again_) Good, I will wait for him--One
thing, Fraulein--My friend leaves this house to-day; he leaves the city
to-morrow and perhaps Europe in a short time.

Leonore. (_To herself_) Oh, God!

Trast. But to-day I should like to prevent a meeting between him and
your brother. If that meeting does occur, without my being able to
prevent it, I should like you to remain in the vicinity.

Leonore. (_She nods; voices are heard at the door. She hurries to the
left, then turns_) What shall I do. Count?

Trast. Be true to him!

Leonore. I will! (_She goes_)

Trast. Now--the brother!


                   (_Enter_ Kurt, Lothar _and_ Hugo.)


Kurt. (_Surprised_) Count!

Lothar. (_Aside_) Good thing we came with you!

Trast. I should like a few words with you, Herr Muhlingk.

Kurt. Sorry, but I am very pressed for time; my father is waiting for
me!

Trast. (_Aside_) Oho!--(_To_ Kurt) It's a personal favor.

Kurt. I have no secrets from my friends, Count. (_They sit down_)

Trast. Someone, a great friend of mine, has suffered deeply because of
his honor. On my advice and as a favor to me he has foregone sending
you a challenge.

Kurt. You are mistaken, Count; Herr Heinecke received satisfaction.

Lothar. We could allow no other satisfaction.

Trast. (_Looks at him from head to foot_) We won't go into that any
further, Herr Muhlingk. My friend at this moment is with your father,
settling his accounts in person.

Kurt, Well, that is his privilege.

Trast. He is to have an interview with him at the same time.

Kurt. That is also his privilege. Count.

Trast. In an hour my friend will have left this establishment. In
consideration of the strain of excitement under which he is probably
suffering at present, it would be to the advantage of both sides if a
meeting between you could be avoided.

Lothar. That----

Trast, (_Quietly_) Herr Lieutenant, I have not as yet taken the liberty
of addressing you! Herr Muhlingk, let us consider this seriously. You
are speaking with some one who has your material welfare at heart--not
out of sympathy, I am free to admit--Therefore, I may speak to you
almost as a friend, don't let these gentlemen intimidate you.

Hugo. No, don't let us intimidate you!

Trast. And consider this! I don't dare think of the wrong I have done
that man--you will--you'll do me this favor?

Lothar. (_Behind_ Kurt) Now show him!

Kurt. I have nothing to say, Count, because I find it impossible to
choose words to express my astonishment at your extraordinary request.


                             (_All rise._)


Lothar. (_To_ Kurt, _aside_) Fine! fine!

Kurt. And furthermore, I should like to know by what right you dare
make such a request to me in my own house?

Trast. You refuse?

Kurt. Do you still doubt it, Count?

Lothar. (_Aside to him_) More cutting, more cutting.

Trast. (_Aside_) Force--Yes, I doubted it, for I still cherished the
slight hope that I was dealing with a man of honor--I beg your
pardon--I made a mistake.

Kurt. Sir--that is----

Trast. An insult--yes.

Kurt. Which will be properly dealt with.

Trast. I ask for nothing better.

Kurt. You will hear from me to-morrow.

Trast. To-morrow--So you sleep on a thing like that? I am accustomed to
settling such matters at once.

Kurt. (_Chokingly_) Immediately.

Trast. (_Aside_) Thank God! (_Aloud_) Then we'll go!

Lothar. (_Stepping between_) Always correct, Kurt. You, as principal,
have nothing further to do with the gentleman. (_Sharply_) In the first
place, Count, the Code of Honor permits the challenged as well as the
challenger twenty-four hours in which to arrange his affairs. We,
my principal and I--shall make use of this rule, unless--and now I come
to the second point--we shall be prevented from enjoying that
privilege--for you. Sir, have not insulted us----

Trast. Ah!

Lothar. You belong to those who _cannot_ insult us.

Trast. (_Merrily_) Ah, yes!

Lothar. Will you be kind enough to recall, that the Count von
Trast-Saarberg, as we can still see in the register,--on the
twenty-fifth of June, 1864, was released, under a cloud, from his
regiment, because of unpaid gambling debts. That is all. (_Bows
negligently_)

Trast. (_Breaking out into laughter_) Gentlemen, I thank you heartily
for the little lesson--I certainly deserved it--for the worst crime
under heaven is to be illogical! And one thing I see above everything
else. No matter how much a man is elevated above the modern Honor he
must still remain her slave, even if it is only when he wants to help a
poor devil of a friend out of a hole--Gentlemen, I have the honor--
Pardon! I _haven't_ the honor! You have denied me that; so nothing
remains but the pleasure--the pleasure of saying "Good-day," but that
is better still! (_He goes out laughing_)

Hugo. Here we are with our honor and still we've made ourselves
ridiculous.

Lothar. We acted quite correctly.

Hugo. But, Lothar, the coffee, the coffee.

Lothar. One must be willing to sacrifice for the sake of his Honor, my
friend. I am glad I could do you this service, Kurt--What would you
have done without me? Well, until to-night.

Kurt. Are you going back to town already?

Lothar. Yes.

Kurt. I'll go with you.

Lothar. Oh, that will look as though you wanted to get away from the
noble brother.

Kurt. What do you mean?

Lothar. Do you want the Count to laugh in his sleeve? Now it has become
almost a duty to stay.

Kurt. Hardly that.

Lothar. Your duty, unless you want it thought you are a coward.


   (_Enter_ Muhlingk _in a fur coat and hat_, Wilhelm _follows him._)


Muhlingk. (_Throwing his coat to_ Wilhelm) What is that fellow
thinking of to try and get into my office?--Good-day, gentlemen--let
him send the books to me, then tell him to go to the devil--(Wilhelm
_leaves_) Kurt, why are you sneaking away? We've got a little bone to
pick, eh?

Kurt. (_Aside to his friends_) Now I'm in for it--Get out now! before
the storm!

Hugo. Herr Councillor, we haven't much time----

Muhlingk. Good-day, gentlemen, I regret exceedingly. Good-day.

Lothar. (_Aside_) You tell us how the thing comes out.


                     (Lothar _and_ Hugo _go out._)


Muhlingk. This time I've cleaned the matter up satisfactorily, and the
sacrifice, God knows, will be put down to your debit. Now for the moral
side of the question.


                        (_Enter_ Frau Muhlingk.)


Kurt. (_Aside_) Here comes the old lady, this will be great.

Frau Muhlingk. Oh, Kurt! Kurt!

Kurt. Yes, Mother?

Frau Muhlingk. (_Sitting_) You have brought a great deal of trouble to
your parents. You forced your father to bargain with that rabble.
(Leonore _enters left_) Oh, how disgusting! what humiliation for us!
(_To_ Leonore) What do you want?

Leonore. I have something to say to you.

Muhlingk. We haven't time now, go to your room.

Leonore. No, Father. I can't play the part of the silent daughter any
longer. If I am a member of the family I want to take part in this
conversation.

Muhlingk. What is the meaning of all this ceremony?

Leonore. Something very unfortunate has taken place in our family.

Muhlingk. I don't know anything----!

Leonore. You needn't try to hide it from me. According to the rules of
modern hypocrisy which are applied to the so-called young ladies, I
ought to go about with downcast eyes and play the part of innocent
ignorance. Under the circumstances that doesn't work. I have heard
about the whole affair.

Frau Muhlingk. And you aren't ashamed of yourself?

Leonore. (_Bitterly_) I am ashamed of myself.

Muhlingk. Do you know whom you are speaking to? Are you mad?

Leonore. If my tone was impertinent, please forgive me. I want to
soften you, not to quarrel with you. Perhaps I have been a bad
daughter--Perhaps I really haven't the right to have my own thoughts as
long as I do not eat my own bread--If that is true, try to pardon me--I
will make up for it a thousand times. But understand--give him back his
honor----

Muhlingk. I won't ask you again what the fellow is to you?--what do you
mean by "giving him back his honor?"

Leonore. Heavens, you must first at least have the good will to make up
for what has happened. Then we can find the means later.

Muhlingk. You think so? Sit down, my child--I shall let my customary
mildness still govern me and try to bring you to reason, although
perhaps a stricter method would be more in place--Look at this old gray
head. A great deal of honor has been piled up there and still in my
whole life I have never meddled with this so-called sense of honor--ah,
what a person has to endure without even saying "Hum" when he expects
to succeed in life. Here is a young man from whom you say, I have taken
his honor. Taking for granted that you are right--where does a young
fellow like that get his honor? From his family? Or from my business?
My clerks are no knights. You say he had honor, and I'm supposed to
give it back to him. How? By taking his sister as a daughter-in-law?

Frau Muhlingk. Really, Theodore, you mustn't say these things even as a
joke.

Muhlingk. If I did that, I should disgrace myself and my family. On the
other hand, this young man has the chance of getting out of the
trouble. If he refuses, and it comes back to me, who shall be made
unhappy, we or he? My answer is; he shall, I have no desire to be,
myself--That's the way I've always done, and everyone knows me as a man
of honor.

Leonore. (_Rising_) Father, is that your last word?

Muhlingk. My last! Now, come, give me a kiss and beg your mother's
pardon.

Leonore. (_Shrinks back with a shudder_) Let me go! I can't deceive
you!

Muhlingk. What do you mean?

Leonore. Father, I feel I am in the wrong, that I am asking the
impossible from you. I shall have to know the world differently
from--(_Stops suddenly and listens. There are voices in the hall_)

Muhlingk. And----?

Leonore. (_Aside_) It's he!--Oh, I can't stand it any longer!


                           (_Enter_ Wilhelm.)


Wilhelm. The young Herr Heinecke from the Alley is there again.


                            (Kurt _starts._)


Muhlingk. Did you tell him what I told you to say?

Wilhelm. Yes, Herr Councillor, but he followed me here from the office.

Muhlingk. What impertinence!--If he doesn't leave this----!

Kurt. Pardon me. Father. Perhaps he only wants to thank you! I believe
he has reasons.

Muhlingk. Such people never give you thanks.

Kurt. Has he money to give you?

Muhlingk. Certainly.

Kurt. There must be something back of it--get it over and we'll be done
with him.

Muhlingk. As far as I'm concerned--let him come.


                         (Wilhelm _goes out._)


Frau Muhlingk. We'll go, Leonore,

Leonore. (_Aside_) Kurt!

Kurt. Well?

Leonore. Be on your guard!

Kurt. Bah! (_Trying to hide his fear_)


(Frau Muhlingk _and_ Leonore _go out. Enter_ Robert, _apparently calm,
respectful in manner--he carries a portfolio._)


Muhlingk. You were a little insistant, young man--Well, I never
criticize a man in the discharge of duty; least of all when he is about
to leave his employer, at the eleventh hour. Take a seat!

Robert. If you don't mind, I'll remain standing.

Muhlingk. Just as you like--I had word from my nephew yesterday. He is
getting on well--having a good time--a little too much according to
Count Trast--Well, a little pleasure is always in the blood of
gentlemen of good family--You have brought the annual report with you,
I hope?

Robert. Yes.

Muhlingk. And----

Robert. (_To_ Muhlingk) There, sir, (_Takes a sheet and hands it to
the_ Councillor)

Kurt. (_Playing the part of indifference_) May I see, Father?

Muhlingk. Yes, yes--or perhaps you have a copy?

Robert. Yes, I have.

Muhlingk. Please give it to my son. (Robert _hands it to_ Kurt. _The
two stand, measuring each other with their eyes_) As far as I can see
at the first glance that is exceedingly good. The net gain is----

Robert. 116,227 Gulden.

Muhlingk. The dutch gulden is one mark seventy--Kurt figure it with me.

Robert. 197,585 Marks.

Muhlingk. 8--1--3--5--8. Right--197,285 Marks and 90 Pfennigs. Kurt,
are you figuring it up?

Kurt. And ninety pfennig. Yes, Father.

Muhlingk. Ha--And in the coffee "a small profit?" What does that mean?

Robert. (_Handing him a sheet_) Here is the special account. I was in a
position to foresee the crisis caused by the competition in Brazil and
I had five-sixths of the area planted with tea.

Muhlingk. You?

Robert. Yes, Herr Councillor, I----

Kurt. Strange!

Muhlingk. And how is the "Quinquina?"

Robert. Here is the report. (_Hands him the paper_)

Muhlingk. Not much, either! Where does the profit come in that brings
up the average?

Robert. The chief source of gain was Sumatra tobacco and the
tea--especially the tea. (_Handing another sheet_)

Muhlingk. You made this trial on the strength of your own judgment,
too?

Robert. Not entirely, I followed a suggestion that my friend, Count
Trast, gave me.

Muhlingk. And my nephew approved of it?

Robert. Afterwards--yes.

Muhlingk. You are right, Kurt--it is strange!

Robert. Have the gentlemen any further questions?

Muhlingk. Judging from the manner in which you behave here, one might
think that you had been running my business in Java yourself. What do
you imply by that?

Robert. That I had the authority, Herr Councillor.

Muhlingk. And where was my nephew, meanwhile?

Robert. That is a question too general to answer, Herr Councillor.

Muhlingk. Didn't he come to the office every day?

Robert. No, Herr Councillor.

Muhlingk. (_With increasing anger_) When did he come?

Robert. When the post from Hamburg came, and when he had need of money.

Muhlingk. Do you imply by that that my nephew neglected his duty?

Robert. I don't wish to imply anything that I have not said.

Muhlingk. Then kindly explain to me.

Robert. I don't feel myself called upon to discuss the private life of
my former manager.

Kurt. But to paint him as black as you can--that suits you better!

Robert. (_Starts forward toward him, but controls himself_) Have the
gentlemen any further questions?

Muhlingk. What monies have you brought with you?

Robert. I have notes from different banks amounting to about 95,000
gulden--here they are.

Muhlingk. Kurt, check that up. (Kurt _rises and takes each paper from_
Robert _in turn and looks it through_)

Robert. Have you finished, Herr Councillor?

Muhlingk. Just a minute. (_Pause_)

Kurt. Correct.

Muhlingk. Well, my dear Herr--Heinecke, I wish you success in your
future enterprises. Be an industrious fellow and don't forget what you
owe to this house.

Robert. No, Herr Councillor, I shan't forget! Here is the forty
thousand marks that you had the kindness to give to my father.

Muhlingk. This forty thousand was a gift, not a loan.

Robert. Nevertheless, I consider myself responsible for its return.

Muhlingk. Has your father given his authority for the return of the
money?

Robert. No, he has not.

Muhlingk. Then the money is your own?

Robert. Yes.

Muhlingk. Hmm!

Kurt. Don't you think it interesting, Father, that Herr Heinecke has
saved so much money?

Robert. (_Thinks a moment, then realizes the meaning of_ Kurt's
_insinuation, cries out, and steps forward drawing his revolver. He
seizes_ Kurt _by the throat_) Cur! take that back!--back!

Muhlingk. Help! help!


                          (Leonore _enters_.)


Leonore. Have pity! Robert!

Robert. (_Lets the revolver fall and drops back, his face in his
hands_. Kurt _struggling for breath sinks to sofa_) Oh!


                        (_Enter_ Frau Muhlingk.)

Frau Muhlingk. What is it? Kurt? (_Rushing to him_) Help! Murder!
Murder! Ring, Theodore!

Muhlingk. Quiet! There is no further danger! What more do you want? Get
out!

Robert. Leave as a thief, eh? (_At a movement from_ Leonore) Yes,
Leonore, you may as well know I've saved money, I'm a thief!

Leonore. Father, what is it?--what have you done!

Robert. Good. This is a day of reckoning. We might as well settle all
accounts. The account between the Avenue and the Alley. We work for
you. We give you sweat and blood. As a reward you ruin our daughter and
pay for the disgrace with the money we've earned for you. That is what
you call doing a kindness. I have fought tooth and nail for your
business and never asked pay. I have looked up to you as a person looks
up to something holy! You were my faith and my religion! And what did
you do for me? You stole the honor of my house, for it was honorable
even if it was in the Alley. You stole my heart and my people and even
if they were poor beggars, I love them just the same. You stole the
very pillow on which I might rest when I was worn out working for you!
You stole my home and my trust in God and man! You stole my sense of
shame, my peace, my good conscience!--You have stolen the very sun out
of my heaven!--You are the thieves--you!!

Muhlingk. (_After a pause_) Shall I have the servants put you out?

Leonore. (_Stepping between_) That you won't do, Father.

Muhlingk. What! You?

Leonore. He will leave of his own free will, unmolested, or Father, you
can put me out, too.

Robert. Leonore, what are you doing?

Leonore. Haven't you a word of apology for him?--not a single word?

Muhlingk. You are mad!

Robert. Stop, Leonore! I will think of you with--gratitude--as long
as I live. When I leave you I leave the only thing that I can call
home--God bless you! and farewell! (_He goes to door_)

Leonore. (_Embracing him_) Don't go! don't go!--or take me with you!

Robert. Leonore!

Muhlingk. What!!!

Leonore. Don't leave me alone! My soul is frozen between these walls!
You are my home, too! You have always been! See, I've thrown myself
into your arms!

Muhlingk. Oh! what a disgraceful scene!

Leonore. Father dear, we needn't get angry with each other. I love this
man. For that which you have taken from him I offer that which I have.
(_Half to_ Robert) I only have myself--If he wants that----

Robert. Leonore!


                            (_Enter_ Trast.)


Trast. What has happened?

Leonore. I thank you, my good friend, for showing me the right way.
Robert, let us make a new home, new duties.

Robert. (_Bitterly, with a look at_ Kurt _who is sitting as though
dumb_) And a new honor! (_He takes her in his arms_)

Frau Muhlingk. So that is our thanks, Father!

Leonore. Father, Mother, I ask your forgiveness, but what I am doing
now I must do! I am sure that it can't be wrong. But I beg of you,
think kindly of me--sometimes.

Muhlingk. Ah, and you think you'll leave my house without my curse!
(_He lifts his arm as though to curse her_) You----

Trast. (_Stepping up to him_) No, Herr Councillor, what's the use of
wearing yourself out with curses? (_Quietly_) and furthermore, in
confidence, your daughter isn't making a bad match. The young fellow
will have my station and, since I have no heirs, my fortune.

Muhlingk. But, Count--why didn't you explain!

Trast. (_Quickly stepping back and raising his hand as if to bless
him_) Please submit your worthy blessing in writing!

                   (_Follows the two to the door as_


                          THE CURTAIN FALLS.)
﻿                               CHARACTERS

  Count Michael von Kellinghausen.
  Beata, his wife.
  Ellen, their daughter.
  Baron Richard von Völkerlingk.
  Leonie, his wife.
  Norbert, their son, reading for the Bar.
  Baron Ludwig von Völkerlingk (_Secretary of State, Richard's
     step-brother_).
  Prince Usingen.
  Baron von Brachtmann.
  Herr von Berkelwitz-Grünhof.
  Dr. Kahlenberg (_Privy Councillor at the Board of Physicians_).
  Holtzmann (_candidate for Holy Orders, private Secretary to Baron
     Richard von Völkerlingk_).
  Meixner.
  A Physician.
  Conrad, servant at Count Kellinghausen's.
  George, Baron Richard's servant.
  Another Servant.

_The scene is laid in Berlin--the first three and the fifth acts at the
house of Count Kellinghausen; the fourth act at Baron Richard
Völkerlingk's._

                         _Period: about 1899_.




                                 ACT I




                           THE JOY OF LIVING




                                 ACT I


_A drawing-room in the Empire style in_ Count Kellinghausen's _house.
In front, on the left, a fireplace; to the left, in the background, a
door to the inner apartments; to the right, back, a door into the front
passage; in the foreground, on the right, a window. In the centre of
back wall a wide opening between two columns, partly closed by an old
Gobelins tapestry. On the right a sofa, table and chairs. On the left,
in front of the fireplace, several low seats. Near the middle, placed
diagonally, a writing-table with shelves; beside the table two seats
with low backs and a comfortable arm-chair. Old portraits and coloured
prints on the walls._

Holtzmann _is seated at the back of the room, a portfolio on his lap_.
Conrad _ushers in_ Baron Ludwig.


                       Conrad (_in the doorway_).

If your Excellency will kindly come this way--the doctor is with Madame
von Kellinghausen.

                             Baron Ludwig.

Ah? In that case perhaps I had better----

                                Conrad.

Madame von Kellinghausen will be here in a moment, your Excellency. The
other gentleman has already been announced. (_Indicating_ Holtzmann.)

                             Baron Ludwig.

Very well. (Conrad _goes out_.)

               Holtzmann (_rises and makes a deep bow_).

                             Baron Ludwig.

(_Bowing slightly in return wanders about the room and at last pauses
before_ Holtzmann.) I beg your pardon but--surely I know your face.

                               Holtzmann.

Very likely, your Excellency. My name is Holtzmann, private secretary
to Baron Richard von Völkerlingk.

                             Baron Ludwig.

Indeed? I am so seldom at my brother's. The fact is--er, well.
Yesterday was election-day at Lengenfeld, by the way. The papers were
full of it this morning. It seems to cause a good deal of surprise that
Count Kellinghausen should not only have withdrawn in favour of my
brother, but should actually have gone about canvassing for him. I
daresay that's an exaggeration, though?

                               Holtzmann.

On the contrary, your Excellency. The Count has been down in the
country electioneering for weeks.

                             Baron Ludwig.

Really? And you were with him, I suppose?

                     Holtzmann (_with a dry smile_).

Very much so, your Excellency. I should be sorry to be answerable for
all the nonsense I've had to talk and write!

                             Baron Ludwig.

H'm--just so. Nonsense always wins. Who said that, by the way? Julian
the Apostate, wasn't it?

                               Holtzmann.

No, your Excellency. Talbot.

                             Baron Ludwig.

Julian might have said it. The losing side always philosophises.

                               Holtzmann.

I hope we sha'n't be on the losing side.

                             Baron Ludwig.

H'm. What is your profession?

                               Holtzmann.

Theology, your Excellency.

                             Baron Ludwig.

And how long do you think it will be before it lands you in socialism?

                         Holtzmann (_offended_).
Excellency!

                             Baron Ludwig.

My dear sir, look at the examples! I remember a predecessor of yours at
my brother's--a theological student also, I believe. Well, he landed
with both feet in the middle of the Socialist camp.

                               Holtzmann.

Yes, I know, your Excellency. You mean Meixner.

                             Baron Ludwig.

That reminds me--I hear the fellow has actually been taking a leading
hand in the fight against my brother.

                               Holtzmann.

The report is true.

                             Baron Ludwig.

Well, I hope you hit back hard.

                               Holtzmann.

That is what I was there for, your Excellency.

                  _Enter_ Beata _and_ Dr. Kahlenberg.

                                 Beata.

I hadn't dared to hope that your Excellency would answer my summons so
promptly.

                   Baron Ludwig (_kissing her hand_).

My dear Countess, your summons was a command--and one I was only too
happy to obey. (Beata _turns to_ Holtzmann.) Ah, good-morning, my dear
doctor.

                              Kahlenberg.

Good-morning, your Excellency. How is it you haven't been in lately to
let me look you over? A guilty conscience, eh?

                             Baron Ludwig.

Lack of time, doctor. Give me a day of twenty-five hours, and I'll
devote one of them to consulting my physician.

                              Kahlenberg.

Who will order you to rest during the other twenty-four.

                             Baron Ludwig.

We all get that order sooner or later, doctor--and from a chief we have
to obey. (_In a low voice_.) How is the Countess?

                       Kahlenberg (_same tone_).

No worse. (_To_ Beata.) And now, my dear lady, I must be off--but
what's the matter?

            Beata (_joyously excited, a paper in her hand_).

Oh, nothing--nothing--nothing----

             Kahlenberg (_in a tone of friendly reproach_).

You know I've warned you----

                                 Beata.

Not to feel, not to think, not to laugh, not to cry--not to live, in
short, dear doctor!

                              Kahlenberg.

Well, I don't object to the laughing.

                                 Beata.

It's just as well you don't, for it's a habit you couldn't break me of.
There is so much to laugh at in this vale of tears! Well, good-bye,
doctor! (Kahlenberg _goes out_.)

                       Beata (_to_ Baron Ludwig).

This will interest you too. Herr Holtzmann--you know Herr
Holtzmann?--has just brought me the returns from Lengenfeld. Only
fancy, your brother has a majority of a hundred and thirty-one! Think
of that!

                             Baron Ludwig.

Don't let us be too sanguine.

                                 Beata.

Oh----

                               Holtzmann.

Six districts are still to be heard from, Countess, and we know that
four of these belong to the Socialists. It is still doubtful if we can
gain a majority.

                Beata (_concealing her disappointment_).

And when do you expect to hear the final result?

                               Holtzmann.

At any moment now.

                                 Beata.

And when you _do_ hear----

                               Holtzmann.

I will jump into a cab and bring you the news instantly.

                                 Beata.

Thank you so 'much. (_Gives him her hand_.) Is Baron Völkerlingk at
home?

                               Holtzmann.

He went for a ride. I daresay I shall find him on my return.

                                 Beata.

Remember me to him, won't you? (Holtzmann _takes leave with a bow_.)

                             Baron Ludwig.

What do you hear from Kellinghausen? He is still at Lengenfeld, I hear.

                                 Beata.

I have just had a letter. Now that the elections are over he means to
take a day's shooting, and then he is coming home--free from his
party-duties for the first time in years!

                             Baron Ludwig.

And what does the Egeria of the party say to such a state of things?

                                 Beata.

Do you mean _me_, your Excellency?

                             Baron Ludwig.

I mean the woman at whose delightful dinner-table the fate of more than
one important bill has been decided. Now that Kellinghausen has retired
into private life, do you mean to keep up the little political dinners
we've always been so much afraid of?

                                 Beata.

I hope so, your Excellency. And if you care to beard the lion in his
den, I shall be charmed to send you an invitation. You haven't dined
with us in an age. I've always fancied that the estrangement between
your brother and yourself might be the cause of our seeing so little of
you.

                             Baron Ludwig.

My dear Countess, those eyes of yours see through everything; and I
read in them all the answers I might make to that question. Ah,
well--Richard had the good luck, the unspeakable good luck, to win your
friendship, and under your influence, to develop into the man he is!

                                 Beata.

I know how to listen when clever men are talking. That is the secret of
what you call my influence.

                             Baron Ludwig.

You think so?--Well--there was Richard, dabbling in poetry and
politics, in archæology and explorations, like the typical noble
amateur. He had a fortune from his mother, while I was poor. But in one
respect I was richer than he; for he married a fool who dragged him
down to the level of her own silly snobbishness. But then you came--and
lifted him up again. Then all his dormant powers awoke--he discovered
his gift as a speaker, he became the mouthpiece of the party, he got
into the Reichstag, and----

                                 Beata.

And dropped out again.

                             Baron Ludwig.

Exactly. And the estrangement between us dates from that time. It was
reported that government had left him in the lurch, and I was thought
to be more or less responsible.

                                 Beata.

At all events, his career was cut short. And he failed again at the
next election.

                             Baron Ludwig.

And now your friendship has helped him to success.

                                 Beata.

My husband's friendship, you mean.

                             Baron Ludwig.

In my loveless household I know too little of the power of woman to
pronounce definitely on that point.

                                 Beata.

You do well to suspend your judgment.

                             Baron Ludwig.

Ah, now you are displeased with me. I am sorry. I might be of use to
you.

                                 Beata.

If you wish to be of use to me you can do so by becoming your brother's
friend. It was to ask you this that I sent for you.

                             Baron Ludwig.

Countess, I wonder at your faith in human nature!

                                 Beata.

Human nature has never deceived me.

                             Baron Ludwig.

One would adore you for saying that if one hadn't so many other reasons
for doing so!

                          Beata (_laughing_).

Pretty speeches at our age?

                             Baron Ludwig.

You may talk of my age, but not of yours.

                                 Beata.

Look at the grey hair--here, on my temples; and my medicine-bottles
over there. I never stir without them now.

                             Baron Ludwig.

I have been distressed to hear of your illness.

                                 Beata.

Yes, my heart bothers me--an old story. My heart is tired--and I--I'm
not. And when I drive it too hard it grows a little restive now and
then. But it doesn't matter! (_Enter_ Ellen.) Is that you, Ellen? Come
in, dear.

                       Ellen (_in skating dress_).

Mother, dear, I didn't know you had a visitor. How do you do, your
Excellency?

                             Baron Ludwig.

How do you do, young lady? Dear me dear me what have you been growing
into?

                                 Ellen.

Into life, your Excellency!

                             Baron Ludwig.

Ha--very good--very neat. So many people just grow past it.

                                 Beata.

And how was the skating, dear?

                                 Ellen.

Oh, heavenly. Norbert and I simply flew. Poor Miss Mansborough--we left
her miles behind!

                                 Beata.

Well, run away now. Take off your fur jacket--you're too warm.

                                 Ellen.

Good-bye, your Excellency.

                             Baron Ludwig.

_Au revoir_, little Countess. (Ellen _goes out_.)

                             Baron Ludwig.

What a little wonder you've made of her!

                                 Beata.

She _is_ developing, isn't she?

                             Baron Ludwig.

And my nephew Norbert--you have developed him too. A very comprehensive
piece of work. (Beata _laughs_.)

                             Baron Ludwig.

If only he doesn't stray from the path you've marked out for him.

                                 Beata.

Ah--you are thinking of that pamphlet of his?

                         Baron Ludwig (_nods_).

An attack on duelling, I understand? Well, it's no business of mine.

                                 Beata.

He is not as immature as you think.

                             Baron Ludwig.

Indeed?

                            _Enter_ Conrad.

                         Conrad (_announcing_).

Baron von Brachtmann, his Highness Prince Usingen.

                             Baron Ludwig.

The pillars of the state! Brachtmann especially. This is something for
me to remember, Countess.

          _Enter_ Brachtmann _and_ Prince. Conrad _goes out_.

                              Brachtmann.

My dear Countess----

                                 Beata.

I am so glad to see you. And you, Prince. Always faithful to the cause?

                                Prince.

Yes, Countess; as far as fidelity is consonant with perfect inactivity.
Glad to shake hands between two rounds, your Excellency.

                             Baron Ludwig.

Our encounters are not sanguinary, your Highness.

                                Prince.

No although one adversary occasionally cuts another. (_Laughter_.)

                              Brachtmann.

We ventured to call, Countess, because we fancied that Völkerlingk
would keep you posted as to the news from Lengenfeld.

                                 Beata.

Baron Völkerlingk has done me no such honour. But--by the merest
accident--his secretary was here just now. Here are the latest returns.
(_Hands him the paper_.)

                 Brachtmann (_bending over the paper_).

H'm, h'm----

                                Prince.

Let me see.

                              Brachtmann.

Well, we'll hope for the best. Kellinghausen's personal popularity has
secured a conservative majority till now; but now that he has withdrawn
in favour of another man--even though that man is Völkerlingk--the
result is more than doubtful.

                             Baron Ludwig.

I confess, Countess, that even if Kellinghausen looked upon his
politics merely as a branch of sport, I don't quite understand his
sacrificing his career to my brother.

                                 Beata.

My husband is very easy-going. He has no ambition. They had bothered
him dreadfully at their committee-meetings about things he didn't
understand--at least he said he didn't. The truth is, it probably bored
him.

                              Brachtmann.

But how about his fanatical devotion to the party? If we are all
monomaniacs on that subject, he is certainly the worst. He felt more
keenly than any of us what the party lost in losing your brother (_to_
Baron Ludwig)--he realised our need of Völkerlingk's efficiency and
energy. He saw what a great power was lying idle. Doesn't that explain
his action?

                             Baron Ludwig.

I needn't tell you, Herr von Brachtmann, how pleasant it is to hear my
brother praised. I quite realise how much you need him at this
particular moment with the debate on the civil code pending, and the
serious questions likely to come up in connection with it. (_To_
Beata.) But that Kellinghausen should have consented to withdraw, even
in such an emergency-- I have so often heard him say, Countess, that it
was the duty of a landed proprietor to represent the district in which
his property lay. He said it was the only justification of a
representative government.

                                 Beata.

But you know you, all say that!

                                Prince.

My dear Countess, the revolutionary spirit has entered into our
traditions, and the modern idea of making a revolution is to gird at
existing institutions. Why deprive us of such an innocent amusement?

                             Baron Ludwig.

Really, Prince--pardon me--but since, by birth and political
affiliations, you are a supporter of existing institutions, would it
not be well to speak of them less flippantly?

                                Prince.

Why, my dear Baron?--Countess, shall I show you the attitude of the
modern state toward its citizens? Here we are: the state with its hand
in its pocket, the citizen with his fist clenched. And the only way to
unclench the citizen's fist is for the state to pull something out of
its pocket. There's the situation in a nutshell. It's a matter of taste
whether one respects such an institution or not.

                              Brachtmann.

You know. Baron, he is the spoiled child of the party.

                                Prince.

Its prodigal son, you mean. I squandered all my original ideas long
ago, and am living on the husks of the feudal tradition. But we are
boring Madame von Kellinghausen. (_The three men rise_.)

                                 Beata.

Good-bye, Prince--Herr von Brachtmann. (_To_ Baron Ludwig.) Whenever
your solitude weighs on you, come in and let me give you a cup of tea.

                             Baron Ludwig.

You are very good. But I am afraid it is too late to begin.

                                 Beata.

It is never too late to renew an old friendship.

                             Baron Ludwig.

Thank you. (_Goes out with the two other men_.)

                            Ellen _enters_.

                                 Ellen.

(_Throwing her arms about her mother's neck_.) Mother! You dear little
mamma!

                                 Beata.

Well, madcap--what is it now?

                                 Ellen.

Oh, nothing, nothing. I'm so happy, that's all.

                                 Beata.

What are you happy about, dear?

                                 Ellen.

I don't know--does one ever?

                                 Beata.

Has anything in particular happened?

                                 Ellen.

No; nothing. That is--Norbert said-- Oh, yes to be sure; we met Uncle
Richard.

                                 Beata.

Ah--where?

                                 Ellen.

In the Zoo. On horseback. He sent his love and said he would be in
before dinner. Norbert is coming too. Mother, is it true that Uncle
Richard is such a wonderful speaker? Norbert says he can do what he
likes with people.

                                 Beata.

Some people--but only those whose thoughts he can turn into feelings,
or whose feelings he can turn into thoughts. Do you understand?

                                 Ellen.

Oh, yes! You mean, one can give only to those who have something to
give in return?

                                 Beata.

Yes.

                                 Ellen.

But he must have great power--I am sure of it! He's always so quiet,
and says so little--yet one feels there's a great fire inside--and
sometimes it blazes up.

                          Beata (_laughing_).

What do you know about it?

                                 Ellen.

Oh, I know. It's just the same with-- Mother, how can people _bear_
life sometimes? It's so beautiful one simply can't breathe!

                        Beata (_with emotion_).

Yes, it _is_ beautiful. And even when it's nothing but pain and fear
and renunciation, even then it's still beautiful, Ellen.

                           Ellen (_alarmed_).

Mother--what is the matter?

                                 Beata.

Nothing, dear. I'm only a little tired. (_She goes to the door_.)

                            Conrad _enters_.

                                Conrad.

Baron Norbert. (_Goes out_.)

                           Norbert _enters_.

                                Norbert.

How d'ye do, Aunt Beata? How are you to-day?

                           Beata (_wearily_).

Very well, thanks.

                          Ellen (_anxiously_).

No, not very well. (Beata _signs her to be silent_.)

                                Norbert.

This is Thursday. Ellen and I were to read _I Promessi Sposi_ together;
but if I might say a word to you first----

                                 Beata.

Presently, Norbert. Wait for me here.

                                 Ellen.

Don't you want me, mother?

                                 Beata.

No, dear. Stay with Norbert. I shall be back in a moment. (_She goes
out_.)

                      Ellen (_looking after her_).

Oh, Norbert!

                                Norbert.

Is she really worse?

                                 Ellen.

No, she is just the same as usual. But at night--oh, Norbert, she's
never in bed. All night she wanders, wanders. When I hear her coming, I
lie quite still. If she knew I was awake she might not come any more.
She never touches me, but just bends over and strokes my pillow, oh, so
softly! And she breathes so hard, as if it hurt her--and then gradually
she grows quiet again. When you see her in the daytime, so gay and dear
and busy, so full of other people's pleasures, you'd never guess the
misery she endures. Oh, Norbert, you _do_ love her, don't you?

                                Norbert.

I believe I love her better than my own mother.

                                 Ellen.

No, no, Norbert, that's wicked. You mustn't say that.

                                Norbert.

Perhaps not, but I can't help feeling it. And why shouldn't I, after
all? When I was a boy my father was everything to me--after that he was
always travelling, and I was left to my own devices. There are so many
things that puzzle a chap when there's no one to talk them over with.
It's different with girls, I suppose. At first I used to go to
my mother: _she's_ always found life simple enough. Visits, and
parties, and church--she looks upon church-going as another kind of
visiting--well, do you know what _she_ said to me? "In the first place,
my dear boy, your trousers are shocking. What you need is a good
tailor. Then you ought to take up lawn tennis--and after that, we'll
see." Well, that didn't help me much. And then your mother took pity on
me. Again and again she's let me sit up half the night, talking things
over with her.

                                 Ellen.

And now you and she have got something to say to each other again. What
is it, Norbert? Do tell me! Why can't _I_ help you as well as mother?

                                Norbert.

Perhaps you'd like to do my examination papers for me?

                                 Ellen.

Nonsense; it's not that.--But you don't care for me any more.

                                Norbert.

You silly child!

                                 Ellen.

You told me you did once--long ago--but since then--you've never
once----

                                Norbert.

Listen, dear. I made an awful ass of myself that day. Do you know what
I did? I called on your father to ask his permission to marry you.

                                 Ellen.

And you never told me?

                                Norbert.

Luckily your father was out--and as for your mother--well, she simply
laughed at me!

                                 Ellen.

Oh!

                                Norbert.

Oh, you know how your mother laughs at one. It doesn't hurt. "Dear
boy," she said, in the kindest way, "it's too soon to talk of such
things to Ellen. You must give her time to grow up." And I gave her my
word I would; and you see I've kept it.

                                 Ellen.

And if mother should----

                            Beata _enters_.

                                 Beata.

Ellen, dear, go to Miss Mansborough. It's time for your reading.
Norbert will come in a moment.

                                 Ellen.

Yes, mother. (_Goes out_.)

             Beata (_who has been watching them closely_).

By the way, Norbert--what about that promise you made me?

                                Norbert.

I've kept it, Aunt Beata.

                                 Beata.

Then you want to talk to me about something else?

                                Norbert.

Yes. The storm-signals are up. My college club has turned on me: one,
two, three, and out you go!

                                 Beata.

Not in disgrace?

                                Norbert.

I'm not so sure. I got an official letter yesterday from the committee,
asking me if I was the author of a pamphlet called "The Ordeal."

                                 Beata.

Why did you write it under an assumed name?

                                Norbert.

Only on my father's account.

                                 Beata.

If you disguised yourself at all, you ought to have done so more
thoroughly.

                                Norbert.

Why, Aunt Beata! Haven't you often told me that every reformer must
have the courage of his convictions?

                                 Beata.

Yes; but I've no sympathy with unnecessary martyrdom. Keep a cool head,
dear boy, and don't be drawn into controversy just yet. Haven't I often
told you that this college duelling you rail against is only a
preparation for the real battle of life--the battle of ideas and
beliefs? You'll come to that later--ask your father how it is!

                                Norbert.

Oh, father--of course he's only interested in big things.

                                 Beata.

What does he say to your article?

                                Norbert.

Immature.

                                 Beata.

Was he vexed?

                                Norbert.

When I asked him if it annoyed him, he laughed and said:--"I know the
world too well to agree with you. But you must work out the problem for
yourself. I sha'n't interfere."

                                 Beata.

Well, what more do you want? Did you expect him to go into raptures?

                                Norbert.

Wait and see, Aunt Beata! I mean to suffer for my convictions. I mean
to brave persecution. Is that a laughing matter?

                                 Beata.

Come! Come! No bragging--not even about persecution. It's intoxicating
at first, but the after-taste is bitter.

                                Norbert.

Don't make fun of me, Aunt Beata.

                                 Beata.

Heaven forbid! You know _I_ don't disapprove of your article.

                                Norbert.

How could you? Isn't it all yours?

                                 Beata.

I don't understand anything about duelling.

                                Norbert.

No, but my ideas are yours--every one of them. All I've said about
self-restraint--about striving toward an harmonious whole--about
the Greek ideal of freedom--and how posterity will smile at our
struggles--it's all yours, Aunt Beata, every word of it.

                                 Beata.

Don't tell your father! And besides, it isn't. My ideas have got
twisted in that wild young brain of yours. And it might annoy him to
think that I had put them there----

                                Norbert.

Oh, Aunt Beata, _I_ know what you really think. But, of course, if you
don't want me to, I----

                            _Enter_ Conrad.

                         Conrad (_announcing_).

Baron Völkerlingk.

                  _Enter_ Richard. Conrad _goes out_.

                                Richard.

Well, dear friend? What sort of a night have you had? Not good, I'm
afraid.

                                 Beata.

There's no use in trying to deceive you. Have you just come from your
own house?

                                Richard.

Yes.

                                 Beata.

Well? Telegrams?

                                Richard.

None for the last two hours. Well, Norbert, you here, as usual? (_To_
Beata.) So you have the younger generation on your hands too?

                          Beata (_laughing_).

So much the better, since the older shows itself so seldom nowadays.

                                Richard.

Ah, well----

                                 Beata.

Good-bye, Norbert dear.

                  Norbert (_kissing_ Beata's _hand_).

Good-bye, father. (Richard _nods to him_. Norbert goes out.)

                                 Beata.

Will you dine with me to-day, Richard? (Richard _shakes his head_.)

                                 Beata.

Just we two?

                                Richard.

I can't: my wife has a dinner: an ambassador and his wife, two lights
of the Church, and others of the same feather. I must show myself on
such occasions, to keep up appearances.

                                 Beata.

I'm sorry. I should have liked to have you with me--to-day. How do you
stand the suspense? Perhaps I don't show it--but I'm in a fever.

                                Richard.

It's telling on me too. The fact is, any poor devil of a mountebank is
a king compared to one of us. He does his trick and gets his pay.--Oh,
this last fortnight! If you'd seen me driven about from village to
village like a travelling quack! Freedom and hot words, free beer and
hot sausages! And, to cap the climax, a fellow who used to be my
private secretary leading the campaign against me! Bah--it was
horrible. As for Michael, with his Olympian calm, he saw only the
humorous side of it. (_Laughing_.)

                                 Beata.

I wonder he let you leave before the election.

                                Richard.

He thought I ought not to make myself too cheap. I quite agreed with
him, and took myself off. Hang the democracy!

                                 Beata.

If only the noblemen who want to rule could get on without it!

                                Richard.

They could, if the spirit of the age hadn't turned them into
demagogues.

                                 Beata.

Did Holtzmann do as well as you expected?

                                Richard.

Admirably. But he's been going about with such a long face lately that
he's rather got on my nerves.--I heard you had told him to come back
when the returns are in--may I wait for him here?--When one thinks that
something will come in at that door presently--something dressed like
Holtzmann, looking like Holtzmann--and that that something will be
Fate--nothing more or less than Fate!

                                 Beata.

And if he comes in and says--or rather, if he doesn't say anything?
Remember, Richard, even if _that_ happens, you've got to go on living!

                                Richard.

Of course. Why not? It's all in the day's work. An Indian penitent was
once asked: "Why do you go on living?" And his answer was: "Because I
am dead."--Oh, I don't mean to be ungrateful. As long as I have you,
dear--as long as you are here to live my life with me, to give it
colour and meaning and purpose--let come what may, nothing else
matters.

                                 Beata.

Don't say that--don't----

                                Richard.

Am I exaggerating? Why, ever since we-- How long ago is it that we met
for the first time, in the wood at Tarasp? Fifteen years?

                                 Beata.

It seems like yesterday.

                                Richard.

You passed between the dark pine-trunks like an apparition. You wore a
pink dress and had Ellen by the hand.

                                 Beata.

She was tired and had begun to cry.

                                Richard.

I saw that she wanted to be carried.

                                 Beata.

And I was just recovering from an illness, and was too weak to lift
her. You raised your hat--no, it was the white cap you wore----

                                Richard.

Do you remember that?

                                 Beata.

Good heavens, what was I then, and what have you made of me? My
own--let me call you that just once, Richard, as I used to do--just
once, on this great day--my own! (Richard _looks nervously toward the
door_.)

                                 Beata.

There is no one coming.

                                Richard.

_Let_ you!

                                 Beata.

What a quiet happy little woman I was! That "happy" is not meant as a
reproach, dearest! I have a boundless capacity for happiness, and it
kept me company even in the loneliness of my early married life--for in
those days Michael didn't take much notice of me. It was you who showed
him that I was worth noticing. And so you built up my new life--a hard
life to carry, at times, a life bowed under its own wealth as the vine
is bowed under its fruit--but how it has grown under your hand,
dearest, how it has spread and strengthened!--Now you're laughing at
me, Richard.

                                Richard.

Beata--no one knows as you do how I have blundered and struggled. What
are you trying to do? Do you want to give me more faith in myself, or
do you really think I've done all that for you?

                                 Beata.

I know every line in your forehead, I watch every look in your eye, I
read every thought in your soul--there are some I could wish away, for
they only make you miserable--but no one knows as I do what you are,
and what you have been to me!

                                Richard.

When will Michael be here?

                                 Beata.

How suddenly you ask that! You are tormenting yourself again.
Dear--dearest--don't look like that! Why, it never really
happened--it's been dead and buried for years--dead and buried, every
trace of it. No one knows what we were to each other, no one even
dreams it. And we're old people now--you and I. Only think, I shall
soon be forty! Who is going to ask two old mummies what follies they
committed in the year one?

                                Richard.

You are pretending not to care, Beata. Don't do that!

                                 Beata.

Don't weigh every word I say--just look into my wicked heart. Your
conscience has nothing to do with that! And if you're fond of
Michael--if we're both fond of him--and why shouldn't we both be fond
of him--that dear, good, cheery Michael of ours?--why, that needn't
make you probe the depths of your soul for fresh wickedness. I tell you
we've paid for everything, even to the uttermost farthing!

                                Richard.

Do you think so? It seems to me that when a man and a woman have found
everything in each other, as we have, when they have been to each other
the strength and the meaning and the object of life--when they've
resolved to die fighting back to back, together to the last, as you
used to say it seems to me that in such a case there isn't much room
for expiation. If Purgatory is like that it must be fairly habitable.
(Beata _laughs_.) Ah, now you are flippant.

                                 Beata.

Be thankful that one of us is, dear!

                                Richard.

I remember when I lost my seat, six years ago--it was a hard knock, I
can tell you--everything went under at once--well, I said to myself:
This is my punishment. And the idea never left me. While I was
wandering about the world, or vegetating down in the country, I
actually used to get a kind of comfort out of it. And now? Do you know,
I sometimes fancy you wouldn't be altogether sorry if I lost my
election again.

                         Beata (_laughingly_).

Really? Do you think that?

                                Richard.

In fact I'm not at all sure you hold with the party any longer.

                                 Beata.

What--I, its Egeria? An elderly party-nymph gone wrong? What a shocking
idea!

                                Richard.

I'm sure of one thing you enjoy looking over our heads.

                                 Beata.

Don't say _our_ heads--don't include yourself with the rest. You think
of your duty; they think of their rights. You use the masses in order
to serve them. The others think only of power.

                                Richard.

Oh, as to that--we all want power.

                                 Beata.

Yes: the question is, for whose benefit?--Ah, well, I see I shall have
to tell you--you ought to know--the sooner the better, I suppose!

                                Richard.

Tell me what?

                                 Beata.

Dear--did you really think it was Michael's fondest wish to resign his
seat in Parliament, and live only for his horses?

                                Richard.

I've heard him say so often enough.

                                 Beata.

And so you leaped into the breach--in the interests of the party?

                        Richard (_hesitating_).

And because--(_suddenly_) Beata--there's been some deception? (Beata
_nods_.) Some one has been working against me----?

                                 Beata.

Or for you--as you please.--Sit down beside me, dear; give me
both your hands--so! And now listen. I couldn't bear to see your
disappointment--your suffering--I suffered with you too intensely! And
so--don't look so startled, or I shall lose heart and be afraid to go
on.--How shall I tell you?--It's taken me a year a whole year's work.
By degrees I persuaded him that he was unsuited to Parliamentary
life--gradually I turned him against the pottering routine-work which
is the only thing he can do--little by little I made him see what a
boon it would be for the country and the party if he would only let you
take his place. Till at last he did----

                          Richard (_rising_).

Ah----

                                 Beata.

Can you say _now_ that I didn't want you elected? (Richard _is
silent_.) I should never have told you this if I hadn't known that his
pride in his heroic feat would make him betray himself sooner or later.
(_A pause_.) After all, think how little he's given up! To him it was
only a--pastime--to you it is life. I had no choice, had I? You do see
that, don't you? (_A pause_.) Richard, I may be a very wicked woman,
but at least I deserve one look from you!

                                Richard.

Beata! Beata! What can I say? What can I say? You know how I've always
tried to keep our feeling for each other within the bounds--the bounds
of-- You know how it was twelve years ago--when I found myself
gradually slipping into intimacy with him, I came to you and said:
"Either this thing ends here, or I tell him everything. I won't take
his hand and play the sneak. If I do, we shall lose our respect for
each other as well as our self-respect." And then we hit on this
friendship as a way out of it--a way of not losing each other
altogether. It wasn't a very honourable solution--but this--this new
sacrifice--if I accept this--God! If Holtzmann were to come in now and
tell me the other man has won, what a load he would take off my mind!

                                 Beata.

Richard--how can you?

                                Richard.

Think of it: To-morrow I shall have to make that speech. My position,
my convictions, compel me to appear as the spokesman of the highest
ideals--and all the while I shall owe my seat to the friend whose
holiest ties I have trampled on----

                                 Beata.

And if they were not the holiest----?

                         Richard (_startled_).

Beata!

                                 Beata.

Don't turn from me. I've loved you so long!

                     Richard (_clasps her hands_).

One thing more. Listen to me. You played too reckless a game. Such
things are avenged. No one knows what happened in the past. Twelve
years have covered it; but it's ill disturbing the dead. Such things
are avenged. Remember that.

                                 Beata.

Well--and what of it?

                                Richard.

What of it?

                                 Beata.

I shouldn't care--except for Norbert and Ellen. For I mean them to have
all the happiness we have missed. Nothing must ever come between--
Hush! That is Holtzmann's voice. (_She presses her left hand to her
heart_.) Quite steady. (_She holds out her right hand to_ Richard.)
Feel my pulse it's perfectly steady.

                            Conrad _enters_.

                                Conrad.

Herr Holtzmann----

                 _Enter_ Holtzmann. Conrad _goes out_.

                     Holtzmann (_bowing quietly_).

We have a majority of twenty votes, Baron. Here are the final returns.
(_Hands telegram to_ Richard.)

                                Richard.

Official?

                               Holtzmann.

Virtually. As your co-worker, Baron, allow me to offer my
congratulations. (Richard _turns away without speaking_.)

                                 Beata.

You see how overcome he is, dear Herr Holtzmann. Thank you with all my
heart. (_Gives him her hand_.)

                Holtzmann (_turning to leave the room_).

Good-afternoon, Countess.

                                Richard.

Holtzmann! (Holtzmann _pauses_.) You've fought a good fight.

                               Holtzmann.

Oh, as to that----

                                Richard.

Thank you. (_Shakes his hand_.)

                               Holtzmann.

Don't mention it. I did my duty, that's all. (_Bows and goes out_.)

                                 Beata.

Richard! Isn't the struggle over yet?

                                Richard.

Beata--you have made me believe--in spite of myself--that--even now--I
may be of use to the cause. I shall stick to my work, and try not to
think.

                                 Beata.

It may not be as hard as you imagine.

                                Richard.

Perhaps not. But when the blow falls--if it falls----

                                 Beata.

We'll laugh----

                                Richard.

And meanwhile----

                                 Beata.

We'll live! (_They clasp each other's hands_.)


                                Curtain.




                                 ACT II




                                 ACT II


_The same scenery as in the first act. The drawing-room is brightly
lit, the curtain in the opening at back of stage drawn back, showing
two other apartments, also brilliantly lit. In the nearest one a group
of gentlemen are at the billiard-table. In the third room the rest of
the guests have just left the table. For some minutes_ Beata _is seen
among them_. Brachtmann, Prince Usingen _and_ von Berkelwitz-Grünhof
_are just coming out of the billiard-room, talking together._

                              Brachtmann.

(_Coming forward with_ Usingen.) Prince, I want a word with you
later--an important matter.

                                Prince.

And I want a word with you.

                              Brachtmann.

On the same subject, probably.

                                Prince.

Perhaps.

                 von Berkelwitz (_looking about him_).

Deuced fine--magnificent! You've got to come up to town to see this
kind of thing.

                              Brachtmann.

How is it we never see you in the Reichstag nowadays, my dear fellow?

                            von Berkelwitz.

What's a man to do? I'm a country squire--I've got to work--and besides
I'm too poor to live in town. A man has got to make a show here--keep
up appearances--I--hang it, that champagne's gone to my head--what was
I going to say? Oh, yes: well, you see, I've got four boys growing up;
one is in the Rathenow Hussars--crack regiment, you know--I always look
out for that sort of thing--but costs like the devil! The second is
with the Pacific squadron on board the Princess William. _He_
doesn't cost as much except when he's ashore. The third is to study
forestry, and just now he's with his rifle-corps. The fourth is at
college--Bonn--belongs to all the most expensive clubs--but smart,
deuced smart! That's the chief thing. I expect all four to make their
living out of the state, but meanwhile they're a confounded expense to
me. You've no idea what it costs to keep Oscar alone in white gloves!

                       Prince (_to_ Brachtmann).

And these are the sources of German statesmanship!

                            von Berkelwitz.

What did you say, Prince?

                                Prince.

Nothing, nothing.

                            von Berkelwitz.

Not that we can't give you as good a dinner as you'll get here. But as
to keeping up a countryseat and a town house and a shooting-box and a
racing-stable--why, it's out of the question. I've had to mortgage my
place--and the men's wages--coming round every Saturday! well--well--I
tell my boys--rich marriages--_that's_ the cure. And they _ought_ to,
by gad! Good-looking fellows, you understand. What the deuce are we
Prussian noblemen for, if the state doesn't provide for us? Just answer
me that!

             Prince (_who has been studying the pictures_).

You ought to ask the Socialists that, Herr von Berkelwitz--ask it in
the Reichstag, you know. It would be rather effective. (_Turns back to
the pictures_.) A capital Sustermans.

                        Brachtmann (_smiling_).

After all, we're all looking out for ourselves.

                            von Berkelwitz.

And how have we succeeded? What have we landed proprietors
accomplished? Oh, we can all talk loud enough; but when it comes to
action, there we stand with our hands in our pockets.

                                Prince.

(_Who is turning over photograph-albums on the table_.) Other people's
pockets.

                        Brachtmann (_laughing_).

Prince--Prince!

                            von Berkelwitz.

(_In a low tone, to_ Brachtmann.) I say, is that fellow making fun of
us?

                              Brachtmann.

He's ten times more of a Conservative than either of us.

                            von Berkelwitz.

He talks like a Radical.

                     Prince (_in a startled tone_).

Oh, the devil!

                              Brachtmann.

What's the matter?

                                Prince.

Isn't this the Countess's writing-table?

                              Brachtmann.

Yes.

                                Prince.

Come here a moment, will you, and just glance discreetly over these
papers. Do you notice anything? (Brachtmann _shrugs his shoulders_.) I
mean among the newspapers.

             Brachtmann (_in a low voice, much agitated_).

The devil!--That was what I wanted to speak to you about. (_He points
to one of the papers_.)

                                Prince.

Ah--they've sent you one too?

                              Brachtmann.

In the same wrapper, addressed in the same hand. An hour ago, just as I
left the house. I suppose they haven't had time to look at the last
post here.

                                Prince.

(_Taking up the paper and looking at the wrapper_.) Do you know, I've
half a mind----

                              Brachtmann.

No, no, Prince--can't be done.

                                Prince.

I know it can't, my dear Baron. That's the very reason.--Don't our
political opponents say that property is theft? Why not reverse the
axiom, and----

                            von Berkelwitz.

What the deuce----?

                                Prince.

Why, instead of putting our hands into other people's pockets, we might
put other people's property into ours.

                              Brachtmann.

Prince, we all know your way----

                            von Berkelwitz.

If your Highness has made yourself sufficiently witty at our expense,
perhaps you'll explain what this is? (_Pointing to the paper_.)

                                Prince.

This, my dear Herr von Berkelwitz, is a copy of the "Lengenfeld News,"
the Socialist organ----

                            von Berkelwitz.

Faugh! How can you touch it?

                                Prince.

Well, it touches _us_, and rather nearly, as you'll see.

                            von Berkelwitz.

Why, what's up?

                                Prince.

(_Taking a newspaper out of his pocket_.) Look here----

                            von Berkelwitz.

That's the same as the other?

                                Prince.

Precisely. I brought it with me on your account. You will find in it an
interesting report of a meeting of Socialist electors. Do me the favour
to read the passage which they have thoughtfully marked for our
benefit.

                      von Berkelwitz (_reading_).

"It is seldom that the honourable gentlemen of the Right, the
self-constituted guardians of public morality, give us an opportunity
to see what goes on behind the scenes, in the gilded saloons to which
the man in the street may not presume to penetrate"--confound their
insolence!--"it is not often that we get a hint of what goes on behind
their silken bed-curtains"--h'm, I wish they could see what I sleep on!

                                Prince.

Go on.

                      von Berkelwitz (_reading_).

"But now and then a happy accident yields us an edifying glimpse of
their private histories. And, if I might venture to speak openly, I
could give you such a glimpse into the private life of the honourable
member from Lengenfeld, and into his relations with the friend whose
seat in the Reichstag he has taken--the confiding friend who, instead
of keeping watch in his own house, has been travelling from place to
place, canvassing for the honourable member. (Laughter. Prolonged
cheering.)" Lengenfeld? Lengen--why, that is Völkerlingk's district.
(Brachtmann _nods affirmatively_.)

                            von Berkelwitz.

And the friend--the friend who----? (_He breaks off, and points vaguely
to the room_. Brachtmann _nods again_.) The deuce!

                              Brachtmann.

On account of the party I suppose we shall have to take some notice of
this.

                                Prince.

Kellinghausen evidently doesn't know of it yet. But Völkerlingk does. I
watched him.

                              Brachtmann.

The Countess is not well. Who is the proper person to take that paper
away before she sees it?

                          Prince (_smiling_).

Well, frankly, I should say Völkerlingk----

                              Brachtmann.

You don't mean----

                       Prince (_still smiling_).

I don't mean anything.

                            von Berkelwitz.

Gentlemen, I'm only a plain country squire, but I should like to
suggest that the morals of our hostess are hardly a subject for
discussion.

                                Prince.

Morals? Morals? What do morals signify? They were only invented for the
preservation of the race.

                            von Berkelwitz.

That's over my head, your Highness.

                                Prince.

It's simple enough. Mankind is bound to go on reproducing
itself--that's its fundamental instinct. Morality was invented to keep
the strain pure. If it ceases to accomplish that purpose, it had better
abdicate in favour of immorality. That's all.

                            von Berkelwitz.

I'll be hanged if I understand a single word.

                                Prince.

We all know the old families wouldn't have survived till now if the
stock hadn't been renewed--surreptitiously, so to speak--by----

                              Brachtmann.

Really, Prince--really----

                                Prince.

My dear Brachtmann, it's all very well for you to look shocked. Your
family hasn't had to resort to such expedients: your patent of nobility
isn't more than two hundred years old. But my people have been
misbehaving since the time of Lewis the Pious. Look at the result--look
at _me_. Jaw prognathous--frontal bone asymmetrical--ears abnormal--all
the symptoms of a decaying race. Thanks to several centuries of
inbreeding, I must go through life a degenerate, and I assure you I
haven't any talent for it. If only I could marry a healthy dairy-maid!
Under such circumstances, do you wonder one loses one's respect for
morality? What if two people in this house have followed the dictates
of their temperament?

                              Brachtmann.

Prince, von Berkelwitz is right. As long as we're in the house
ourselves, we'll postpone any discussion of its inmates.

                                Prince.

As you please. (Richard Völkerlingk _is seen approaching. The_ Prince
_glances toward him_.) Which won't prevent my feeling the sincerest
sympathy for our friend there. His phenomenal self-possession is enough
to confirm my suspicions.

                            _Enter_ Richard.

                                Richard.

I've been looking for you every where, Brachtmann. I want to shake
hands and tell you how glad I am to be under your orders again.

                              Brachtmann.

We won't talk of being under my orders, my dear Völkerlingk. You know
how badly we need you, and how anxious we are to have you take the lead
in the coming debate. (Richard _bows_.) I suppose we may count on your
speaking on the Divorce Bill next Friday?

                        Richard (_hesitating_).

Why--I had hardly expected----

                              Brachtmann.

It's the very thing we want of you. According to the Socialists, a man
and his wife are no more bound to each other than a pair of cuckoos. We
need a speaker of your eloquence and your convictions to proclaim the
sanctity of the marriage-bond.

                                Richard.

But I hardly know if I should have time to get my facts together. And
besides-- (_He draws_ Brachtmann _aside and continues in a low tone_.)
An hour or two ago I received a copy of a speech that a fellow called
Meixner has been making against me. The man is a former secretary of
mine, turned Socialist----

                              Brachtmann.

Ah--Meixner was your secretary?

                                Richard.

You knew of this?

                              Brachtmann.

My dear Völkerlingk, don't you see that after such an attack it's
doubly important that you should speak on this very question? As for
the party, I think I may say in its name that our asking you to do so
is equivalent to a vote of confidence.

                                Richard.

Thanks, Brachtmann. I believe you're right. My refusal might be
misinterpreted.

               Brachtmann (_turning toward the others_).

We were speaking of this when you joined us. We have all received
copies of the paper.

                       Richard (_to the group_).

Then I must apologise for not having mentioned the matter; but I was
waiting to bring it before you in committee. It seems to be a question
of personal spite, for my son has received the paper too.

                              Brachtmann.

And Madame von Völkerlingk?

                                Richard.

My wife? Why do you ask?

                              Brachtmann.

Look at this. (_Leads_ Richard _to the writing-table and points to the
paper_. Richard _starts, but controls himself instantly_.)

                                Prince.

We were just wondering how we could get rid of the thing before it is
discovered, and we had reluctantly decided that none of us is
sufficiently intimate here to tamper with the Countess's papers. Now,
if _you_, my dear Baron--as an old friend of the family--knowing how
important it is to spare her any excitement----

                  Richard (_looking at him sharply_).

There is only one person entitled to remove that paper, and that is
Count Kellinghausen. I will speak to him at once.

                           Prince (_aside_).

Irreproachable!

                              Brachtmann.

My dear Völkerlingk, for heaven's sake leave Kellinghausen out of the
question!

                                Richard.

How can I?

                              Brachtmann.

I have been in politics long enough to take such incidents
philosophically. But Kellinghausen, easy-going as he is, strikes me as
the kind of man who might make an ass of himself in such an emergency.
If he loses his head he may do the party an incalculable amount of
harm; whereas, if we can keep this thing from him, it will blow over in
a week, and nobody be any the worse for it.

                                Richard.

But you forget that I am as much involved in this as Kellinghausen. It
is impossible that I should stand aside and allow any reflection to be
cast on--er----

                              Brachtmann.

You are quite right. But wait a moment. You said you meant to bring the
matter up in committee, which is undoubtedly the proper way of dealing
with it. The committee meets the day after to-morrow; and all I ask is
that you should say nothing till then.

                                Richard.

And suppose I agree to that what becomes of this paper? (_Pointing to
the writing-table_.) What if the Countess finds it?

                            von Berkelwitz.

Gentlemen, I'm only a plain country squire, and I haven't your
refinements of conscience. (_He takes the paper, tears it up and throws
it into the wastepaper basket_. Brachtmann _and the_ Prince _laugh_.)

                            von Berkelwitz.

After which act of felony I suppose I had better make my escape.
(_Shakes hands with the others and goes out_.)

                              Brachtmann.

Then it's understood that, in the interests of the party, you will----

                                Prince.

'Sh. Here is our host.

                        Kellinghausen _enters_.

                             Kellinghausen.

Ah, there you are, Richard! My dear fellow, I've been hunting for you
high and low. I was actually reduced to asking Madame von Völkerlingk
where you were. "My dear Count," she said, "it's fifteen years since
I've known where my husband was." Nice reputation you've got! Well, now
I've run you to earth, sit down and let's have a talk. (_To the
others_.) I haven't had a chance to say two words to him yet.

                                Prince.

My dear Brachtmann, shall we----?

                             Kellinghausen.

No, no; don't run off. Richard and I have no secrets. Let us take
possession of this quiet corner. (_To_ Conrad, _who is passing with a
tray of refreshments_.) Conrad, what have you got there? Lion brew from
the wood, eh?

                                Conrad.

Yes, your Excellency.

                             Kellinghausen.

That's what we always had at Bismarck's. H'm--in those days there was a
power in the land. It weighed on us rather heavily at times, but we
were none the worse for it. Your health, Richard, my dear fellow!
Gentlemen, your healths! How deuced quiet you all are! You look as if
I'd invited you to my own funeral. Good Lord, if you knew how glad I am
to have got the Reichstag off my shoulders!--The other day, down at the
polls, I said to one of our Lengenfeld peasants: "My dear friend--"
(they're all our dear friends at election-time; we even have to put up
with being _their_ dear friends). "My dear friend," said I, "I hope
you're going to vote for my successor?"--"What will he give me for it?"
says he. "What will the Socialist give you?" said I. "The Socialist
will call you all names, and I like to hear you called names. It makes
me laugh," the fellow answered. And he was right. We must amuse the
masses and they'll love us. Circus-riding, my dear friends that's all
the nobility are good for!

                              Brachtmann.

We shall miss your cheerful view of life, my dear Kellinghausen.

                             Kellinghausen.

H'm--that's about the only epitaph I can hope for. Ha! ha!--Well--I
say, Richard, what sort of a fellow is that Meixner? (_The others look
up quickly_.) Wasn't he your secretary at one time?

                                Richard.

Yes.

                             Kellinghausen.

How long ago?

                                Richard.

It must be ten or twelve years.

                             Kellinghausen.

Well, he has certainly profited by the training you gave him. He's
raving against you like a madman.

                                Richard.

Did you happen to run across him?

                             Kellinghausen.

Heaven forbid!

                                Richard.

Did you hear what he said?

                             Kellinghausen.

Yes; Holtzmann told me about him. And I've had a lot of his speeches
and proclamations sent to me. Capital stuff for lighting the fire.
Well, thank the Lord, it's all over.

                                Richard.

I wish I knew how to thank you, Michael----

                             Kellinghausen.

Nonsense. None of that. By the way, I picked up a pamphlet in the train
to-day--"The Ordeal" or some such name. Holtzmann tells me that Norbert
wrote it. Is that true? (Richard _nods_.)

                              Brachtmann.

Ah, indeed--your son wrote----?

                             Kellinghausen.

I say, Richard, you give him a long rein, don't you?

                                Richard.

My dear Michael, the chief thing I have to thank my father for is that
he gave _me_ one. I vowed long ago that Norbert should have as much
freedom as I had.

                             Kellinghausen.

Well, we shall have to take the young scamp in hand before long.

                                Richard.

I wish you would. I should like to know who has put him up to this. He
won't tell me.

          _Enter_ Beata, _with_ Baron Ludwig von Völkerlingk.

                                 Beata.

May we join you? Don't let us break up your party.

                             Baron Ludwig.

(_Advancing toward the other men_.) Will you allow me?

                 Beata (_to_ Michael, _in a low tone_).

Well, are you enjoying yourself?

                             Kellinghausen.

Immensely, dear, immensely.

                                 Beata.

Did you like the way I arranged the seats at table?

                             Kellinghausen.

Couldn't have been better. The brothers not too close together, yet
near enough to talk. Now you must follow it up, and get them to make
friends--eh?

                                 Beata.

That is what I've come for. (_To_ Richard.) My dear Völkerlingk, I want
to speak to you.

                             Kellinghausen.

(_To_ Richard, _as he approaches_.) Mind you obey orders, now! (_Joins
the others_.)

                                Richard.

I am glad you are not too tired, Beata.

                                 Beata.

I've been growing stronger every day since the elections. But you must
take some notice of Leonie, Richard. She is saying things.

                                Richard.

Let her. It's her specialty.

                                 Beata.

Every one knows that she never comes here, and her being here to-night
is making people talk.

                             Baron Ludwig.

(_Approaching his brother, evidently at_ Kellinghausen's
_instigation_.) Ah, here are the two friends talking together.

                                 Beata.

(_Looking from one brother to the other_.) And the two enemies,
too--thank heaven!

                             Baron Ludwig.

The Countess is right, Richard. It was foolish of us not to speak to
each other.

                                Richard.

My dear Ludwig, perhaps we hadn't enough to say.

                             Baron Ludwig.

Or too much!

                                Richard.

Possibly. (_To_ Beata.) But, Countess----

                 Beata (_turning to join the others_).

No, no. I am going to leave you two together. (_She moves away_.)

                                Richard.

Why do you look at her so strangely?

                             Baron Ludwig.

Strangely? What do you mean?

                                Richard.

You begrudge me this friendship, Ludwig.

                             Baron Ludwig.

Do I? Perhaps. You must remember that I am very lonely. I had hoped
that your house might----

                                Richard.

My house? With Leonie----?

                             Baron Ludwig.

Yes--your friend is different from Leonie.

                                Richard.

You needn't envy me, Ludwig. My friend is a dying woman. Every day I
ask myself if I shall ever see her again.

                             Baron Ludwig.

My dear Richard, the woman lives in a thousand energies. She will
survive us both.

                                Richard.

God grant it!

                             Baron Ludwig.

But--be on your guard.

                                Richard.

What do you mean?

                             Baron Ludwig.

(_Glancing at_ Kellinghausen.) Can we find a quiet corner somewhere?
(_He takes_ Richard's _arm and they go toward the other room_.)

                 _Enter_ Leonie, _on_ Norbert's _arm_.

                    Leonie (_meeting the brothers_).

What a touching spectacle! Look, Norbert!

                             Baron Ludwig.

Don't detain us, Leonie. We're going to have our photograph taken. (_He
and_ Richard _go out_.)

                 Leonie (_advancing toward the front_).

How enchanting! And Beata as the angel of peace! Quite a new rôle for
you, isn't it, dear? But you're _so_ versatile!

                                 Beata.

Dear Leonie, find fault with me when I sow discord, but praise me when
I make peace.

                                Leonie.

Do you care so much for praise?

                                 Beata.

Don't you?

                                Leonie.

Oh, no one ever praises me. I suppose I don't know how to play my
cards. Norbert, please have the carriage called.

                                Norbert.

Very well, mother. (_Goes out_.)

                                Leonie.

Ah, Prince--good-evening! (_He kisses her hand_.) How is it we never
see you at our missionary meetings? Her Royal Highness wished me to say
that she counts on your help. Isn't that flattering? (_To the others_.)
The Prince is one of us, you know. He serves the cause of religion
faithfully----

                                Prince.

And in poverty of spirit. That's my special merit, you know, Baroness.

                  Brachtmann (_aside to the_ Prince).

You reprobate!

                                Leonie.

But pray don't let me disturb you, for I must really be off. My
carriage is waiting, and my coachman is so cross. We're all the
slaves of our carriages. (_To_ Kellinghausen.) It has been so
delightful--dear Beata is such a wonderful hostess. Our great
stateswoman knows so well how to keep her party in hand. Willingly or
unwillingly, she makes them all come into line; don't you, Beata, dear?

                                 Beata.

I'm afraid you are among the unwilling to-night, Leonie.

                                Leonie.

Oh, I'm not as adaptable as some of your friends.

                  Brachtmann (_aside to the_ Prince).

Do you hear those amenities?

                       Prince (_to_ Brachtmann).

The Baroness is dispensing Christian charity sprinkled with arsenic.
Let's efface ourselves. (_They move quietly into the background_.)

                                Leonie.

(_To_ Kellinghausen, _with whom she has been talking_.) No, no, my dear
Count you mustn't think of it. Norbert will put me in my carriage. And
meanwhile, I want to have a little chat with dear Beata. We always have
so many things to say to each other.

                  Kellinghausen (_kissing her hand_).

At your orders, my dear friend. I'll draw the curtain to protect your
_tête-à-tête_. (_He draws the curtain between the columns and goes
out_.)

                                Leonie.

How wonderfully well you look to-night, Beata! Not in the least like a
prospective grandmother.

                                 Beata.

Why, as to that, Leonie, it looks as though you and I were to be made
grandmothers on the same day.

                                Leonie.

Ah, really? Well, Ellen is a delightful child. Where is she, by the
way? You don't seem to care to let her be seen in your neighbourhood on
such occasions.

                                 Beata.

Seen? In my neighbourhood? You have an odd way of putting things. But I
believe you had something to say to me.

                                Leonie.

I know I oughtn't to keep you from your other guests, but it's such a
pleasure to have you to myself. I wonder what has become of Norbert?--I
must say, Beata, I can't help admiring your self-possession. I don't
see how you can be so unconcerned.

                                 Beata.

What should I be concerned about?

                                Leonie.

Why, you don't mean--? I should almost think you-- But I don't know how
to express myself. It's so very painful.--There are such dreadful
people in the world.

                                 Beata.

Are there?

                                Leonie.

This former secretary of Richard's, for instance, who has made such a
shocking speech against him. You've received a copy, of course?

                                 Beata.

Not that I know of.

              Leonie (_drawing a paper from her pocket_).

Ah--I brought mine with me. Perhaps it might interest you.

                                 Beata.

Not in the least, my dear.

                                Leonie.

You are mentioned in it, too.

                           Beata (_smiling_).

Really?

                                Leonie.

Only between the lines, of course.

                                 Beata.

Between the lines? What do you mean?

                                Leonie.

This is the paragraph; the one marked with a blue pencil. Don't be
horrified. It will make you laugh, of course. I laughed over it myself.
(Beata _takes the paper, looking firmly at_ Leonie _as she does so. She
reads the paper, throws it aside, and looks at_ Leonie _again, without
speaking_.) Good heavens, how pale you are! I didn't realise-- Shall I
get you a glass of water?

                                 Beata.

No, thanks. (_Controlling herself with an effort_.) Does Richard know
of this?

                                Leonie.

Oh, yes. Doesn't Michael?

                                 Beata.

Certainly not.--He would have-- Will you let me have this paper?

                                Leonie.

To show Michael?

                                 Beata.

Naturally. In a matter involving his honour----

                                Leonie.

You don't mean to make a scandal?

                                 Beata.

What do you call a scandal? Haven't you made one in bringing me this?

                                Leonie.

I mean that your husband might----

                                 Beata.

My husband will do as he sees fit.

                                Leonie.

You are very sure of yourself.

                                 Beata.

My dear Leonie, remember that you are in my house.

                                Leonie.

My dear Beata, we are always in each other's houses; we can't meet at
the street corners, like servants.

                                 Beata.

You are right. Say what you were going to say.

                                Leonie.

Oh, I have held my tongue so long!

                                 Beata.

Why have you, if you had anything to say?

                                Leonie.

Listen, Beata. I am not going to discuss the relations between my
husband and yourself. It's a subject that no longer interests me. But
it was you who took him away from me, and when I found you had taken
him, I turned to my boy instead. Then you took him too. Now I have
nothing left--nothing but my position in society, which I have built up
slowly, year by year, by my own efforts, as you know. I am in the
Princess Agnes's most intimate set, I am patroness of--but all this
doesn't interest you. But how have I accomplished it? Simply by
keeping my eyes shut and appearing to sanction your friendship with
Richard.--And now, if you persist in dragging your husband in, there
will be a scandal, and I shall have to sue for a divorce; and that will
be excessively unpleasant for us all. Don't you agree with me?

                                 Beata.

I might say so many things in reply.--In the first place, whatever I
have taken was never really yours.--But no matter. I will only ask you
one thing: have you thought of Ellen and Norbert?

                                Leonie.

Oh, Ellen and Norbert! I've no objection to the match, none
whatever--but it's _your_ scheme, not mine, and you can't expect me to
be particularly enthusiastic about it. But I should think it would be
one more reason for _you_ to keep quiet.

                                 Beata.

Then--if you don't mean to do anything--why did you bring me this?

                 Leonie (_with irrepressible triumph_).

Why did I bring it? Because I--(_relapses into her usual
amiability_)--I thought it might interest you, and you see I was not
mistaken. Ah, here comes Norbert!

                            _Enter_ Norbert.

                                Norbert.

I'm sorry to have kept you, mother. The carriage was-- (_Startled_.)
Why, Aunt Beata, what's the matter?

                  Beata (_making an effort to smile_).

Nothing, Norbert, dear.

                                Leonie.

Well, good-bye, Beata. Do be careful of yourself! I should be so sorry
to think I had done anything to excite you. Come, Norbert, you must put
me in the carriage, and then you can come back to your dear aunt.

                                Norbert.

I beg your pardon, mother, but I think Aunt Beata needs me now. If
you'll wait for me a moment downstairs----

                                Leonie.

What did I say? I congratulate you, Beata! (_She goes out alone_.)

                                Norbert.

What has she been saying to you?

                                 Beata.

Oh, she was right--so right!

                          Norbert (_alarmed_).

Aunt Beata!

                       Beata (_with an effort_).

Norbert--my son--take me to Ellen. In a few minutes I shall be
quite----

                                Norbert.

Come, come-- (_Leads her gently out. Sounds of talk and laughter come
from the inner room_.)

                            _Enter_ Kellinghausen.

                             Kellinghausen.

(_Putting his head through the curtains_.) Ha! No one there? Have our
wives made way with each other? (_To_ Richard, _who has followed him_.)
They're not so deuced fond of one another. I say, old man, just now,
when I was talking about the elections, why did you all put on that air
of statesmanlike reserve? Did I say anything out of the way?

                                Richard.

What an absurd idea!

                             Kellinghausen.

One is always liable to make an ass of one's self. I'm not conscious of
having blundered, but--oh, well, I sha'n't get anything out of you.
(_Raising the curtain and calling out_--) Brachtmann--Usingen--come
here a moment.

                                Richard.

Michael, if you take my advice we'll drop the election for the present.
I give you my word that if anything occurs that reflects on you----

                             Kellinghausen.

On me? Reflects on me? What on earth do you mean? I'm thinking of the
party. Our business is to look out for the party.

  _Enter_ Brachtmann _and the_ Prince, _followed a moment or two later
                              by_ Norbert.

                              Brachtmann.

Hear, hear! But what are you talking about?

                     Kellinghausen (_to_ Norbert).

Aha, young man, where have you come from? Tea in the school-room, eh?

                                Norbert.

Aunt Beata was not very well, Uncle Michael. (Richard _starts_.)

                             Kellinghausen.

Ah?

                                Norbert.

She is feeling better now. She will be here in a few minutes.

                             Kellinghausen.

That's good--that's good. By the way, Master Norbert, we're going to
put you through your paces. How about this so-called "Ordeal," eh? Do
you own up to it?

                                Norbert.

I'm proud to, Uncle. At least, no--not so very proud; for I've found
out lately that it's all been said before, a thousand times better than
I've said it.

                              Brachtmann.

And also by a member of the Conservative party?

                                Norbert.

Well--no--not exactly.

                              Brachtmann.

Ah--but that's the point.

                                Norbert.

I beg your pardon, Herr von Brachtmann, I thought truth was truth, no
matter who uttered it.

                                Prince.

What is truth? said Pilate.

                                Norbert.

And washed his hands. We also wash our hands of many things, your
Highness. I have even heard it said that the use of soap and water is
the only thing that distinguishes us from the masses. But no matter how
much washing we do, we can't wash off the blood we have shed in the
abuse of our class-privileges.

                         Prince (_to_ Richard).

Very neatly parried. He has a good wrist.

                                Richard.

My dear Norbert, will you give your venerable parent a hearing? We have
left far behind us many of what you call our "class-privileges"; but
their traditional spirit still survives. And that spirit, whether the
modern world condemns it, or the middle-classes make it ridiculous by
aping it--that spirit is the safeguard of our order. Believe me,
Norbert, we must stand or fall by it.

                                Norbert.

Then we must fall, father.

                                Richard.

Possibly--even probably. But meanwhile the one distinction we have left
is the right to dispose of our lives. When a nobleman of the Italian
Renaissance, or a young blade of the court of Louis XIII., crossed the
threshold of his house, he was never sure of re-entering it alive. That
was what gave him his audacity, his splendid indifference to danger.
Today we no longer stake our lives so lightly; but the fact that they
are ours to stake still gives its keenest edge to living.

                              The Others.

Hear! Hear!

                                Norbert.

My dear father, you have given us an admirable explanation of the
personal view of death. But life is not a personal matter at all. You
have said so often enough. Our lives belong to the ideals for which we
fight, they belong to the state or to the race----

                             Kellinghausen.

And how about our personal sense of honour? What of that, Norbert? Are
we to be forbidden to defend with our lives the few things we hold
sacred on earth? May we no longer fall upon the scoundrel who assails
them? You will hardly convince us of that, Norbert.

                                Richard.

Then again, Norbert, there may be cases--you are too young to have
foreseen them, but they exist--where an honourable man may have done
irreparable injury to another's honour. If he admits his guilt, and
satisfaction is demanded of him, what is he to do? Is he to run away,
or to shelter himself behind the law? The law, which was made to
protect the honour of serfs! Should you expect that of him, Norbert?

                                Norbert.

If your man of honour admits his guilt, and is ready to pay the
penalty, let him be his own judge.

                                Richard.

H'm----

                                Norbert.

But I beg your pardon, father; that is hardly the point. It was all
very well for the aristocracy to make its own laws when it had
the power to enforce them; but what is to become of its precious
"class-privileges" when the modern world laughs at them and the mob
refuses to recognise them? When that day comes, I don't see what we can
do but take shelter behind the law.

                             Kellinghausen.

I don't understand you, Norbert. Give us an instance.

                                Norbert.

Nothing easier, Uncle Michael. What do you propose to do with the
scoundrel who has been insulting you in his electioneering speeches?
(_There is a startled movement among his listeners_.) You don't mean to
challenge _him_, I suppose?

                             Kellinghausen.

What do you----?

                                Norbert.

Unless you treat the whole matter with silent contempt and I fancy
you'll hardly do that it seems to me that a libel suit is the only
alternative.

                             Kellinghausen.

Norbert--are you dreaming--or----

                                Norbert.

Why--Uncle Michael--didn't you know?

                                Prince.

_Now_ you've done it, young man!

                             Kellinghausen.

Do any of you know what he's driving at?

                              Brachtmann.

Yes.

                             Kellinghausen.

Richard, what does this mean? What is going on behind my back? You call
yourself my friend--why have you kept me in the dark?

                       Richard (_very quietly_).

In the first place, dear Michael, we only heard of the business an hour
or two ago; in the second place (_as he speaks_, Beata _enters from
behind_), I am mixed up in it myself.

                             Kellinghausen.

You? In a slander that concerns me? (Richard _nods without speaking_.)
Then there was all the more reason----

                              Brachtmann.

My dear Kellinghausen, the fault is mine. For the sake of the party, I
asked Völkerlingk not to--

                  Prince (_suddenly noticing_ Beata).

H'm. Perhaps we had better-- (_he advances toward_ Beata). My dear
Countess----

                        Beata _enters quietly_.

                                 Beata.

Don't be afraid. I know what you are speaking of. I know all about it.
Michael, if these gentlemen would allow us to talk the matter over by
ourselves----

                             Kellinghausen.

Thank you, my dear. But I think you had better keep out of it.
Richard--Brachtmann--if you'll come to my study---- (_They both
assent_.)

                     Richard (_approaching_ Beata).

I will say good-night, Countess.

                                 Beata.

Good-night, my dear Völkerlingk. (_Rapidly, in a low voice, as he bends
above her hand_.) Does he know?

                     Richard (_in the same tone_).

Not yet.

             Beata (_aloud, with conventional cordiality_).

I shall see you to-morrow? (Richard _bows, and follows the other men
toward the door_.)


                                Curtain.




                                ACT III




                                ACT III


_The same scene: in the afternoon_. Holtzmann _is waiting. Enter_
Kellinghausen _in hat and fur-lined coat_.

                             Kellinghausen.

Ah, Holtzmann--this is very good of you. I'm extremely obliged to you
for coming. (_Shakes hands with him_.) Sorry to have kept you waiting.
(_Takes off his hat and coat_.) Sit down--sit down.--That is,--perhaps
we'd better-- Oh, well, my wife's not likely to come in just now.--A
cigarette?

                               Holtzmann.

Thanks. I don't smoke.

                Kellinghausen (_lighting a cigarette_).

You remember Meixner the fellow who gave us such a lot of trouble
during the elections? I believe you and he have crossed swords once or
twice in public; and didn't you tell me that you knew him personally?
When was it that you ran across him?

                               Holtzmann.

There was only one inn in the village, and his room and mine were on
the same landing. The meeting was over at eleven, and I went to bed
soon after. About midnight in walks Meixner, as cool as you please, and
sits down on my bed. "We haven't finished that argument yet. Let's have
it out now," he said. And there he sat till six in the morning.

                             Kellinghausen.

(_Takes a copy of the_ "_Lengenfeld News_" _out of his pocket and
glances at it_.) Did that happen before or after the twelfth of
January?

                               Holtzmann.

It happened before he made that speech.

                      Kellinghausen (_startled_).

What? You knew----?

                               Holtzmann.

Why--naturally.

                             Kellinghausen.

Herr Holtzmann, we were in the train together for hours. We drove
together for miles. I have always treated you as a friend. Why did you
never speak of this? (Holtzmann _remains silent_.) Let me tell you one
thing: you can't put me off with a shrug. If you think you can, you
don't know me.

                               Holtzmann.

I beg your pardon, Count Kellinghausen--but I must remind you that I am
not in your service.

                             Kellinghausen.

My dear Herr Holtzmann, you are known as one of the most zealous
supporters of our party. Probably you attach some importance to that
fact. Your silence in this matter surprises me, and I shall not fail to
draw my own conclusions.

                         Holtzmann (_rising_).

You must draw what conclusions you please, sir. Personally I have
nothing to gain by serving your party. I might have a living at any
moment, and if I have preferred, for the present, to devote myself to
politics, it was only because I thought I could be of use to the cause.

                    Kellinghausen (_after a pause_).

I have offended you. You must make allowances for my excitement--this
business has unnerved me. (_Holds out his hand_.) Sit down again and
let me ask you a question. Has this Meixner any recognised standing in
his party, or is he merely a hanger-on?

                               Holtzmann.

He must have a certain standing, since he is their candidate for the
next election.

                             Kellinghausen.

Ha! ha! A nice lot they are! Well, the gentleman has given us his
measure by sending copies of this paper to the wives of the men he
attacks.

                               Holtzmann.

If he has done that, sir, can you guess his reasons?

                             Kellinghausen.

No. Can you?

                               Holtzmann.

Perhaps----

                             Kellinghausen.

Well----?

                               Holtzmann.

I'm sorry, sir--but I can't say anything more just now.

                       Kellinghausen (_rising_).

Good-day, then, Herr Holtzmann.

                               Holtzmann.

My respects to you, sir. (_Goes out_.)

               Kellinghausen (_giving way to his rage_).

Hounds! Brigands! Damn them! All tarred with the same brush----

                            Beata _enters_.

                           Beata (_quietly_).

Flying into a passion won't mend matters, Michael.

                             Kellinghausen.

And I can't make you out, either. Here they are, throwing mud
at us--calling you I won't say what--and you stand there
like--like--Haven't you got any blood in your veins? Don't you realise
what it all means?

                                 Beata.

I haven't much strength to spare, and I have to economise my emotions.

                             Kellinghausen.

Good God--how white you are! Don't mind me--I'll pull myself together.
We won't talk of the damned thing any more.

                                 Beata.

It will be the first time in twenty years that we haven't talked over
what you had on your mind.

                             Kellinghausen.

I wish to heaven I'd never told you of it. The devil take Leonie! She
can't hold her cursed meddling tongue; Richard ought to muzzle her. By
the way, it's strange he hasn't shown himself to-day.

                                 Beata.

I have had a note from him. He asked me to tell you that he is deep in
his speech. He is coming as soon as he has a moment to spare.

                             Kellinghausen.

There you are again! Just when the man needs a clear head for the great
work that's before him, he finds himself involved in this filthy-- Ah,
well, I'll have the dogs by the throat yet! I'll have them howling for
mercy!

                                 Beata.

Do calm yourself, Michael. Look--your face is all on fire. You know
it's bad for you to excite yourself.

                             Kellinghausen.

There, there--I'm quiet again. Don't I always do what you tell me? Ah,
if I hadn't had _you_ all these years, the Lord knows what would have
become of me!

                                 Beata.

Then, on the whole, I've been--satisfactory?

                      Kellinghausen (_laughing_).

That sounds as if you were asking for a reference.

                                 Beata.

Perhaps I am. I want to have one to show in case of need.

                             Kellinghausen.

And when do you expect to need it?

                                 Beata.

Who knows?

                            _Enter_ Conrad.

                         Conrad (_announcing_).

Baron Brachtmann.

                      Kellinghausen (_to_ Beata).

Do you wish to see him?

                                 Beata.

Yes.

                 _Enter_ Brachtmann. Conrad _goes out_.

                              Brachtmann.

(_Bows to_ Kellinghausen _and kisses_ Beata's _hand_.) I am sorry we
were not on our guard yesterday, Countess. Even if you had to know of
this stupid business, you needn't have heard of it till it had blown
over.

                                 Beata.

Don't reproach yourself, Baron. I should have been sorry to miss such a
chance of enlarging my knowledge of human nature.

                              Brachtmann.

Well, at all events, I beg of you both not to take it too seriously.
And as for you, my dear Kellinghausen, I say again as I've said before:
for God's sake, keep out of the courts.

                             Kellinghausen.

Ah----?

                              Brachtmann.

Why, my dear man, haven't I been accused of arson and forgery? Haven't
I been charged with bribing my constituents to perjure themselves--not
to speak of my dodging my taxes, and other sleight-of-hand
performances? That's merely the political way of poking fun.

                             Kellinghausen.

H'm--your digestion must be stronger than mine. But those charges
concerned no one but yourself; if I stood alone in this business, I
might see the humour of it. But let them beware how they attack my
family! Besides, I've taken steps already----

                              Brachtmann.

What have you done?

                             Kellinghausen.

I got hold of my counsel this morning. He has made out a retraction
which the scoundrel is to sign. If he won't sign it, we'll take other
means. He is to be at my lawyer's at three o'clock.

                         Beata (_starting up_).

What? To-day?

                             Kellinghausen.

To-day. The sooner the better. By the way, what time is it? I must be
on hand myself. Brachtmann, will you come with me?

                              Brachtmann.

I was going to propose it. (_While_ Kellinghausen _puts on his coat, he
turns to_ Beata.) If you have any influence over him, for heaven's
sake----

                       Beata (_in a low voice_).

I can do nothing.

                             Kellinghausen.

Well, dear, good-bye. If Richard turns up, be sure you make him wait. I
shall be back in an hour. (Kellinghausen _and_ Brachtmann _go out_.)

                                 Beata.

(_Closing her eyes, with a miserable smile_.) In an hour!

                             _Enter_ Ellen.

                       Ellen (_in the doorway_).

Mother!

                                 Beata.

Come in, dear child.

                  Ellen (_kneeling down beside her_).

Mother, mother dear, what has happened? What is it? Papa is so excited
and talks to himself so strangely--and you--oh, mother!

                           Beata (_smiling_).

Well what have I done?

                                 Ellen.

If I tell you, you won't--won't stay away? You'll come and lean over my
bed every night--just as you've always done?

                          Beata (_surprised_).

Then you're awake--when I come?

                                 Ellen.

Always, always. I never go to sleep till I've heard you.

                                 Beata.

Dearest! And yet you never stirred!

                                 Ellen.

Oh, I prided myself on that! But last night it was so hard to keep
quiet. I could feel your tears on my face--oh, how you were crying! And
I did so want to cry with you. But I held my breath and lay as still as
I could.--Mother, what has happened? Won't you tell me? I'm not a child
any longer.

                                 Beata.

Listen, dear. I want to ask you a question. Is there any one in the
world--besides your father and me--that you're very fond of?

                           Ellen (_softly_).

You know, mother. I don't have to tell you things----

                                 Beata.

Some one you're so fond of that you could live for him--or even die for
him?

                                 Ellen.

There's nothing in the world I wouldn't do for him!

                                 Beata.

(_Softly stroking her hair and cheeks_.) H'm----

                            _Enter_ Conrad.

                         Conrad (_announcing_).

                            Dr. Kahlenberg.

                          Beata (_to Ellen_).

Go, dear. That is all I wanted to know.

                                 Ellen.

Mother! (_Goes out_.)

               _Enter_ Dr. Kahlenberg. Conrad _goes out_.

                            Dr. Kahlenberg.

You sent for me, Countess? Nothing wrong, I hope?

                                 Beata.

Why, this is your hour for consultations, isn't it?

                            Dr. Kahlenberg.

Oh, there was no one there but two or three whining women. The kind
that can be cured by the atmosphere of a fashionable doctor's
waiting-room; so I'm letting them wait.

                                 Beata.

(_Listening, as though to make sure that they are alone_.) I sha'n't
keep you long. Doctor you know how often I have said to you: "My dear
friend, I've got to live--I've simply got to live; show me how--" and
how you've always answered: "The only way is to avoid excitement."
Well--I've borne that in mind--I've schooled myself to look at life
through a tombstone, as it were--my own tombstone, doctor! I've done
that. But now--now there are storms ahead, perhaps disasters. If they
come, my judgment and energy are equal to them--but my valves are not.
I found that out last night--it was only those drops of yours that
saved me. But I can't live on those drops--you've warned me not to take
them too often. And I don't want to die of this. Doctor, you must help
me!

                            Dr. Kahlenberg.

Why, what's the meaning of all this? H'm. You're right. Strophanthus
and digitalis are not meant for human nature's daily food. Besides, the
effect might wear off.--My dear Countess, take your courage in both
hands and run away. Turn your back on all these emotions. Human life is
simply a process of molecular adjustment complicated by moral
idiosyncrasies.

                          Beata (_laughing_).

I'm so glad to know it, doctor. (_Growing serious_.) But there is no
time to run away. The storm may break in an hour.

                            Dr. Kahlenberg.

Child, what has happened? Ah, well, I never ask questions.--In an
hour?--I am going home to despatch my whining women, and then I'll drop
in again and see what has happened in the interval.

                                 Beata.

And if to-day is only the prelude?

                            Dr. Kahlenberg.

So much the better. Then we shall have time to look the thing in the
face. Meanwhile I'll give you something new to take--something that
your system hasn't got used to. We physicians have a supply of such
remedies to tide us over bad places.

                                 Beata.

Thank you.

                            Dr. Kahlenberg.

Give me both hands, Countess. You and I know death too well to be much
afraid of it. But if you want to live I'll do my best to help you. And
now I'll go and assure my other patients that they're really ill.
Good-bye. (_He goes out. In the hall he is heard greeting_ Norbert.)

                            _Enter_ Norbert.

                                Norbert.

Aunt Beata, I'm so glad to see you looking so well. I was almost
afraid----

                                 Beata.

It always cheers me to see you, Norbert. And to-day especially----

                                Norbert.

To-day?

                                 Beata.

'Sh--to-day is a lucky day.

                                Norbert.

Lucky? In what way?

                                 Beata.

Wait and see! Wait and see!

                                Norbert.

I say, Aunt Beata, you're not making fun of me? I don't half like the
way you're smiling to yourself.

                                 Beata.

Well, you must make the best of it, dear boy!

                                Norbert.

Aunt Beata--you're _not_ the same since yesterday. I knew it all along.
What a beastly business life is! You--you--of all women!--that they
should dare attack you! The scoundrels--the miserable sneaking
scoundrels!

                                 Beata.

Norbert, dear, you must see that this is a matter we can't discuss.
Besides, I have something else to talk to you about. Can you tell me
what time it is?

                                Norbert.

Half-past four.

                                 Beata.

Will you ring for the lamps, please? Ring twice. (Norbert _rings_.) I
have only a few minutes to spare, but it won't take long to-- (Conrad
_brings in two lamps, and draws the curtains_) to tell you what
I-- (_She hesitates, constrained by_ Conrad's _presence_.) This is Miss
Mansborough's afternoon. She has probably gone out. (Conrad _leaves the
room_.) You will find Ellen alone in her sitting-room--go and look for
her--and when you find her, put your arms about her, and say to her,
"I love you, and I shall always love you, in this world and the
next"--provided there is any next!

                                Norbert.

Aunt Beata! (_Falls on his knees before her and hides his face in her
lap_.)

                  Beata (_struggling with her tears_).

And then sit down in the twilight, you and Ellen, quietly, side by
side, and talk of all the happiness that is coming to you and of all
the good you mean to do. Let it be your hour of consecration. And I
shall be with you all the while--feeling your happiness, thinking your
thoughts--all through this next hour of my life.--Now go, Norbert. I
hear some one coming--it must be your father. I will tell him--go,
dear, go.

                                Norbert.

Aunt Beata! (_Kisses her hand_.)

                                 Beata.

Your hour of consecration remember that, Norbert. (Norbert _goes out_.)

                            _Enter_ Richard.

                                Richard.

What has happened? You look radiant.

                                 Beata.

(_Taking his hand and holding it fast_.) I have settled the future of
our children. No matter what happens to us-- Why, Richard, aren't you
the least bit pleased?--Oh, how ill you look!

                                Richard.

What sort of a night did you have, Beata?

                                 Beata.

Not so bad.--And how goes the speech? Are you in sight of land?

                                Richard.

Beata--I don't know if I shall be able to speak to-morrow.

                           Beata (_alarmed_).

But you must. You must. They all count on you. Dear, you _must_. Is it
because of that wretched business last night?

                                Richard.

Partly, I suppose. This new danger has stirred up the whole past.

                                 Beata.

And your conscience is bothering you again?

                                Richard.

You call it conscience, Beata; I call it consistency. How dare I speak
on this bill, how dare I take such a stand before God and man, when my
whole life gives me the lie?--Good God!--To stand up and talk about the
sanctity of marriage--about the family life as the main support of
society--to parade such an argument before the cynics of the
Opposition, when with my own hands I have helped to tear down that very
support--no, no, I can't justify myself without adopting their own
cynical and materialistic creed. And not even then; for what I call God
they call social expediency; and this new idol of theirs is more
exacting than the Jehovah of the old dispensation. As to acknowledging
that words are one thing and actions another--that the man in me is not
accountable to the statesman--well, I haven't sunk as low as that--what
I give I must give without an afterthought.--And so all my ideas
crumble into dust, all my reasoning ends in contradiction--and I find
myself powerless to plead the very cause I have at heart!

                                 Beata.

But why, dearest, why?

                                Richard.

Forgive me. I am so tired; my mind is a blank. First that dreadful
scene last night, when a moment's hesitation would have ruined us both.
Then my long night at my desk--the superhuman effort of collecting my
thoughts after all I'd been through. But as I worked, my subject took
such hold of me that I've only just waked up to the question--how on
earth is it all to end? (Beata _is silent_.) Oh, Beata, the truth, the
truth! Oh, to be at one with one's self! To have the right to
stand up openly for one's convictions! I would give everything for
it--happiness, life itself, everything!

                                 Beata.

And yet you love life.

                                Richard.

I? No--not now. Now that our falsehood is closing in on us, death would
be--but don't be frightened; I shall do nothing foolish. There are two
of us, and we must hold together. I am so used to sharing every thought
with you.--What has happened since yesterday? I suppose Michael has
given up the absurd idea of prosecuting the man.

                                 Beata.

On the contrary.

                                Richard.

What?

                                 Beata.

At this moment he has probably found out whatever your former secretary
knows about us.

                                Richard.

What on earth do you mean?

                                 Beata.

I haven't interrupted you, dear, because speaking seemed to clear your
thoughts. But I haven't attempted to answer you, because every minute
is precious.

                                Richard.

Hasn't Brachtmann been here?

                                 Beata.

Brachtmann came too late.

                                Richard.

Then----?

                                 Beata.

Even if he had come sooner he could not have prevented anything.
Dearest, Michael may come back at any moment, and when he comes we must
be ready----

                                Richard.

Don't go on, Beata. Let us suppose the worst: say that Meixner has
unearthed a few suspicious circumstances--what use can he make of them?
He can't produce any proofs.

                                 Beata.

Who knows?

                                Richard.

Where are they to come from? The few letters we exchanged were burnt
long ago. Copies are not admitted as evidence. He will not be allowed
to testify on oath. We have only to keep ourselves in hand as well as
we did yesterday, and the whole story will fall to the ground.

                                 Beata.

And Michael?

                                Richard.

Michael?

                                 Beata.

Suppose he questions you?

                                Richard.

There can be but one answer, I think.

                                 Beata.

In our class there is something we call a "word of honour." If he asks
you for _that_--? You don't answer.

                Richard (_confused, breathing heavily_).

We haven't reached that point yet, Beata--and if he does--why, we two
are chained together by our past, we are answerable to no one but
ourselves. That is all there is left to us.

                                 Beata.

Is that your answer? You, who tell me you have wrestled with yourself
all night because--Richard, I don't believe you!

                                Richard.

Believe me or not, but be sure that, whatever happens, no suspicion
shall fall on you--on either of us. And now I beg of you--let me see
Michael alone.

                           Beata (_smiling_).

Alone?

                                Richard.

I----

                        Beata (_still smiling_).

Hush! Do you hear his latch-key?

                                Richard.

Beata, I implore you. You are not fit to bear what is coming! If you
value your life, go----

                                 Beata.

I value yours, and therefore I shall stay.

                         _Enter_ Kellinghausen.

                    Kellinghausen (_very gravely_).

Good-afternoon, Richard. (_Shakes hands with him_.)

                                Richard.

Good-afternoon, Michael.

                      Kellinghausen (_to_ Beata).

Has any one been here?

                                 Beata.

Norbert--and Dr. Kahlenberg. No one else.

                             Kellinghausen.

Kahlenberg? At this hour? Is any one ill?

                                 Beata.

No. He merely came to see me. Shall I give you some tea?

                             Kellinghausen.

Thanks, no. Richard, you don't want any either? Then, if you'll come
into my study----

                                Richard.

With pleasure.

                                 Beata.

Michael, I don't understand you. You have never shut me out from your
counsels. Hitherto, if I have taken part in your discussions, it was
because you wished me to; to-day I have a right to be here.

                             Kellinghausen.

My dear child, don't you always have your way? If Richard doesn't
object----

                                Richard.

Whatever you wish----

                                 Beata.

But first I want to give you a piece of good news. Norbert and Ellen
are engaged.

                Kellinghausen (_his face lighting up_).

Ha? What? Those two children? I saw it coming, bless their hearts!--but
I'd no notion--where are they, Beata? (_Goes to door, left_.)

                 Richard (_in a low tone, to_ Beata).

He knows nothing.

                       Beata (_with an effort_).

Michael--never mind--don't speak to them now! To-morrow Norbert
will---- (_She breathes painfully_. Richard _makes a startled
movement_.)

                             Kellinghausen.

What is it? Are you ill?

                                 Beata.

No--no, it's nothing. But happiness reverberates so! Norbert is coming
back to-morrow. He wishes to tell his mother first.

                             Kellinghausen.

Ah, that's thoughtful of him. I had forgotten about his mother. Well,
shake hands, old man. Confound it--I'm ashamed to look you in the face
with this cursed thing hanging over us. And to think how happy we three
might be--oh, that hound, that vile infamous hound!

                                Richard.

Tell me what happened, Michael.

                             Kellinghausen.

There isn't much to tell. My lawyer had a talk with him. He says his
only object is to bring out the facts.

                    Richard (_after a short pause_).

Well--let him bring them out.

                             Kellinghausen.

Let him? You should have heard Brachtmann. The man was beside himself.
He began with the old story of the Frenchman who said that if he were
accused of stealing the towers of Notre Dame he would take the first
train for the frontier. "No matter how blameless you all are, the lie
will stick to you," he said. "It will stick to you and to your children
and to your party." I had to give him my word of honour that, whatever
happens, I will do nothing to bring scandal on the party.

                                Richard.

But you haven't stuck to your resolve?

                             Kellinghausen.

How could I? We can't wring the scoundrel's neck without landing
ourselves in prison. Norbert was right yesterday. In such cases we have
no refuge left but the courts. There is more in that boy's ideas than I
was willing to admit at the time. Well--meanwhile I've agreed to think
the matter over for twenty-four hours. A mere formality, of course--and
yet not quite, after all. The fact is, I wanted to talk it out with
you.

                                Richard.

Very well.

                             Kellinghausen.

Beata--Richard--I don't need to be told that there's nothing wrong in
this house--nothing wrong between you two, to put it plainly. I can see
that for myself. But in such a dirty business the most harmless fact
may be used against you; and you won't misunderstand me if I ask
you--both-- You see, you two have always been in such close sympathy--I
don't say that to reproach you--God forbid! It was natural
enough--you're both so much cleverer than I am--but I ask you, for all
our sakes, to look back and try to remember if you've ever written each
other any letters that might--might seem--to an outsider--a little
too friendly? Good heavens! _I_ should understand it if you had!
Or--or--have you ever written anything about _me_? Anything that
might--? There are plenty of things to criticise about me. But I must
know the truth. There must not be the least pretext for this attack. I
ask you to stop and consider.

                                Richard.

There is nothing to consider, my dear Michael.

                             Kellinghausen.

Not so fast, my dear fellow! Take time. Think the matter over.

                                Richard.

There is nothing to think over.

                             Kellinghausen.

Beata----?

                                 Beata.

My answer is the same as Richard's, of course.

                             Kellinghausen.

Richard, our fate is in your hands. Do you advise me to bring suit?

                                Richard.

Oh--if you ask my advice----

                             Kellinghausen.

I don't ask your advice but your assurance. I have pledged myself not
to endanger the party. Give me your word of honour that I can bring
suit without doing so.

                   Richard (_straightening himself_).

I give you my word of honour that--you---- (Beata _gives a suppressed
cry_.)

                             Kellinghausen.

What is the matter? What ails you?

                     Beata (_looking at_ Richard).

He will give you his word of honour, and then he will go home and blow
his brains out. Don't you see it in his face?

                             Kellinghausen.

What do you mean?

                                Richard.

Kellinghausen, ask your wife to leave the room, and I will----

                                 Beata.

Richard, for fifteen years we have shared all our joys and sorrows. We
must share this too.

                             Kellinghausen.

(_Half strangled, tearing his collar open, and then throwing himself
on_ Richard.) You--you--you!

                  Richard (_seizing both his hands_).

Michael, take care! This must be between ourselves. Remember that.

                             Kellinghausen.

Yes--yes--yes; I pledged my word--I remember--I--oh, you--you---- (_He
sinks down in a chair near the table, and hides his face with tearless
sobs_.)

                Beata (_approaching him after a pause_).

Dear Michael, Richard and I conquered our feelings long ago. That is
why we are so calm now. What happened between us happened years ago,
and we are ready to pay the cost, whatever it is.

                             Kellinghausen.

Oh, as far as he's concerned, it's simple enough. He and I can soon
settle our account.

                                Richard.

Yes.

                             Kellinghausen.

But you--you--how can you justify yourself? How have you reconciled it
to your conscience to live beside me half a lifetime with this thing
between us? Why didn't you come and ask me to set you free?

                                 Beata.

Yes--that was what _he_ wanted--he has such a sense of honour! And to
this day he has never understood why I wouldn't. I loved him too well
to ruin his life--that's all. Even if he could have got a divorce and
married me, such a marriage would have been his ruin. I should simply
have finished the work that Leonie had begun. But what I wanted was to
save him. And so all these years I have lied for him----

                             Kellinghausen.

And what have you done for _me_? Or didn't I enter into your
calculations?

                                 Beata.

Michael, you must see that we can't discuss that now. It would be
laughable if I were to try to explain to you----

                             Kellinghausen.

Ha! Ha! Lies and deception! Wife--friend--everything! Everything! (_To_
Richard.) Why do you stand there as if you were struck dumb? Why don't
_you_ try and whitewash yourself too?

                                Richard.

You said just now that our account was easy to settle.

                                 Beata.

He sees things differently. I speak for myself. He looks at things as
you do.

                             Kellinghausen.

And yet----

                                 Beata.

Wait, please! I have one word more to say, I have staked everything and
lost--it's all over for us, all three of us. If I had spoken years ago,
the same thing would have happened. You told me just now that I had
made you happy. Well, that is what my lie has done. It has made you
happy for fifteen years. Blame me for it--but don't forget it----

                             Kellinghausen.

And God--and retribution? Do you never think of such things? No
repentance--no remorse? Nothing? Nothing?

                                Richard.

Spare her, Michael. Let me answer for her. (Kellinghausen _advances
toward him with clenched fist_.)

                                 Beata.

You have questioned _me_, Michael; let me question you. Must every
natural instinct end in remorse and repentance? Sin? I am not conscious
of sinning. I did the best that it was in me to do. I simply refused to
be crushed by your social laws. I asserted my right to live; my right
to self-preservation. Perhaps it was another way of suicide--that's no
matter. You know what my life has been--how I've had to buy it, hour by
hour and drop by drop, at the nearest chemist's--well, wretched as it
is, I've loved it too dearly to disown it now! Yes, I've loved it--I've
loved everything--everything around me--you too, Michael--ah, don't
laugh--yes, you too--even if I've--ah-- (_Her breath comes in long
gasps and she reels and clutches a chair, closing her eyes as she leans
against it. Then she opens them again_.) Which one of you will--help me
to the door? (Richard _makes a movement, and then draws back_.)

                             Kellinghausen.

Beata, from now on there will be no one to help you.

                                 Beata.

Thank you. (_With an intense effort, she walks out of the room_.)

                     Kellinghausen (_to_ Richard).

And now----?

                                Richard.

Do what you like. Say what you like. Curse me--shoot me. I sha'n't
defend myself.

                             Kellinghausen.

You admit that one of us must die?

                                Richard.

No; I don't admit it; but I am at your orders.

                             Kellinghausen.

A duel between us is impossible----

                                Richard.

Impossible----

                             Kellinghausen.

I don't mean on account of the children. _That's_ all at an end.

                                Richard.

Why must it be at an end if one of us dies? But I am at your orders.

                             Kellinghausen.

I have pledged my word not to bring any scandal on the party. You are
under the same obligation.

                                Richard.

Yes.

                             Kellinghausen.

So that the only thing left----

                                Richard.

Before you go any further, let me tell you that I decline to go through
the farce of an American duel.

                             Kellinghausen.

You decline--? Perhaps you want to sneak out of the whole business?

                                Richard.

You don't believe that!

                             Kellinghausen.

Well--what other way is there?

                                Richard.

I know a way--but---- (Norbert's _voice is heard outside, speaking
with_ Conrad.)

                             Kellinghausen.

(_With sudden decision, opening the door_.) Norbert!

                       Richard (_following him_).

For God's sake, Michael--do you want to disgrace my whole house?

                  Kellinghausen (_opening the door_).

You shall see.--Norbert! Come in, my boy--come!

                           Norbert _enters_.

                                Norbert.

Uncle Michael, what is the matter with Aunt Beata? The doctor is with
her, and Ellen has been called----

                             Kellinghausen.

Nothing serious. Don't be alarmed. (_Takes his hand_.) Norbert, your
father and I were just talking of last evening. You remember that
stupid business interrupted our talk, and we never heard the end of
your argument. Let us have it now. Sit down--sit down, Richard. (_They
all seat themselves_.) There was one phrase of yours that struck me.
You said--you said--that if----

                                Richard.

You said that if a man of honour has injured another and is called on
to atone for it, he is the best judge of his own punishment.

                         Norbert (_laughing_).

Did I? Very likely--but my head is so full of other things just now
that I couldn't swear to it.

                             Kellinghausen.

That was not quite what I meant; but no matter. Suppose we take such a
case. If the injured person says: "One of us two must die"--what ought
the other to answer?

                                Norbert.

Why, Uncle Michael, I should say that depended on the nature of the
injury--doesn't it?

                                Richard.

Let us say, for the sake of argument, that the wrong is the gravest
that one man can do another; let us say he has seduced his friend's
wife. Has the husband a right to the other man's life?

                                Norbert.

Why, father--there can be but one answer to that. And if the other man
is a man of honour--though I don't see how he could be, do you?--he
would be more eager to give his life than the husband could possibly be
to take it.

                                Richard.

H'm. Perhaps you're right. Thank you, my boy.

                                Norbert.

Uncle Michael, at what time to-morrow may I see you?

                             Kellinghausen.

I'll send you word, Norbert.

                                Norbert.

Thanks. Don't make it too late, will you? Don't keep me waiting too
long. Good-bye. Good-bye, father. (_Goes out_.)

                                Richard.

Well--are you satisfied?

                             Kellinghausen.

You put the question in a way that suggests suicide. That was not----

                                Richard.

It is your own choice. All I ask is two days' respite. You won't refuse
it? (Kellinghausen _shrugs his shoulders_.) Good-bye. (_Goes out_.)


                                Curtain.




                                 ACT IV




                                 ACT IV


_A study in the house of_ Richard Völkerlingk. _Doors on the right and
left, at the back. A fireplace in the middle background, the rest of
the wall hidden by book-cases, which frame the fireplace and doors.
In the foreground, to the left, a window. To the right of it, a
writing-table. In the centre a table covered with periodicals and
books. On the right a leather sofa and arm-chairs. Behind these a door.
Rich and sombre decorations, old pictures, armour, etc. A hanging-lamp
with a green shade, another lamp on a table, both lit. Through
the window one sees the twilight_. Holtzmann _is seated at the
centre-table, reading_.

                            _Enter_ George.

                                George.

Herr Holtzmann, some one is asking for the Baron.

                               Holtzmann.

Why, you know the Baron is at the Reichstag.

                                George.

He says it's important that the Baron should see him. He wants to know
when he can call again.

                               Holtzmann.

Do you know who it is?

                                George.

Well--not exactly a gentleman. What shall I tell him?

                               Holtzmann.

The Baron speaks this afternoon. He will not leave till the House
rises. Tell the man to come back in an hour. (George _goes out_.)

                           Norbert _enters_.

                      Norbert (_greatly excited_).

Herr Holtzmann--haven't you been at the Reichstag? (Holtzmann _shakes
his head without speaking_.) Then you haven't heard? My father has had
the most wonderful triumph--they say there has never been anything like
it.

                               Holtzmann.

Ah?

                                Norbert.

I wish I could give you an idea of it! Look at me--I'm shaking all
over! If you could have heard the way the words rushed out, the way the
thoughts trod on each other's heels! He began by sketching the
psychology of the modern man, and from that he developed a theory of
marriage, with its outward obligations and inner ideals--the marriage
of to-day in its highest, noblest sense--but you'll read what he said;
you'll see if I'm exaggerating. Then he went on to the practical
application of his theory. In this unsettled age, when parents are
losing their control over their children, and the state its hold over
the citizen, when even God and His priests see the soul of man slipping
away from them--at such a time we must do all we can to strengthen the
only tie that holds humanity together--the only tie that gives youth
the shelter of the family life till habit becomes duty, and duty the
law of being, and through obedience to that law a strong and enduring
national soul is created. Isn't that beautiful, Herr Holtzmann? Isn't
that a glorious idea?

                               Holtzmann.

Very fine, very fine. But doesn't such an argument lead back to the
standpoint of the Church, which----

                                Norbert.

When marriage is a mockery, he said, the state may intervene and
dissolve it. That was all. Never in my life have I heard such a
scathing denunciation of infidelity!

                               Holtzmann.

Ah? Indeed?

                                Norbert.

There was such terrible menace in his words that I--oh, well, I can't
explain it--but I began to feel afraid--of I don't know what----

                     Holtzmann (_half to himself_).

This will explain----

                                Norbert.

Explain what? What do you mean?

                            George _enters_.

                          George (_urgently_).

Herr Holtzmann!

                       Holtzmann (_to_ Norbert).

One moment, please. (_He goes up to_ George.)

                        George (_in a whisper_).

The man is here again, and asking to see you. He is waiting in the café
across the street.

                               Holtzmann.

Doesn't he give his name?

                                George.

Yes. Something like Meister or Meissner.

                 Holtzmann (_startled, in a whisper_).

Meixner?

                                George.

That's it.

                   Holtzmann (_turning to_ Norbert).

Will you excuse me? Some one has sent for me.

                                Norbert.

Don't let me keep you. (Holtzmann _and_ George _go out_. Norbert _goes
to the window, his hand shading his eyes, and gazes out eagerly_.
Richard _comes in quietly and lays his portfolio on the
writing-table_.)

                    Norbert (_turning toward him_).

Father! Father! (_He throws himself in_ Richard's _arms_. Richard
_thanks him with a smile_.)

                                Norbert.

Mother sends you her love and is sorry she can't be here to
congratulate you. She's in waiting on the Princess this evening.

                                Richard.

Ah? (_He moves about the room_.)

                                Norbert.

Oh, father, how happy you must be! How they cheered, how they fought to
get near you and shake your hand! Oh, if only I could have one such
hour in my life!

               Richard (_laying a hand on his shoulder_).

If you do, my son, may you pay for it less dearly!

                                Norbert.

What do you mean?

                                Richard.

Listen, Norbert.--Have you heard anything of Aunt Beata?

                                Norbert.

I went there, but they told me she wouldn't see any one.

                         Richard (_musingly_).

H'm.

                                Norbert.

The fact is, I wanted to see Uncle Michael.

                                Richard.

(_Who has walked toward the window_.) Uncle Michael? That reminds me
that I wanted to tell you-- How the sunset shines on the house-tops
over there! Everything is in a glow--we shall have glorious winter
weather soon----

                                Norbert.

You said you had something to tell me, father.

                                Richard.

Yes, yes; to be sure. But first, haven't you something to tell _me_?

                 Norbert (_with an embarrassed smile_).

Yes; but not to-day--when you're so----

                                Richard.

The very day, dear boy! To-morrow I may but there's nothing to tell,
after all. Aunt Beata and I have seen this coming and it has made us
very happy.

                                Norbert.

(_Flinging his arms about his father_.) Father! Father!

                                Richard.

Norbert! My dear lad! But we don't yet know what Uncle Michael will
say----

                                Norbert.

Uncle Michael? When I'm _your_ son? Father, you've heard something. You
wouldn't frighten me for nothing.

                                Richard.

I have heard nothing. But, Norbert, listen. Whatever comes to you in
after days, I want you to remember one thing: it doesn't matter whether
we succeed or not. What we need is the guiding note of a voice that
seems the echo of our best hopes. It doesn't matter whether we are
mistaken in the voice or not--the great thing is to hear it. And the
worst thing is not to feel the need of it.

                                Norbert.

Thank you, father. I'm not sure I understand--but you may be sure I
shall listen for the voice.

                                Richard.

And one thing more. Uncle Michael is very busy just now. Leave him
alone for a day or two--even if you have the chance of speaking. And
let me see you to-morrow morning early. I may have to go on a long
journey--and before I start----

                                Norbert.

On a journey? Now? Just as you----

                           Richard (_nods_).

This is between ourselves. But meanwhile, try to see Aunt Beata for a
moment. I want you to tell her--but stay, I'll write. (_He seats
himself at the writing-table and begins to write_.)

                            _Enter_ George.

                                George.

His Excellency Baron Ludwig von Völkerlingk.

   _Enter_ Baron Ludwig. Richard _starts up, pleased and surprised_.

                                George.

The evening papers, your Excellency. (_He puts them down and goes
out_.)

                                Richard.

Ludwig! It's a long time since you've given me this pleasure.

                             Baron Ludwig.

Thank you, Richard.

                                Richard.

Will you excuse me a moment? I am finishing a letter. (_He folds the
letter, puts it into an envelope and writes the address, while_ Norbert
_and_ Baron Ludwig _are greeting each other_.) There!

                     Norbert (_taking the letter_).

An answer, father?

                                Richard.

As soon as possible. (Norbert _goes out_.)

                             Baron Ludwig.

My dear Richard--we're quite alone, I suppose? (Richard _nods_.)
Forgive the suggestion, but-- (_he glances about the room_) Leonie
sometimes overhears----

                                Richard.

Leonie is out.

                             Baron Ludwig.

So much the better. But first let me tell you with what admiration I
listened to you just now--what breathless admiration! (Richard _makes a
gesture of thanks_.) Still, I confess that your having to speak on such
a subject just at present made me--er--a little nervous----

                                Richard.

Why so?

                             Baron Ludwig.

I was almost afraid--but we'll go into that presently.--Well, at
all events, if nothing goes wrong, you may look upon this as the
starting-point of a career that any man living might envy you.

                                Richard.

What do you mean?

                             Baron Ludwig.

A certain personage was heard to say after your speech: _That is the
man I need_. Don't look as if you saw a ghost. You deserve it all, my
dear Richard.

                                Richard.

(_Walks up and down in agitated silence_.) Ludwig--you have led me to
the top of a high mountain and shown me the promised land in which I
shall never set foot. Give me time to renounce the idea.

                             Baron Ludwig.

Why should you talk of renouncing it? But this brings me to the object
of my visit. Richard, how long do you suppose your enemies will wait
before making capital out of your speech?

                                Richard.

I'm ready for them, my dear fellow. I'll pay the shot--to the last
penny!

                   Baron Ludwig (_in a lower tone_).

We are talking at cross-purposes. I referred to the insinuations of
your former secretary.

                                Richard.

I understand.

                             Baron Ludwig.

You know there is nothing they are so eager to attack as our private
life. Of course I don't for a moment imagine the man has anything to go
on--but unless you can silence him he may make a scandal in which
everything will go under--your name, your career--and other things
besides.

                                Richard.

What can I do to prevent it?

                             Baron Ludwig.

For one thing, you might jump into a cab and hunt your man down with a
big bribe in your pocket.

                                Richard.

Do you think that kind of man could be bribed?

                             Baron Ludwig.

My dear Richard, this is not merely a matter of life and death.
Remember that. Of course you may be too late; but it's the only way I
can suggest. (_There is a knock on the door_.)

                                Richard.

Come in.

                           _Enter_ Holtzmann.

                               Holtzmann.

I beg your pardon, Baron. (_In a low voice_.) An important matter----

                                Richard.

You may speak before my brother. I have no secrets from him.

                               Holtzmann.

There is a man waiting in my room who wishes to speak to you. His name
is Meixner. (_The two brothers look at each other_.)

                                Richard.

Thanks. Please tell Herr Meixner that I will see him in a moment.
(Holtzmann _goes out_.)

                             Baron Ludwig.

Well, this ends my mission. Good-bye, Richard. Your luck frightens me.

                     Richard (_laughing bitterly_).

My luck!

                  Baron Ludwig (_pressing his hands_).

Don't hang back now, my dear fellow. The way is open to you.

                                Richard.

Thank you. Good-bye. (Baron Ludwig _goes out_. Richard _rings_.)

                            _Enter_ George.

                                Richard.

I will see the gentleman who is waiting. You will remain in the
ante-room. Don't let in any one else. (George _goes out. After a short
pause_ Meixner _enters_.)

                                Richard.

Herr Meixner, after what has happened, doesn't it strike you as rather
a liberty that you should enter my house?

                                Meixner.

(_Speaking in a hoarse voice, with an occasional cough_.) May I take my
muffler off? My lungs have gone wrong--makes it very hard for me to
talk down my adversary in one of those crowded smoky halls.--But what's
to be done about it?

                                Richard.

May I ask what you want of me?

                                Meixner.

Really, Baron, from the way you look at me I might almost ask what you
want of _me_. But I suppose it's my turn first.--I haven't come out of
malice. You can safely offer me a chair.

                                Richard.

If you haven't come out of malice you probably won't stay long enough
to need one.

                                Meixner.

Ah--thanks. Well, I'll take the hint and be brief. It was down at
Lengenfeld, you know. Herr Holtzmann and I sat up a whole night arguing
over the elections. Why not--two honourable antagonists, eh? Herr
Holtzmann, as a good theologian, was all for the sanctity of the social
order. I laughed at him--he's at the age when the disciple looks up to
his master, and he brought you up as an example. I laughed at him
again.--"If Baron Völkerlingk is not what I believe him to be," said
he, "nothing is what I believe it to be, and I'll go over to your
side." "Shake hands on that," said I; and we did. The next day, in my
speech, I made that allusion--you know what I mean--and as no one took
it up, and I began to be afraid it might hang fire, I sent about a few
copies of the paper. That helped. I got my nomination the next day.

                                Richard.

Not in my district.

                                Meixner.

No matter. Well I found I'd made a stupid blunder. I'd meant to convert
Holtzmann but I hadn't meant to ruin _you_. Do you see? Then you made
your speech to-day--and after that-- Well, I've been tramping the
streets ever since, saying to myself: The man who could make that
speech after what he's been through--well, he's suffered enough.--Baron
Völkerlingk, here are two letters written to you by-- (_he looks about
him cautiously_) by a lady I needn't name. Don't ask me how I got them.
I didn't steal them; and here they are, if you'll give me your word
that you'll put a stop to that libel-suit.

                                Richard.

I think the suit has already been stopped.

                                Meixner.

H'm--well, your thinking so is hardly sufficient.

                                Richard.

It will have to be stopped, even if you keep those letters.

                         Meixner (_startled_).

Even if--? H'm--do things look as badly as that for you?

                                Richard.

You will kindly leave me out of the question.

                                Meixner.

Ah--well--here are your letters. (_Lays them on the table_.)

                                Richard.

If you didn't wish to do me a public injury, why not have shown them
privately to my secretary?

                                Meixner.

They might have been forgeries.

                                Richard.

They may be so still.

                                Meixner.

When I've taken the trouble to return them to you? Holtzmann doesn't
think so. He's packing up already. Perhaps you'd like to see him before
he leaves?

                                Richard.

No.

                                Meixner.

Baron Völkerlingk, if I have got you into trouble don't set it down to
ill-feeling. Principle is principle, if we have to hang for it. Every
man who has convictions must be prepared to go to the stake for them.
Good-day to you, Baron Völkerlingk. (_He goes out_.)

                                Richard.

(_Clutches the letters and strikes his clenched hand against his
brow_.) Oh, to live again to live, to live!

                            _Enter_ Norbert.

                                Norbert.

Father----

                                Richard.

Well?

                                Norbert.

Aunt Beata was out.

                                Richard.

Out? At this hour? Why, she never goes out except for her morning
drive. Where can she have gone?

                                Norbert.

No one knows.

                                Richard.

But she must have ordered the carriage?

                                Norbert.

It seems not.

                                Richard.

Well, thank you, my boy. What time is it?

                                Norbert.

Nearly seven.

                                Richard.

You had better dine without me. I shall go and enquire. She may
have----

                                Norbert.

Is there anything I can do, father?

                                Richard.

No, no. Thanks, Norbert. (_He gives him his hand_.) Good-night, my lad.

                                Norbert.

Good-night, father. (_Goes out_.)

                        Richard (_to himself_).

My God! My God! (_He hurries toward the door, and starts back amazed_.)

      _Enter_ Beata, _in hat and cloak, her face thickly veiled_.

                                Richard.

Beata! (_He closes the door_.) Where have you come from? Tell me, for
heaven's sake!

                                 Beata.

Alive!

                                Richard.

Did any one see you except George?

                                 Beata.

Alive--alive! (_She sinks into a chair, trembling and hiding her face
in her hands_.)

                                Richard.

Good God, Beata, rouse yourself! What has happened? Don't keep me in
suspense. What is it, dearest? Answer me.

                                 Beata.

I'm so cold.

                     Richard (_opening the door_).

George! (George _enters_.) Light the fire.

                 George (_kneels down and lights it_).

Yes, your Excellency.

                                Richard.

And see that no one interrupts us. I am engaged with Madame von
Kellinghausen.

                                George.

Yes, your Excellency.

                                Richard.

If the Baroness comes in, say nothing, but let me know.

                                George.

Yes, your Excellency. (_Goes out_.)

                                Richard.

And now, come and sit by the fire. But take off your cloak
first--there. And your hat and veil too?

                                 Beata.
(_Letting her arms sink down helplessly_.) I can't.

                                Richard.

Wait, dear. (_He loosens her veil_.) How white you are! Come to the
fire. (_He leads her to the fireplace_.) There! is that right?

                                 Beata.

Everything is right as long as you're alive!

                                Richard.

Why, Beata, what put such an idea into your head?

                                 Beata.

Hasn't it been in _yours_ ever since yesterday?

                                Richard.

There will be no duel, I assure you.

                                 Beata.

I have just read your speech. It was your goodbye to the world. Oh,
don't laugh--don't deny it. I've felt death hanging over us ever since.

                                Richard.

And I swear to you that I've never loved life better, have never been
more determined to live, than now that I've won back my place in the
world.

                                 Beata.

You swear that to me?

                                Richard.

I swear it.

                                 Beata.

And yet you must die.

                                Richard.

So must we all. But I mean to put it off as long as possible, I promise
you!

                         Beata (_standing up_).

Richard, for fifteen years we haven't kept a single thought from each
other, yet now that the end has come you throw me over as if you were
paying off a discarded mistress.

                         Richard (_agitated_).

Beata!

                                 Beata.

Don't be afraid. I am not going to force your confidence. You would
only repeat what Michael has already told me--that you are going to
travel, to disappear for a while.--Is this the laugh with which we were
to have greeted death? Often and often, at night, when I've lain in bed
struggling for breath, I've said to myself that I should die before
morning. What if it really happened to-night? You'd have to wait
then--you'd have no right to follow me. Think how people would talk if
you did! (_With a sudden start_.) The children, Richard--there must be
no shadow on the children.

                                Richard.

Beata, don't talk so wildly. Do shake off such fancies.

                           Beata (_musing_).

Yes--yes.--You know you'll have a note from Michael in the morning.

                                Richard.

What do you mean?

                                 Beata.

A note asking you to luncheon to-morrow to meet some friends. Nothing
more.

                                Richard.

What is the object----

                                 Beata.

It seems there has been some gossip at the clubs, and this is the
shortest way of putting a stop to it. (_Entreatingly_.) You'll come,
Richard, won't you?

                                Richard.

Beata! Why should we go through this new misery?

                       Beata (_in wild anxiety_).

Richard, you _will_ come? You must come.

                                Richard.

I can't, Beata.

                                 Beata.

It is the last thing I shall ever ask of you. Now you're smiling
again--well, I'll believe anything you tell me--about your travelling,
about your disappearing--I'll believe anything, if you'll only come.
Richard, come for the children's sake. And if not for the children's
sake, come for mine--or I shall die of it--I shall die of it, Richard,
in the night----

                         Richard (_overcome_).

I will come.

                                 Beata.

Give me your hand. (Richard _gives it_. Beata _takes his hand, and
passes it over her eyes and cheeks_.) There--I'm quite quiet again, you
see. (_Sits down_.) I don't know if I told you that I'm going to
Rossitsch to-morrow.

                                Richard.

For good?

                           Beata (_nodding_).

So that, unless you come and pay me a visit there----

                                Richard.

This is good-bye?

For always. So you needn't keep yourself so frightfully in hand. (_He
looks at her doubtfully_.) You needn't, really. (_He falls on his knees
before her and hides his face in her lap_.)

                      Beata (_stroking his hair_).

"I knew a sad old tale of Tristram and Iseult"--How grey you've grown
in these last few days! (_She kisses his hair_.) Don't get up yet--I
want to look at you again--for the last time.--Only I can't see
you--your face has been like a mask ever since yesterday.--Look at me
just once as you used to--just once!

                          Richard (_rising_).

I've never changed to you.

                                 Beata.

Haven't you?--Who knows?--We've grown old, you and I. There's a layer
of ashes on our hearts--a layer of conventionality and good behaviour
and weariness and disappointment.--Who knows what we were like before
the fire went out? Not a trace is left to tell--not so much as a riband
or a flower. The words are forgotten, the letters are destroyed, the
emotions have faded. Here we sit like two ghosts on our own graves.
(_Passionately_.) Oh, to go back just once to the old life, and then
forget everything----

                                Richard.

Do you really want to?

                                 Beata.

You can work wonders--but not that!

                                Richard.

(_Draws out the letters, and opening one, begins to read it to her_.)
"Rossitsch, June 13th, 1881. Two o'clock in the morning."

                                 Beata.

What is that?

                                Richard.

Listen. (_Reading_.) "I don't want to sleep, dearest. The night is too
bright and my happiness too great. The moonlight lies on Likowa, and
already the dawn shows red through the network of elms. The blood beats
like a hammer in my temples--I scarcely know how I am going to bear the
riches of my new life. Oh, how I pray God to let me live it out beside
you--not as your wife, that would be too wild a dream!--but as an
unseen influence at your side, faint as the moonlight which rests upon
your sleep, or as the first glow of dawn that wakes you to new
endeavour."

                                 Beata.

I must have been listening to Wagner. Let me see; did I really write
that? (_She reads_.) "For I mean to make you the greatest among men,
you, my discoverer and my deliverer--" That's not so bad, you know.
(_Reads on_.) "If only heaven would let me die, and give you my life to
live as well as your own." (_She rises suddenly with a strange look on
her face_.)

                                Richard.

This letter and another have just been brought to me by--Meixner. If he
had come yesterday we should have been saved. Now it is too late.

                                 Beata.

Too late?--Oh, Richard, how ungrateful I've been! Why, every prayer
of my youth has been granted--the long sad sweet dream at your
side-- (_She breaks suddenly into laughter_.)

                                Richard.

Why do you laugh?

                                 Beata.

I laugh because in your speech this morning you disowned us
both--disowned our long sad sweet dream. Oh, I don't blame you,
Richard. It isn't your conscience that torments you, it's the
conscience of the race. I'm only a woman--what do I care for the race?
You felt that you were sinning--I felt that I had risen above myself,
that I had attained the harmony nature meant me to attain. And because
I feel that----

                                Richard.

You deny that we have sinned----?

                                 Beata.

I deny nothing. I affirm nothing. I stand on the farther shore of life,
and look over at you with a smile. Oh, Richard, Richard (_she laughs_),
did you ever really think I had given you up? I never gave you up. I
never ceased to long for you, passionately, feverishly, day and night,
when you were away and when you were near me--always, always--and all
the while I was playing the cool, quiet friend, biting my lips to keep
the words back, and crushing down my rebellious heart--yes, and through
it all I was so happy--so unspeakably, supremely happy----

                      Richard (_going up to her_).

Take care, dear. You mustn't excite yourself. I shall have to send you
home.

                                 Beata.

(_Letting her head sink on his breast with a happy smile_.) Home? This
is home.

                                Richard.

They will be wondering where you are. They may send here to find you.

                   Beata (_mysteriously, urgently_).

No, no--not yet! I have so much to say to you. There are so many
secrets I must tell you. Everything has grown so clear to me--I wish
I--Richard, you will surely come to-morrow? (_Crying out suddenly_.) I
want to stay with you. I am afraid of to-night!

                                Richard.

Beata, do try to control yourself.

                                 Beata.

Yes, yes--I'll control myself.-- (_She stands motionless, benumbed_.)
Give me my hat. (_He brings her the hat and veil_.) And my veil.
(_Fervently_.) You still love your life, Richard? You still want to
live?

                                Richard.

Haven't I told you so? Ever since----

                                 Beata.

Never fear, dearest. You _shall_ live.

                  Richard (_with outstretched hands_).

Beata, before we part----

                                 Beata.

Don't thank me--don't kiss me. I--good-bye, Richard. (_She goes out_.)

                                Richard.

Beata!


                                Curtain.




                                 ACT V




                                 ACT V


_The dining-room at_ Count Kellinghausen's. _In the middle of the stage
a table with six covers. On the right a sofa, table, and chairs.
Sideboard on the left. In the centre at the back a wide door leading
into the drawing-room. Door on the right into anteroom, door on the
left into inner apartments. A window on the right, in the foreground.
Grey light of a winter's day_. Ellen _is busy arranging the flowers on
the table_. Conrad _in the background. Enter_ Beata _from the left_.

                                 Ellen.

Oh, mother, I'm so glad you've come. Will the flowers do?

                                 Beata.

Beautifully, dear. (Conrad _goes out_.)

                                 Ellen.

And the cards? Look--I've put you here, of course, with Baron Ludwig on
your right, and Prince Usingen on your left.--Mother! You're not
listening.

                                 Beata.

Yes I am. But Brachtmann is older than the Prince. They must change
places.

                                 Ellen.

Very well. And this is Uncle Richard's seat, next to father's.

                         _Enter_ Kellinghausen.

                             Kellinghausen.

What about father?

                                 Ellen.

I was only saying that I had put Uncle Richard next to you.

                             Kellinghausen.

Next to me?--Yes, yes; of course. Quite right. (_He pets her_.) Now,
you monkey, be off!

                                 Beata.

I shall see you before luncheon, dear.

                                 Ellen.

Yes, mother. (_Goes out_.)

                             Kellinghausen.

I came to speak to you about our arrangements. I have just received a
telegram from Rossitsch. Your rooms are ready for you. To prevent any
talk, I shall take you there and leave you. I suppose you are ready to
start this evening?

                                 Beata.

Whenever you please, dear Michael.

                             Kellinghausen.

You don't seem to have made any preparations.

                           Beata (_smiling_).

I have so few to make!

                             Kellinghausen.

I have no objection to Ellen's remaining with you till the spring. Then
we can see about sending her to a boarding-school.

                                 Beata.

I consent to that too.

                             Kellinghausen.

You could hardly expect your refusal to make much difference.

                        Beata (_still smiling_).

Don't be afraid. I understand my position.

                             Kellinghausen.

And who is to blame for it?

                                 Beata.

My dear Michael, we neither of us care for tragedy. Why not let that
be?

                             Kellinghausen.

You're right.--Where have you put my seat?

                                 Beata.

Here.

                             Kellinghausen.

Another torture to undergo!

                                 Beata.

Isn't it more than you can bear?

                             Kellinghausen.

Perhaps--but it can't be helped. I had to have these people--I've got
to go through with it.

                                 Beata.

Yes, you've got to go through with it. And so have I. I need them more
than you do.

                             Kellinghausen.

You? Why?

                                 Beata.

You will see later.

                             Kellinghausen.

You have no right to keep anything from me----

                                 Beata.

Are you keeping nothing from _me_? (_He turns away_.) Michael, here is
a letter in which I have written something I can't well say to you.
Will you promise not to open it till luncheon is over?

                             Kellinghausen.

Yes.

                                 Beata.

You give me your word?

                             Kellinghausen.

Yes.

                    Beata (_giving him the letter_).

Here it is.

                             Kellinghausen.

Thank you. Then--I suppose--we-- (_Goes to the door_.)

                                 Beata.

Michael!

                             Kellinghausen.

Eh?

                                 Beata.

You know I'm not very strong--oh, don't misunderstand me! I'm not
trying to work on your feelings--but you know how much is at stake. If
Richard Völkerlingk should die suddenly, and I----

                      Kellinghausen (_tortured_).

I beg of you, Beata! I----

                                 Beata.

Well?

                             Kellinghausen.

Go on.

                                 Beata.

You had something to say.

                      Kellinghausen (_confused_).

I--I was only going to tell you--that there will be no duel.

                                 Beata.

Ah.--Then the danger I spoke of is removed, and I----

                            _Enter_ Conrad.

                                Conrad.

His Highness Prince Usingen and Baron Brachtmann are in the
drawing-room.

                             Kellinghausen.

I will come at once. (Conrad _goes out_.)

                                 Beata.

If you don't mind I will join you at table.

                             Kellinghausen.

You are not well.

                      Beata (_carelessly_).

It's nothing to speak of. Don't keep them waiting.--(Kellinghausen
_stands before her, shaken with tearless sobs_. Beata _goes up to him
and lays her hand softly on his arm_.) Michael, dear, when I think how
I have hurt you I should like to fall down before you and kiss your
hands--I should like to show you--what is in my heart--but it's too
late to say such things now----

                             Kellinghausen.

Good-bye. (_He goes out_. Beata _rings and_ Conrad _enters_.)

                                 Beata.

Ask Countess Ellen to bring me my drops. (Conrad _goes out_. Beata
_stretches out her arms and passes her hands over her face_.)

                             _Enter_ Ellen.

                       Ellen (_in the doorway_).

Mother! Are you ill? (Beata _stretches out her arms again, half
beckoning_ Ellen, _half warding her off_. Ellen, _hastening to her_.)
Mother! Mother! what is it?

                           Beata (_softly_).

Nothing, nothing. (_She strokes_ Ellen's hair, _lets her arms slip
gradually from the girl's shoulders, and finds the phial containing the
drops in her left hand. A long shudder_.) Give me the drops.

                                 Ellen.

How you snatch! Here they are. (Beata _turns the phial about in her
hand_.) Mother, are we really going to Rossitsch, this evening?

                           Beata (_nodding_).

Yes.

                                 Ellen.

In midwinter? Why do we go?

                                 Beata.

H'm----

                                 Ellen.

What will Norbert say? It looks as though you wanted to separate us----

                                 Beata.

Does it? Does it really look so?

                                 Ellen.

No, no, no--forgive me! No.

                                 Beata.

But others might want to separate you--for life--for life, Ellen! Do
you understand?

                                 Ellen.

Mother!

                                 Beata.

Shall I tell you what to do if ever that happens? Wait till you are of
age, and then go to him wherever he is, and say: "My mother sent me."
Do you see?

                                 Ellen.

Yes, yes--but why----?

                                 Beata.

By and by, at Rossitsch, I'll tell you. When we sit together in the big
hall, over the fire, with the wind singing in the chimney. You'll like
that, won't you, dear? We'll be so jolly together, you and I. And now,
darling, go. (_Passionately_.) No, come back-- (_kissing her) and
now-- (_smiling at her) go dear, go! (Ellen _goes out_.)

                            _Enter_ Conrad.

                                 Beata.

Has every one come?

                                Conrad.

All but Baron Richard.

                                 Beata.

You may announce luncheon, then. (Conrad _goes out. A moment later he
throws open the doors, and_ Baron Ludwig, Prince Usingen, Baron
Brachtmann, _and_ Kellinghausen _enter_.)

                                 Beata.

Prince--Herr von Brachtmann--how do you do? (_To_ Baron Ludwig.) Your
Excellency, you are to sit on my right.

                             Baron Ludwig.

You do me too much honour. (Conrad _closes the folding-doors_.)

                             Kellinghausen.

And now, gentlemen, shall we begin _à la Russe_, with a little caviare?
(_He leads the others to the table near the sofa, where cold dishes and
liqueurs are set out_.)

                                Prince.

Your true German can't abide a Russian, but we all adore their caviare.

                             Baron Ludwig.

Where can my brother be? The feast is given for him and he is the last
to appear.

                              Brachtmann.

He's probably doing what we all do the day after. Poring over the
papers.

                                Prince.

And wondering how it is that yesterday's laurels have already turned
into thorns.

                             Baron Ludwig.

Ah, that's part of the game.

                                Prince.

No, it's the end of the game.

                                 Beata.

What do you mean, Prince?

                                Prince.

That our growth ceases when we gain our end. Attainment means being
nailed fast--nailed to a cross, sometimes!

                             Kellinghausen.

(_While_ Conrad _hands about glasses of wine_.) Gentlemen, won't you
drop your epigrams and try some of my port?

                                Prince.

It's his Excellency's doing. He always begins!

                           _Enter a footman_.

                              The Footman.

Baron Richard von Völkerlingk. (_There is an expectant murmur_.)

                            _Enter_ Richard.

                    Brachtmann (_aside to_ Prince).

I told you there was nothing wrong.

                                Prince.

Wait and see.

                  Richard (_kissing_ Beata's _hand_).

Forgive my being so late. A dozen things turned up at the last moment.
Excuse me, Michael. (_The_ Prince _makes a sign to_ Brachtmann.)

                             Kellinghausen.

(_Shaking hands composedly with_ Richard.) Don't mention it, my dear
fellow. We are lucky to get you at all. The man of the hour you can't
have a moment to yourself.

                                Richard.

I've not had many yet. (_Shakes hands with him again and then turns to
the others_.)

                                 Beata.

Shall we have luncheon? Völkerlingk, you can join us when you've had
your caviare. (Richard _makes a gesture refusing the hors-d'[oe]uvre_.)

                  Brachtmann (_aside to the_ Prince).

Well?

                                Prince.

Irreproachable, as usual.

                              Brachtmann.

Thank God! (_They all seat themselves_.)

                   Prince (_to_ Baron Ludwig).

I can't make your brother out. You know him better than we do. Look at
his face--what's the matter with him?

                             Baron Ludwig.

We are such complicated machines, your Highness. It's impossible to
explain any one with a word.

                                 Beata.

Take a hundred, then. (_With a short excited laugh_.) Life is long
enough!

                     Kellinghausen (_to himself_).

Yes. Life is long enough.

                                Richard.

Instead of discussing my appearance I wish you would criticise my
speech.

                                Prince.

What a _gourmet_ he is, Countess! He wants the disapproval of his
friends to season the praise of his enemies!

                                Richard.

Now, then, Brachtmann?

                              Brachtmann.

Why, my dear fellow, if you insist--I must tell you frankly that I had
hoped you would lay more stress on the view of marriage as a divine
institution.

                                Richard.

I have the greatest respect for that view of marriage, but I fear it
might have invalidated the scientific side of my argument. What do you
say, Prince?

                                Prince.

And what if it did? It's much more gratifying to our vanity to think
ourselves the objects of divine solicitude than the victims of natural
law. (Brachtmann _and_ Baron Ludwig _protest_. Beata _laughs_.)

                             Kellinghausen.

Really, Usingen----!

                             Baron Ludwig.

Isn't your Highnesses scepticism a little overdone? Surely society has
made us the natural protectors of the social order. The order may
change with the times--all we ask is that it should maintain the moral
balance of power. (Beata _laughs_.) You are amused, Countess?

                       Beata (_still laughing_).

I was only laughing to think how often I'd heard it before--the moral
balance of power, and all the rest! I'm sure our ancestors sang the
same song when they threw their victims to Moloch. And our souls are
still thrown by the million to the Moloch of social expediency. We are
all expected to sacrifice our personal happiness to the welfare of the
race! (_She laughs excitedly_.)

                Kellinghausen (_almost threateningly_).

Beata!

                             Baron Ludwig.

Countess, you are conjuring up a phantom.

                                 Beata.

It may be a phantom, but it has us by the throat.--(_To_ Richard.) What
are you thinking of, Völkerlingk? You are not going to refuse our
celebrated game-pie?

                                Richard.

I beg your pardon. I wasn't thinking. (_He helps himself to the dish_.)

                                 Beata.

You must know that that pie is an invention of my own!

                                Prince.

Dear me, Countess, are you at home in every branch of learning?

                                 Beata.

Oh, I had the making of a great cook in me. I believe I'm the last of
the old school--the model housekeeper, the domestic wife, the
high-priestess of the family! (_She goes on laughing excitedly and_
Michael _nervously echoes her laugh_.)

                                Richard.

(_Making a perceptible effort to change the conversation_.) My dear
Countess, no one ever ventures to dispute your statements. But there is
one family about which I want to say a word and that is the one we are
in. (_Rising_.) I drink to the house of Kellinghausen!

                              The Others.

Hear--hear!

                                Richard.

The house of Kellinghausen! As I look back over my life, I don't know
how to sum up all I owe to it. (_He turns to_ Beata.) To you, my dear
friend----

                 Kellinghausen (_with forced gaiety_).

Is this a settlement in full, my dear fellow?

                                Richard.

(_Taken aback, but recovering himself instantly_.) You're right,
Michael. There's no use trying; but there's something I want to say to
you.

                             Kellinghausen.

Hear! hear!

                       Richard (_to the others_).

Since yesterday, you all know what I owe him. My success is his doing,
all his doing. If I've gained my end, if I've reached the goal at last,
it's to Kellinghausen I owe it. Here's to my good friend and yours!

                              The Others.

Hear! Hear! (_They clink their glasses_.)

                             Kellinghausen.

(_With a strained laugh, as he and_ Richard _touch glasses_.) You might
have left that out.

                                Richard.

I should have written it if I hadn't said it.

                  Kellinghausen (_still on his feet_).

Gentlemen--Beata--I may speak for all of you, I believe? I think our
friend Völkerlingk proved conclusively yesterday that if he has taken
my place it is because he has the best right to it. (_On the verge
of an outburst_.) A better right to it--than-- (_He is checked
by a terrified glance from_ Beata, _who utters a low exclamation_.)
Well--well--I'm not much of a speech-maker.--Gentlemen--Beata--long
life to our friend Völkerlingk--long life to my successor!

                                 Beata.

(_In a low voice, while the others gather about_ Richard.) Long life to
him! (_She presses her hand to her heart, and rests heavily against the
arm of her chair_.)

                      Prince (_to_ Kellinghausen).

Is anything wrong with the Countess?

                             Kellinghausen.

Beata!

                Beata (_raising herself with a smile_).

Yes?

                             Kellinghausen.

Would you not rather go into the drawing-room? You look tired. (_She
shakes her head_.)

                                Richard.

(_In a formal tone, with a glance at_ Michael.) We all beg of you,
Countess----

                                 Beata.

(_Looking from one to the other with growing apprehension_.)
No--no--no--I'm quite--quite--on the contrary--_I_ have a toast to
propose. (Richard _makes a startled gesture_.) Yes--a toast of my own!
But please all sit down first----

                                Prince.

Woman disposes!

                             Kellinghausen.

Beata, you are overtaxing yourself. Be careful.

                                 Beata.

My dear friends, you all go on wishing each other a long life but which
of us is really alive? Which of us really dares to live? Somewhere, far
off in the distance, we catch a glimpse of life--but we hide our eyes
and shrink away from it like transgressors. And that's our nearest
approach to living! Do you really think you're alive--any one of you?
Or do you think I am? (_She springs up with an inspired look_.) But I,
at least--I--whose whole life is one long struggle against death--I who
never sleep, who hardly breathe, who barely stand--I at least know how
to laugh, how to love life and be thankful for it! (_She staggers to
her feet, raising her glass, her voice no more than a hoarse whisper_.)
And as the only living soul among you, I drink to the joy of living!

               The Others (_holding out their glasses_).

Good! Good! Bravo!

                                 Beata.

(_Draws a deep breath, sets down her glass, and looks about her
confusedly. Her eyes rest on_ Richard, _and then turn to_ Michael, _to
whom she speaks_.) I think I will take your advice and go into the
other room for a little while. (_She rises with an effort_.)

                             Kellinghausen.

There, Beata! I warned you.

                 Baron Ludwig (_offering her his arm_).

Won't you take my arm, Countess?

                                 Beata.

No, no--thanks! Michael, make my excuses. I shall be back in a few
minutes. (_She lingers in the doorway with a last smile and a last look
at_ Richard.) Good-bye. I shall be back--in a few minutes. (_Goes
out_.)

                   Kellinghausen (_to the others_).

Don't be alarmed. My wife often breaks down in this way--I knew by her
excitement that it was coming. Please sit down again. I assure you that
in a few minutes she--(_A heavy fall is heard in the next room_.
Richard _starts violently_. Michael _half springs from his seat, but
controls himself with an effort. There is a short pause_.)--she'll be
coming back laughing as usual. (_Whispers are heard behind the door to
the left_. Richard _is seen to listen intently_.) What are you
listening to? What's the matter?

                         Richard (_agitated_).

I beg your pardon--I thought I-- (Ellen _is heard to utter a piercing
scream. The men start to their feet_. Michael _rushes out_.)

                             Baron Ludwig.

Surely that was Countess Ellen's voice?

                                Prince.

It doesn't look as if the Countess were going to come back laughing as
usual.

                 Michael _enters with a ghastly face_.

                      Kellinghausen (_hoarsely_).

The nearest doctor--any one--quick! (_Goes out again_. Richard _makes a
motion as though to follow him, then turns and rushes out of the door
to the right_.)

                              Brachtmann.

The Countess is subject to such attacks; but this seems--different.

                                Prince.

H'm--yes--quite so. (_There is a long silence_.)

                    Brachtmann (_to_ Baron Ludwig).

Your brother may not be able to find a doctor.

                             Baron Ludwig.

We must hope for the best. (_Another silence_.)

                                Prince.

Perhaps we had better be going----

                              Brachtmann.

(_Nods his assent; then to_ Baron Ludwig.) Are you coming?

                             Baron Ludwig.

I shall wait for my brother. (_He shakes hands with them_.)

                                Prince.

H'm. (_He and_ Brachtmann _go out_. Baron Ludwig _walks up and down the
room shaking his head_.)

                            _Enter_ Conrad.

                             Baron Ludwig.

Well?

                                Conrad.

I can't say yet, your Excellency. (_He goes to the table_.) We are
looking for the drops. Countess Ellen gave them to the Countess herself
before luncheon.

                             Baron Ludwig.

I thought I saw something in her hand at luncheon. Has any one looked
in her hand?

                                Conrad.

No. (_He goes out. There is a pause_.)

                    _Enter_ Richard _and a doctor_.

                                Richard.

Well? Has anything----

                             Baron Ludwig.

Nothing.

                                Richard.

Will you come this way, doctor?

                              The Doctor.

Thank you. (Richard _and the doctor go out_. Baron Ludwig _continues to
pace the floor_.)

                _Enter_ Norbert _by door on the right_.

                                Norbert.

Uncle, what has happened? I've just met Brachtmann and Usingen. They
said--uncle-- (Baron Ludwig _points silently to the door on the left_.
Norbert _hurries through it. Another pause_. Baron Ludwig _continues to
pace up and down. The doctor_, Richard _and_ Michael _come slowly into
the room_.)

                    The Doctor (_after a silence_).

Count, I am extremely sorry to have come too late. But it may be some
comfort to you to know that I could have done nothing. Death was the
result of heart disease--the end must have been instantaneous. May I
ask who was the Countess's regular physician?

                             Kellinghausen.

Dr. Kahlenberg.

                              The Doctor.

I will notify him at once. Permit me to offer my sympathy.

                             Kellinghausen.

Thank you, doctor. (_Shakes his hand and accompanies him to the door.
The doctor goes out_. Baron Ludwig _shakes_ Kellinghausen's _hand
silently, nods to_ Richard _and withdraws_.)

                                Richard.

Thank you, Michael--for letting me be with her----

                             Kellinghausen.

Read this. (_Hands him_ Beata's _letter_.)

                                Richard.

(_Takes the letter, shudders at sight of the handwriting, tries to read
it, and then hands it back_.) I cannot----

                             Kellinghausen.

Then I will read it to you. It's meant for both of us. (_He reads_.)
"Dear Michael, even if the poison is found in me they will think I took
it by mistake. To avoid suspicion I shall do it while we are all at
luncheon. I see that some one must pay the penalty--better I than he.
He has his work before him--I have lived my life. And so I mean to
steal a march on him. Whatever you have agreed upon between you, my
death will cancel the bargain--he cannot die now without causing the
scandal you have been so anxious to avert. I have always loved
happiness, and I find happiness now in doing this for his sake, and the
children's and yours. Beata." As she says, this cancels our agreement.
You see that I must give you back your word.

                                Richard.

And you see, Michael----

                            _Enter_ Norbert.

                                Norbert.

(_Throws himself weeping into_ Kellinghausen's _arms_.) Uncle Michael!

                             Kellinghausen.

Go, my son--go to Ellen. (Norbert _wrings_ Richard's _hand without
speaking, and goes out_.)

                                Richard.

And you see, Michael, that _I_ live because I must--that I
live--because I am dead----


                                Curtain.
﻿                               CHARACTERS


      Lieutenant-Colonel Leopold Schwartz.
      Pastor Heffterdingt
      Dr. Von Kellner
      Max
      Major-General Von Klebs
      Prof. Beckmann
      Mrs. Schwartz, the stepmother
      Magda Schwartz    \
                         > sisters
      Marie Schwartz    /
      Franziska
      Mrs. General Von Klebs
      Mrs. Justice Ellrich
      Mrs. Schumann
      Theresa, the Schwartzs' maid



                                 MAGDA.




                                 ACT I.

Scene. _Living-room in house of_ Lieutenant-Colonel Schwartze,
_furnished in simple and old-fashioned style. Left, at back, a glass
door with white curtains through which the dining-room is seen. There
is also a hall door, through which a staircase to the upper story is
visible. Right, a corner window, with white curtains, surrounded by
ivy. Left, a door to the_ Lieutenant-Colonel's _room. Steel engravings
of a religious and patriotic character, in tarnished gold frames,
photographs of military groups, and cases of butterflies on the walls.
Right, over the sofa, among other pictures, is the portrait of the
first Mrs. Schwartze, young and charming, in the costume of the
sixties. Behind the sofa, an old-fashioned desk. Before the window, a
small table with workbox and hand sewing-machine. At the back, between
the doors, an old-fashioned tall clock. In the left-hand corner, a
stand with dried grasses; in front, a table with a small aquarium.
Left, in front, a corner sofa with a small pipe-cupboard behind it. A
stove with a stuffed bird on it; and behind, a bookcase with a bust of
the old Emperor William._


[Marie _and_ Theresa _discovered_. Theresa _at the door_. Marie _is
occupied with the sewing-machine_.]


                                THERESA.

Miss Marie!

                                 MARIE.

Well!

                                THERESA.

Is your father still lying down?

                                 MARIE.

What's the matter? Has any one called?

                                THERESA.

No, but-- There! Look at that! [_Producing a magnificent mass of
flowers_.]

                                 MARIE.

Good Heavens! Take it to my room quickly, or papa-- But, Theresa, when
the first came yesterday, weren't you told not to let any more be left?

                                THERESA.

I'd have sent the florist's boy away if I could, but I was up on the
ladder fixing the flag, and he laid it down and was gone before I could
stop him. My, my, though, they're beautiful! and if I might make a
guess, the Lieutenant--

                                 MARIE.

You may not make a guess.

                                THERESA.

All right, all right. Oh, I know what I wanted to ask. Does the flag
hang well? [Marie _looks out, and nods assent_.]

                                THERESA.

The whole town is full of flags and flowers, and the most expensive
tapestries are hung out of the windows. One would think it was the
King's birthday. And all this fuss is about a stupid Music Festival!
What is this Music Festival, Miss Marie? Is it different from a choral
festival?

                                 MARIE.

Yes, indeed.

                                THERESA.

Is it better?

                                 MARIE.

Oh, much better!

                                THERESA.

Oh, well, if it's better-- [_A knock_.]

                                 MARIE.

Come in!

                              _Enter_ Max.

                                THERESA.

Well, _now_ I suppose I can leave the flowers.

                    [_Exit_ Theresa, _laughing_.

                                 MARIE.

You ought to be ashamed of yourself, Max.

                                  MAX.

What on earth do you mean?

                                 MARIE.

Aren't these flowers yours?

                                  MAX.

Good Heavens! I can afford a few pennies for a bunch of violets once in
a while, but this-- Oh, no!

                                 MARIE.

Nor yesterday's?

                                  MAX.

No, nor yesterday's. [Marie _rings_.]

                            _Enter_ Theresa.

                                 MARIE.

Please throw these flowers away.

                                THERESA.

What! Throw those beautiful flowers away?

                                 MARIE.

You are right. The pastor would say, "If God's gifts do not please us,
we must at least take care that they give pleasure to others." Wouldn't
he?

                                  MAX.

Probably he would.

                                 MARIE.

Then you had better take them back to the florist's. Did they come from
Zimmerman's? [Theresa _nods_.] Well, we'll sell them if we can, and
give the money to Pastor Heffterdingt for his hospital.

                                THERESA.

Shall I go now?

                                 MARIE.

After you have made the coffee. I'll serve it myself. [_Exit_ Theresa.]
These flowers are an insult! I need not tell you, Max, that I have
given no one the shadow of an excuse for such a thing.

                                  MAX.

I'm very sure of that.

                                 MARIE.

And papa was so angry. He simply stormed. And I was quiet because I
suspected it was you. If he got hold of the poor fellow, it would go
hard with him.

                                  MAX.

Do you think it would be any better if I got hold of him?

                                 MARIE.

What rights have you in the case?

                                  MAX.

Marie! [_Takes her hand_.]

                                 MARIE.

[_Gently disengaging herself_.] Oh, Max, please--not that. You know
every corner of my heart. But we must think of the proprieties.

                                  MAX.

Proprieties! Oh, pshaw!

                                 MARIE.

Well, you know what a world we live in. Here, every one is afraid of
every one else because each depends upon the good opinion of the other.
If a few anonymous flowers can make me talked of, how much more--

                                  MAX.

Oh, yes, I know.

                                 MARIE.

[_Laying her hand on his shoulder_.] Max, you'll speak again to Aunt
Frankie, won't you, about the guaranty[1] of your income?

                                  MAX.

I have already.

                                 MARIE.

Well?

                                  MAX.

[_Shrugging his shoulders_.] As long as she lives, not a penny.

                                 MARIE.

Then there's only one person who can help us.

                                  MAX.

Your father?

                                 MARIE.

No. For Heaven's sake, don't let him hear of it. He might forbid you
the house.

                                  MAX.

What has he against me?

                                 MARIE.

You know how he has been since our misfortune. He feels that there is a
blot to be wiped out; and especially now, when the whole town echoes
with music,--when everything recalls Magda.

                                  MAX.

What if she should come back, some day?

                                 MARIE.

After twelve years? She will never come.
                                          [_Weeps_.]

                                  MAX.

Marie!

                                 MARIE.

You're right, you're right. I will put it away from me.

                                  MAX.

But who is the one person who can help us?

                                 MARIE.

Why, the pastor!

                                  MAX.

Yes, yes, he might.

                                 MARIE.

He can do everything. He stirs your very heart--as if-- And then he
seems like a kind of relation. He should have been my brother-in-law.

                                  MAX.

Yes, but she wouldn't have it so.

                                 MARIE.

Don't speak angrily, Max. She must have made atonement. [_A ring_.] Oh,
perhaps this is he.

                                  MAX.

No, no, I forgot to tell you. Councillor von Keller asked me to bring
him here to-day.

                                 MARIE.

What does he want?

                                  MAX.

He wants to interest himself in the missions--no, it's in our home work
particularly, I think. I don't know-- Well, at any rate he wants to
come to the committee meeting tomorrow.

                                 MARIE.

I'll call father and mother. [_Enter_ Theresa _with a card_.] Show him
in. [_Exit_ Theresa.] Entertain him until I come back. [_Gives him her
hand_.] And we'll talk again about the pastor some other time?

                                  MAX.

In spite of the proprieties?

                                 MARIE.

Oh, Max, I've been too forward! Haven't I?

                                  MAX.

Marie!

                                 MARIE.

No, no--we won't speak of it. Good-by.
                                                    [_Exit_ Marie.

                          _Enter_ Von Keller.

                                  MAX.

You must content yourself with me for a few minutes, my dear Von
Keller. [_They shake hands_.]

                              VON KELLER.

With pleasure, my good sir, with pleasure. [_Sits_.] How our little
town is changed by the festival! It really seems as if we were in the
great world.

                                  MAX.

[_Laughing_.] I advise you not to say that aloud.

                              VON KELLER.

What did I say? I assure you I did not mean anything. If such a
misunderstanding got abroad--

                                  MAX.

You have nothing to fear from me!

                              VON KELLER.

Oh, of course not. Ah, how much better it would be to know nothing of
the outer world!

                                  MAX.

How long were you away?

                              VON KELLER.

Five years, with examinations and being sent down to commissioners and
all that. Well, now I am back again. I drink home-brewed beer; I
patronize local tailors; I have even, with a noble fearlessness of
death, eaten the deer-steak of the season; and this I call pleasure!
Yes, youth, travel, and women are good things; but the world must be
ruled, and sober men are needed. Your time will come some day. The
years of honor are approaching. Yes, yes, especially when one joins the
ecclesiastical courts.

                                  MAX.

Are you going to do that?

                              VON KELLER.

I think of it. And to be at one with those of the cloth-- I speak quite
openly with you--it is worth my while, in short, to interest myself in
religious questions. I have of late in my speeches, as perhaps you
know, taken this position; and as for the connections which this
household has--let me tell you I am proud of them.

                                  MAX.

You might have been proud long ago.

                              VON KELLER.

Excuse me, am I over-sensitive? Or do I read a reproach in your words?

                                  MAX.

Not quite that, but--if you will pardon me, it has sometimes
appeared--and not to me alone--as if you avoided the houses where my
uncle's family were to be found.

                              VON KELLER.

And my presence here now--does not that prove the contrary?

                                  MAX.

Exactly. And therefore I too will speak very frankly. You were the last
person to meet my lost cousin, Magda.

                              VON KELLER.

[_Confused_.] Who says--

                                  MAX.

You yourself have spoken of it, I am told. You met her with my friend
Heydebrand when he was at the military academy.

                              VON KELLER.

Yes, yes, it's true.

                                  MAX.

It was wrong of me not to ask you about her openly, but you will
probably understand my reticence. I feel almost as if I belonged to
this family and I feared to learn something which might disgrace it.

                              VON KELLER.

Oh, not at all, not in the least. It was like this. When I was in
Berlin for the State Examinations, I saw one day on Leipsic Street a
familiar face,--a home face, if I may say so. You know what that is
when one is far away. Well, we spoke to each other. I learned that she
was studying to sing in opera, and that for this purpose she had left
her home.

                                  MAX.

Not exactly. She left home to be companion to an old lady.
[_Hesitates_.] There was a difference with her father.

                              VON KELLER.

A love affair?

                                  MAX.

In a way. Her father supported the suitor and told her to obey or leave
his house.

                              VON KELLER.

And she went away?

                                  MAX.

Yes. Then, a year later, when she wrote that she was going on the
stage, it made the breach complete. But what else did you hear?

                              VON KELLER.

That's all.

                                  MAX.

Nothing else?

                              VON KELLER.

Well, well,--I met her once or twice at the opera-house where she had a
pass.

                                  MAX.

And you know absolutely nothing of her life?

                              VON KELLER.

[_With a shrug_.] Have you heard nothing from her?

                                  MAX.

Nothing at all. Well, at any rate, I am grateful to you. I beg you,
however, not to mention the meeting to my uncle, unless he asks you
about it directly. He knows of it, of course, but the name of the lost
daughter is never mentioned in this house.

                              VON KELLER.

Oh, I have tact enough not to do that.

                                  MAX.

And what do you think has become of her?

                              VON KELLER.

Oh, music is a lottery. Ten thousand blanks and one prize. A host of
beginners and but one who makes a career. If one becomes a Patti or a
Sembrich, or, to come down to our own Festival--

                _Enter_ Schwartze _and_ Mrs. Schwartze.

                               SCHWARTZE.

[_Shaking hands_.] Welcome to my house! Councillor von Keller, my wife.

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Pray sit down.

                              VON KELLER.

I should not have dared, madam, to ask the honor of this introduction
had I not wished so strongly to share in the good and useful work which
centres here. My purpose may excuse my temerity.

                               SCHWARTZE.

You're very kind; but you do us too much honor. If you seek the centre
of the whole movement, Pastor Heffterdingt is the man. He inspires all;
he controls all; he--

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Do you know our pastor, sir?

                              VON KELLER.

I have heard him speak many times, dear lady, and have admired equally
the sincerity of his convictions and his naïve faith in human nature.
But I cannot comprehend the influence he exerts.

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

You will find it out. He is so plain and simple that one hardly
realizes what a man he is. He brings every one round.

                              VON KELLER.

I am almost converted already, dear lady.

                               SCHWARTZE.

As for us here, all I can do is to give these weak and useless hands to
help on the great work. It's only right that an old soldier should
dedicate the little strength left him by the throne to the service of
the altar. Those are the two causes to fight for.

                              VON KELLER.

That's a great thought!

                               SCHWARTZE.

Thanks, thanks, but no more of this. Ah, ten years ago, when they gave
me my discharge, I was a devil of a fellow. Max, doesn't my old
battalion still tremble at my name?

                                  MAX.

That they do, uncle.

                               SCHWARTZE.

Ah, that is one thing you escape in the civil service,--being laid on
the shelf without any fault of your own,--without the shadow of a
fault. Then there came a slight stroke of apoplexy. See how my hand
trembles now! And what had I to look forward to? It was then that my
young friend, Heffterdingt, showed me the way, through work and prayer,
to a new youth. Without him I never should have found it.

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

You mustn't believe all he says, Mr. von Keller. If he didn't always
depreciate himself, he would be better thought of in the highest
circles.

                              VON KELLER.

High and low, madam, everywhere your husband is known and honored.

                               SCHWARTZE.

[_Lighting up_.] Indeed? Ah, well, no vanity. No, no, that is the moth
that corrupts.

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Is it really so wrong to wish for a little honor?

                              VON KELLER.

Oh!

                               SCHWARTZE.

What is honor? You would call it being led up the room by the governor,
or being asked to tea at the castle when the royal family is here.

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

You know very well that the latter honor has never fallen to my lot.

                               SCHWARTZE.

Oh, yes, pardon me. I knew your weak spot. I should have avoided it.

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Yes, just think, Councillor, Mrs. Fanny Hirschfeld of the Children's
Hospital was invited, and I was not.

                              VON KELLER.

[_Deprecatingly_.] Oh!

                               SCHWARTZE.

[_Laughing, and stroking her head_.] Ah, the moth that corrupts, the
moth that corrupts! [_Enter_ Marie _with the coffee. She bows in a
friendly way to_ Von Keller.] Herr von Keller, my daughter--my only
daughter.

                              VON KELLER.

I've already had the pleasure.

                                 MARIE.

I can't offer you a hand for welcome, Dr. Von Keller, but you may have
a cup of coffee instead.

                              VON KELLER.

[_Helping himself and looking at the others_.] I am very fortunate in
being treated like an old acquaintance of the family.

                               SCHWARTZE.

As far as we are concerned, you shall become not only an acquaintance
but a friend. And that is no conventional politeness, Councillor; for I
know you, and in these times, when all the ties of morality and
authority seem strained to bursting, it is doubly necessary that those
who stand for the good old patriarchal order should hold together.

                              VON KELLER.

Very true, very true indeed. One doesn't hear such sentiments as that
in the world in general, where modern ideas pass current for small
change.

                               SCHWARTZE.

Modern ideas! Oh, pshaw! I know them. But come into the quiet homes
where are bred brave soldiers and virtuous wives. There you'll hear no
talk about heredity, no arguments about individuality, no scandalous
gossip. There modern ideas have no foothold, for it is there that the
life and strength of the Fatherland abide. Look at this home! There is
no luxury,--hardly even what you call good taste,--faded rugs, birchen
chairs, old pictures; and yet when you see the beams of the western sun
pour through the white curtains and lie with such a loving touch on the
old room, does not something say to you, "Here dwells true happiness"?
[Von Keller _nods with conviction_.]

                               SCHWARTZE.

[_Broodingly_.] And here it might have dwelt!

                                 MARIE.

[_Hurrying to him_.] Papa!

                               SCHWARTZE.

Yes, yes, I know. Well, in this house rules old-fashioned paternal
authority. And it shall rule as long as I live. And am I therefore a
tyrant? Tell me. You ought to know.

                                 MARIE.

You're the best, the dearest--

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

He is so excitable, you see, Councillor.

                               SCHWARTZE.

Have you not been well brought up? And shall we not hold together, we
three? But the age goes on planting rebellion in children's hearts,
putting mistrust between man and wife [_rises_], and it will never be
satisfied till the last roof-tree smokes in ruins, and men wander about
the streets, fearful and alone, like homeless curs. [_Sinks back
exhausted_.]

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

You ought not to get so wrought up, papa. You know it is bad for you.
[Max _makes a sign to_ Von Keller.]

                              VON KELLER.

Shall I go? [Max _nods_.] This is an interesting subject to develop,
Colonel. I must say I think perhaps you are a little severe. But my
time--

                               SCHWARTZE.

Severe? Ah, well, don't think ill of an old man for speaking a little
too hotly.

                              VON KELLER.

Ah, sir, heat is the badge of youth. I believe I am a graybeard beside
you.

                               SCHWARTZE.

No, no. [_Presses his hand_.]

                              VON KELLER.

Madam! Miss Marie! [_Exit_. Max _follows him_.]

                               SCHWARTZE.

Greet the battalion for me, my boy.

                                  MAX.

I will, dear uncle. [_Exit_.

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

A very agreeable man.

                                 MARIE.

Almost too agreeable.

                               SCHWARTZE.

You are speaking of our guest! [Mrs. Schwartze _makes_ Marie _a sign
to be careful_.]

                                 MARIE.

Will you have your pipe, papa?

                               SCHWARTZE.

Yes, dear.

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

The gentlemen of the card-club will be here soon. How lucky that we
didn't eat the haunch of venison Sunday! I've ordered some red wine for
the General, too. I paid three marks; that's not too dear, is it?

                               SCHWARTZE.

Not if it's good. Is your sister coming to-day?

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

I think so.

                               SCHWARTZE.

She was asked to the Governor's yesterday, wasn't she?

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

[_Sighing_.] Yes.

                               SCHWARTZE.

And we were not. Poor thing! She must look out for me to-day if she
boasts. [_Aside_] Old cat!

                                 MARIE.

[_Kneels before him, lighting his pipe_.] Be good, father dear. What
harm does it do you?

                               SCHWARTZE.

Yes, yes, darling. I'll be good. But my heart is sore. [_Bell rings_.
Marie _hurries out_.]

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Here they are.

               _Enter_ Major-general Von Klebs, Professor
                         Beckmann, _and_ Marie.

                               VON KLEBS.

My humblest respects to the ladies. Ah, my dear madam! [_Kisses her
hand_.]

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Make yourselves at home, gentlemen.

                               VON KLEBS.

Ha, my dear Colonel, hearty as ever? All ready for the fray, little
one? Now we are all right. But we were almost too late. We were caught
in the Music Festival crowd. Such a confusion! I was bringing the
schoolmaster along, and just as we passed by the German House, there
was a great crush of people, gaping as if there were a princess at the
least. And what do you suppose it was? A singer! These are really what
one may call goings-on. All this fuss about a singer! What do they call
the person?

                               BECKMANN.

Ah, General, we seem to be in a strange land to-day.

                               VON KLEBS.

We are under a curse, my dear madam. We are bearing a penance. [_They
sit_.]

                               BECKMANN.

But you must know dall' Orto, the great Italian Wagner singer. We are
very fortunate in getting her for the festival. If she were not here--

                               VON KLEBS.

Well, well, what if she were not? Eh? I hoped that our strictly moral
circle, at least, would hold itself aloof from all this. But since the
Governor gives receptions in the lady's honor! And, best of all, to cap
the climax, who do you think was standing to-day among the enthusiasts,
craning his neck like the rest? You'll never guess. It's too
inconceivable. The pastor!

                               SCHWARTZE.

The pastor?

                               VON KLEBS.

Yes, our pastor.

                               SCHWARTZE.

How extraordinary!

                               VON KLEBS.

Now, I ask you, what did he want there? And what did the others want
there? And what good is the whole festival?

                               BECKMANN.

I should think that the cultivation of the faculty of the ideal among
the people was an object--

                               VON KLEBS.

The way to cultivate the faculty of the ideal is to found a Soldiers'
Union.

                               SCHWARTZE.

But, General, every one isn't so lucky as to be a soldier.

                               VON KLEBS.

[_Sorting his cards_.] Well, we have been, Colonel. I know no one, I
wish to know no one, who has not been a soldier. And all this so-called
Art,--what good does it do?

                               BECKMANN.

Art raises the moral tone of the people.

                               VON KLEBS.

There we have it, madam!--We're beaten, beaten by the hero of
Königgrätz.--I tell you Art is a mere invention of those who are afraid
to be soldiers to gain an important position for themselves. I pass.

                               SCHWARTZE.

I pass.

                               BECKMANN.

And will you maintain that Art-- I have the nine of spades.

[_Bell rings. Exit_ Marie. Von Klebs _makes an impatient movement_.
Schwartze _quiets him. They begin to play_.]

              _Enter_ Franziska, _followed by the_ Pastor.

                               VON KLEBS.

Ah, Miss Franziska! [_Aside_] That is the end of us!

                               SCHWARTZE.

No, no, we'll send her into the garden.

                               FRANZISKA.

[_Throwing herself into a chair_.] Oh, I am so hot! I must get my
breath. Pray don't put yourself out, General.

                               BECKMANN.

Nine of spades!

                               VON KLEBS.

Hello, here's the pastor too!

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Good-day to you! [_He shakes hands with each_.]

                               VON KLEBS.

How long have you been running after the singers. Pastor?

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

What? Oh, yes. Yes, I am running after singers. That's my occupation
now.

                               SCHWARTZE.

You can play with our card party though, can't you?

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Unfortunately, no. I must, on the contrary, ask for a few serious words
with you, my dear sir.

                               VON KLEBS.

Ah, but you'll put it off, won't you, Pastor?

                               FRANZISKA.

Oh, for Heaven's sake! It's so important. There must be no delay.

                               SCHWARTZE.

Is my sister-in-law in it too?

                               FRANZISKA.

Very much so.

                               VON KLEBS.

Oh, well, we can go away again.

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Oh, we shouldn't like that at all.

                               SCHWARTZE.

If it were not you, dear pastor, who separated us!

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

But perhaps, Marie, the gentlemen would be willing to take a turn with
you in the garden.

                               VON KLEBS.

Certainly! That's good! That's famous! That's what we'll do! Miss
Marie, be so good as to lead the way.

                               BECKMANN.

Shall we leave the cards as they lie?

                               VON KLEBS.

Yes, you have the nine of spades. Come on.
   [_Exit_ Von Klebs, Beckmann, _and_ Marie.

                               SCHWARTZE.

Well?

                               FRANZISKA.

Good Lord, don't you see how upset I am? You might at least give me a
glass of water. [Mrs. Schwartze _brings it_.]

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Will you promise me, my dear sir, that whatever may happen you will
preserve your calmness? You may believe me, much depends upon it.

                               SCHWARTZE.

Yes, yes; but what--

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Miss Franziska will tell you better.

                               FRANZISKA.

[_After drinking the water_.] This is a day indeed! Fate is avenging
me. This man has for years outraged my holiest feelings, but today I
can heap coals of fire on his head. [_Moved_.] Brother-in-law, give me
your hand. Sister, yours.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Pardon me, dear Miss Franziska, I think your news is so important
that--

                               FRANZISKA.

[_Melting_.] Don't be angry, don't be angry. I am so upset! Well,
yesterday I was at the Governor's. Only the nobility and the most
important people were asked. You weren't asked?

                               SCHWARTZE.

[_Angrily_.] No.

                               FRANZISKA.

I did not mean to offend you. Oh, I am so upset! [_Suppressing a sob at
a sign from the_ Pastor.] Yes, yes, yes. I had on my yellow silk dress
with the Brussels lace--you know I've had the train shortened. Well, as
I stepped into the room--whom do you think I saw?

                               SCHWARTZE.

Well, well, who?

                               FRANZISKA.

[_Sobbing_.] Your child! Magdalene!

[Schwartze _staggers, and is supported by the_ Pastor. Mrs. Schwartze
_cries out. A pause._]

                               SCHWARTZE.

Pastor?

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

It is true.

                               SCHWARTZE.

[_Standing up_.] Magdalene is no longer my child.

                               FRANZISKA.

Ah, just wait. If you listen, you'll look at it in quite another light.
Such a child you will welcome with open arms.

                               SCHWARTZE.

Magdalene is no longer my child.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

But you may at least hear the circumstances.

                               SCHWARTZE.

[_Dazed_.] Yes, I suppose so.

                               FRANZISKA.

[_At a sign from_ Heffterdingt.] Well, the great dining-hall was
crammed. They were almost all strangers. Then I saw his Excellency
coming down the room. And on his arm was a lady--

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

On his Excellency's arm?

                               FRANZISKA.

With dark hair, and very proud and tall--and around her a crowd of men
just like the circle about royalty--and chatting and laughing. And any
one to whom she spoke seemed as happy as if it were the Princess. And
she wore half a dozen orders, and an orange band with a medal about her
neck. I was wondering what royal personage it could be--when she turned
half around--and--I knew Magda's eyes!

                               SCHWARTZE.

Impossible!

                               FRANZISKA.

That is what I saw!

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

My dear Colonel, it is true.

                               SCHWARTZE.

If she-- [_Clasping his hands_.] At least she has not fallen! She has
not fallen! Father in Heaven, Thou hast kept her safely!

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

And what is she, to have such honor--

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

She has become a great singer, and calls herself, in Italian, Maddalene
dall' Orto.

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Listen, listen, Leopold, the famous singer of whom the papers are so
full is our child!

                               SCHWARTZE.

Magda is no longer my child.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Is that your fixed resolve?

                               FRANZISKA.

What sort of a heart have you? You ought to imitate me. She offended me
as only she could,--the little wretch! That is, then she was a little
wretch. But now--well, she did not look at me; but if she had--

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Leopold, she was on his Excellency's arm!

                               SCHWARTZE.

I tell you, and you,--and you, too, Pastor,--that I would rather have
seen her lying in rags and tatters at my feet and begging for
forgiveness. For then I should have known that she was still, at heart,
my child. But why has she come back here? The world was large enough
for her triumph. Why should she rob this humble provincial nest of
ours? I know why. To show her miserable father how far one can rise in
the world by treading filial duty into the dust,--that is her
intention. Pride and arrogance speak in her, and nothing else.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

My dear Colonel, I might ask, what speaks in you? A father's love? You
could make no pretence to that. Your rights? I think rather it would be
your right to rejoice in the good fortune of your child. Offended
custom? I don't know-- Your daughter has done so much through her own
strength that even offended custom might at least condone it. It
appears to me that pride and arrogance speak in you--and nothing else.

                               SCHWARTZE.

[_Angrily_.] Pastor!

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Oh, don't be angry--there is no need of that. When I have something to
say, I must say it, mustn't I? I might almost think that it displeased
you that she has climbed so high in spite of you. Your pride demands
something to forgive, and you are angry because there is nothing to be
forgiven. And now, let me ask you, do you seriously wish that she had
found her way home, lost and ruined? Do you dare answer for such a wish
before the throne of God? [_A silence_.] No, my dear old friend. You
have often, in jest, called me your good angel; let me be so once, in
reality. Come with me--now--to-day.

                               FRANZISKA.

If you'd only seen-- [Heffterdingt _stops her_.]

                               SCHWARTZE.

Has she made the slightest effort to approach her parents? Has she
thought of her home with one throb of love? Who will vouch for it that
my outstretched hand will not be repulsed with scorn?

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

I will vouch for it.

                               SCHWARTZE.

You? You, above all, have had a proof of her untamable pride.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

[_With embarrassment_.] You should not have reminded me of that.

               _Enter_ Marie _with flowers, and_ Theresa.

                                 MARIE.

Papa, papa, listen to what Theresa-- Oh! am I interrupting?

                               SCHWARTZE.

[_Pulling himself together_.] What is it?

                                 MARIE.

To-day I got some more flowers; and when I sent Theresa back to the
florist's, she found out it was not a man, but a lady, who had ordered
them. And she couldn't sell them again; so she brought them back. [_The
others exchange glances_.]

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Tell me, Theresa, did they describe this lady to you?

                                THERESA.

She was tall, with great dark eyes, and there was something very
distinguished and foreign about her.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

[_Leads_ Marie _to the back of the stage, and lays his hand on_
Schwartze's _arm_.] You asked for a token of love!

                               SCHWARTZE.

[_Staring at the flowers_.] From her!

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

They must have cost a small fortune!

                                 MARIE.

Theresa has something else very wonderful to tell, too.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

What is it, Theresa? Quick!

                                THERESA.

If the pastor wishes it. When I came back, the porter told me that last
evening in the twilight a carriage stopped before the door; there was a
lady inside. She didn't get out, but kept watching all the windows of
our house where there were lights. And when he went out to ask what she
wanted, she said something to her coachman, and they were gone! [_All
show signs of astonishment_.]

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

That's all, Theresa. [_Exit_ Theresa.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Pardon us, dear Miss Marie, if we treat you once more like a child, and
ask you to leave us alone for a moment.

                                 MARIE.

I am so frightened at all this, Pastor. [_Imploringly_.] Papa?

                               SCHWARTZE.

What is it, child?

                                 MARIE.

Papa, papa, do you know who this lady is?

                               SCHWARTZE.

I? No. I can only guess.

                                 MARIE.

[_Bursting out_.] Magdalene--Magda! Magda is here! [_Falling on her
knees_.] Oh, you will forgive her?

                               SCHWARTZE.

Get up, my child. Your sister is far above my poor forgiveness.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

She is not above your love.

                                 MARIE.

Magda is here! Magda herself is here! [_Throws her arms about her
mother's neck, weeping_.]

                               FRANZISKA.

Won't any one bring me a glass of water? I am so upset!

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Are you quite resolved? [Schwartze _remains motionless_.] Will you let
her go on her way without--

                               SCHWARTZE.

That would be best.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

How will it be with you if in your death-hour a longing for your lost
child comes upon you, and all you can say to yourself is, "She stood
before my door and I would not open it"?

                               SCHWARTZE.

[_Shaken and half convinced_.] What would you have me do? Must I abase
myself before my runaway child?

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

No, you shall not do that. I--I--will go to her.

                               SCHWARTZE.

You? Pastor--you?

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

This afternoon I waited before her hotel to see if Miss Franziska had
not been mistaken. At a quarter to four she came out of the house and
got into her carriage.

                                 MARIE.

You saw her?

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

How did she look? What did she have on?

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

The performance began at four, and must be almost over now. I will wait
for her again at the hotel, and will tell her that she will find your
arms open to her. May I?

                                 MARIE.

Yes, yes, papa, won't you let him?

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Just think with whom your daughter--

                               SCHWARTZE.

Will you swear to me that no weak and personal motives are mixed with
your intention,--that you do what you do in the name of our Lord and
Saviour?

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

I swear it!

                               SCHWARTZE.

Then God's will be done. [Marie _gives a cry of joy_. Heffterdingt
_presses_ Schwartze's _hand_.]

                               SCHWARTZE.

[_Holding his hand, speaking softly_.] The way will be hard for you, I
know. Your lost youth--your pride--

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Dear Colonel, I begin to think that pride is a very poor sort of thing.
It really profits us little to have it always in our mouths. I am
giving back a daughter to an old father. I am giving back a home to an
erring soul. That, I think, is enough. [_Exit_. Marie _throws herself
on her father's breast, laughing and crying_.]




                                ACT II.


Scene _same as_ Act I. _It is evening; only a slight glow of sunset
still shines through the windows_.

                  [Marie _and_ Theresa _discovered_.]

                                THERESA.

[_Bringing in a lighted lamp_.] Miss Marie! Miss Marie!--What is she
staring at all the time? Miss Marie!

                          MARIE [_starting_.]

[_From the window_.] What do you want?

                                THERESA.

Shall I lay the supper?

                                 MARIE.

Not yet.

                                THERESA.

It's half-past seven.

                                 MARIE.

And he left at half-past six. The performance must have been over long
ago. She will not come.

                                THERESA.

Who? Is any one coming to supper?

                                 MARIE.

No, no, no. [_As_ Theresa _is going_.] Theresa! do you suppose you
could pick a couple of bouquets in the garden?

                                THERESA.

I might try, but I couldn't tell what I was getting. It's almost pitch
dark.

                                 MARIE.

Yes, yes. You may go.

                                THERESA.

Shall I try to pick the flowers, or--

                                 MARIE.

No--thank you, no.

                                THERESA.

[_Aside_.] What is the matter with her?
                                                     [_Exit_.

                        _Enter_ Mrs. Schwartze.

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Well, Marie, whatever happens I've put on my other cap,--the one with
the ribbons. Is it straight?

                                 MARIE.

Yes, mamma dear, very nice.

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Hasn't Aunt Frankie come up yet?

                                 MARIE.

No.

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Heavens! I forgot the two gentlemen entirely. And papa has locked
himself up, and will hear nothing and see nothing. Oh, if the General
should be offended! It is our most aristocratic connection. That would
be a misfortune indeed.

                                 MARIE.

Oh, mamma dear, when he hears what is the matter!

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Yes, yes, I know. And the pastor has not come either. Marie, one
minute. If she should ask you--

                                 MARIE.

Who?

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Why, Magda.

                                 MARIE.

Magda!

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

What am I to you, Marie? They call it stepmother. I'm more than that,
am I not?

                                 MARIE.

Certainly, mamma dear.

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

You see, then I could not get used to having two such big daughters.
But it's all right now? [Marie _nods_.] And we do love each other?

                                 MARIE.

Very much, mamma dear. [_She kisses her_.]

                           _Enter_ Franziska.

                               FRANZISKA.

[_Irritably_.] One's always disturbing these affecting tableaux!

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

What did the General say?

                               FRANZISKA.

The General? H'm, he was angry enough. "To leave us alone for an hour
and a half, that's nice courtesy," he said. And I think myself--

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

[_To_ Marie, _very sadly_.] There, what did I tell you?

                               FRANZISKA.

Well, this time I smoothed the thing over, so that the gentlemen went
away in a good humor.

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Really! Oh, I thank you, Frankie, a thousand times.

                               FRANZISKA.

Yes, I'm good enough to run errands and play the scullery-maid; but
when it comes to being one of the family, an old aunt with her heart
full of love--

                                 MARIE.

Who has offended you, Aunt Frankie?

                               FRANZISKA.

Yes, that's very fine. But a little while ago, when I was so upset, no
one troubled himself about me one bit. To guarantee an income so that
our little miss can be married, I am--

                                 MARIE.

Aunt Frankie!

                               FRANZISKA.

But as long as I live--

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

What are you talking about?

                               FRANZISKA.

We know, we two. And to-day. Who brought back your daughter to you?

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

But she hasn't yet--

                               FRANZISKA.

I brought back your daughter to you. And who thanks me for it? And who
recognizes that I have pardoned her? For I have pardoned her
[_weeping_] everything!

                   _Enter_ Theresa, _in great excitement_.

                                 MARIE.

What is it, Theresa?

                                THERESA.

I am so frightened--

                                 MARIE.

What's the matter?

                                THERESA.

The carriage--

                                 MARIE.

What carriage?

                                THERESA.

The same as last night.

                                 MARIE.

Is it there? Is it there? [_Runs to the window_.] Mamma, mamma, come,
she's there--the carriage--

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Why, there _is_ a carriage.

                                 MARIE.

[_Beating on the door at the left_.] Papa, papa! Come quickly, be
merciful, come quickly!

          [_Exit_ Theresa _at a sign from_ Franziska.]

                           _Enter_ Schwartze.

                               SCHWARTZE.

What's the matter?

                                 MARIE.

Magda--the carriage!

                               SCHWARTZE.

Good God! [_Hurries to the window_.]

                                 MARIE.

Look--look! She's standing up! She's trying to look into the windows.
[_Clapping her hands_.] Papa! papa!

                               SCHWARTZE.

What is it you have to say?

                                 MARIE.

[_Frightened_.] I? Nothing.

                               SCHWARTZE.

Perhaps you were going to say, "She stood before your door and you
would not open it." Eh?

                                 MARIE.

Yes, yes.

                               SCHWARTZE.

Do you hear, wife? She stands before our door. Shall we--in spite of
our pride--shall we call her in?

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Oh, Leopold, since everybody thinks so much of her--

                                 MARIE.

Ah! She's driving away!

                               SCHWARTZE.

No, no, she's not. Come, we will bring her to you.

                               FRANZISKA.

Yes, yes, bring her to me, too.
      [_Exit_ Schwartze _and_ Mrs. Schwartze.

                                 MARIE.

She's sitting back again! If only the carriage doesn't-- What a long
time they are! They must have got downstairs. [_Frightened, almost
beside herself_.] There--there--oh, don't go away! Magda! Magda!

                               FRANZISKA.

Don't scream so! What's the matter?

                                 MARIE.

She's looking round. She's seen them. She's stopping. She's bursting
open the door. She's jumped out! Now! Now! She's in father's arms!
[_Covers her face and sobs_.] Oh, Aunt Frankie! Aunt Frankie!

                               FRANZISKA.

What else could a father do? Since I have forgiven her, he could
not--he could not hold out--

                                 MARIE.

She's between father and mother. Oh, how grand she is! She's
coming--she's coming. What a homely little thing I shall seem beside
her! Oh, I am so frightened! [_Leans against the wall, left. A pause.
Voices of_ Magda _and her parents are heard outside_.]

_Enter_ Magda, _brilliantly dressed, with a large mantle, and a Spanish
veil on her head. She embraces_ Marie.

                                 MAGDA.

My puss! My little one! How my little one has grown! My
pet--my--[_kissing her passionately_]. But what's the matter? You're
dizzy. Come, sit down. No, no, please sit down. Now. Yes, you must.
[_Places_ Marie _in an arm-chair_.] Dear little hands, dear little
hands! [_Kneels before her, kissing and stroking her hands_.] But
they're rough and red, and my darling is pale. There are rings round
her eyes.

                               SCHWARTZE.

[_Lays his hand lightly on her shoulder_.] Magda, we are here too.

                                 MAGDA.

Yes, yes--I'm entirely--[_Standing up, affectionately_.] Dear old papa!
How white you have become! Dear papa! [_Taking his hand_.] But what's
the matter with your hand? It's trembling.

                               SCHWARTZE.

Nothing, my child. Don't ask about it.

                                 MAGDA.

H'm--and you've grown handsomer with the years. I can't look at you
enough. I shall be very proud with such a handsome papa. But she must
get better [_indicating_ Marie]. She's as white as milk. Do you take
iron? Eh? You must take iron? [_tenderly_]. Just to think that I am at
home! It seems like a fairy tale. It was a capital idea of yours to
call me back without any explanations--_senza complimenti_--for we've
outgrown those silly misunderstandings long ago.

                               SCHWARTZE.

Misunderstandings!

                                 MAGDA.

I came near driving away. Would not that have been bad of me? But you
must acknowledge, I have scratched at the door--very quietly, very
modestly--like Lady when she had run away. Where is Lady? Her place is
empty. [_Whistles_.]

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Why, she's been dead seven years!

                                 MAGDA.

Ah, _povera bestia_--yes, I forgot. And, mamma!--yes, mamma! I haven't
looked at you yet. How pretty you've grown! You used to have an air of
belated youth about you that was not becoming. But now you're a dear,
old little mother. One wants to lay one's head quietly in your lap. I
will, too. It'll do me good. Ah, what fine quarrels we used to have! I
was a contrary little beast. And you held up your end. But now we'll
smoke the pipe of peace, sha'n't we?

                             MRS. SCHWARTZE.

You're joking with me, Magda.

                                 MAGDA.

Sha'n't I? Mayn't I? There, there,--pure love, pure love. We will have
nothing but love. We shall be the best of friends.

                               FRANZISKA.

[_Who has for a long time tried to attract attention_.] And we also,
eh, my dear Magda?

                                 MAGDA.

_Tiens, tiens_! [_Examines her critically through her lorgnette_.] Same
as ever. Always active? Always, as of old, the centre of the family?

                               FRANZISKA.

Oh--

                                 MAGDA.

Well, give us your hand! There. I never could bear you, and shall never
learn, I'm afraid. That runs in the blood, doesn't it?

                               FRANZISKA.

I have already forgiven you.

                                 MAGDA.

Really! Such magnanimity! I hardly-- Do you really forgive everything?
From top to bottom? Even that you stirred up my mother against me
before she ever came into the house? That you made my father--[_Puts
her hand to her lips_.] _Meglio tacere! Meglio tacere!_

                                 MARIE.

[_Interrupting_.] For Heaven's sake, Magda!

                                 MAGDA.

Yes, my darling--nothing, not a word.

                               FRANZISKA.

She has a fine presence!

                                 MAGDA.

And now let me look about me! Ah, everything's just the same. Not a
speck of dust has moved.

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

I hope, Magda, that you won't find any specks of dust.

                                 MAGDA.

I'm sure of that, _mammina_. That wasn't what I meant. Twelve years!
Without a trace! Have I dreamed all that comes between?

                               SCHWARTZE.

You will have a great deal to tell us, Magda.

                                 MAGDA.

[_Starting_.] What? Well, we will see, we will see. Now I should
like-- What would I like? I must sit still for a moment. It all comes
over me so. When I think-- From that door to the window, from this
table to the old bureau,--that was once my world.

                               SCHWARTZE.

A world, my child, which one never outgrows, which one never should
outgrow--you have always held to that?

                                 MAGDA.

What do you mean? And what a face you make over it! Yes, yes,
though--that question came at the right time. I have been a fool! I
have been a fool! My dear old papa, this happiness will be short.

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Why?

                                 MAGDA.

What do you think of me? Do you think I am as free as I appear? I'm a
weary, worn-out drudge who is only fortunate when the lash is on her
back.

                               SCHWARTZE.

Whose drudge? What lash?

                                 MAGDA.

That I can't explain, dear father. You don't know my life. You probably
wouldn't understand it, either. Every day, every hour has its work laid
out. Ah, well, now I must go back to the hotel.

                                 MARIE.

No, Magda, no.

                                 MAGDA.

Yes, puss, yes. There have been six or seven men there for ever so
long, waiting for an audience. But I tell you what, I must have you
to-night. Can't you sleep with me?

                               SCHWARTZE.

Of course. That is--what do you mean--sleep where?

                                 MAGDA.

At the hotel.

                               SCHWARTZE.

What? You won't stay! You'll put such an affront on us?

                                 MAGDA.

What are you thinking of? I have a whole retinue with me.

                               SCHWARTZE.

Your father's house is the place for this retinue.

                                 MAGDA.

I don't know. It is rather lively. First, there's Bobo, my parrot, a
darling,--he wouldn't be bad; then my pet maid, Giulietta, a little
demon,--I can't live without her; then my courier,--he's a tyrant, and
the terror of landlords; and then we mustn't forget my teacher.

                               FRANZISKA.

He's a very old man, I hope.

                                 MAGDA.

No, he's a very young man.

                               SCHWARTZE.

[_After a silence_.] Then you must have forgotten your--your _dame
d'honneur_.

                                 MAGDA.

What _dame d'honneur_?

                               SCHWARTZE.

You can't travel about from country to country with a young man
without--

                                 MAGDA.

Ah! does that disquiet you? I can,--be quite easy,--I can. In my world
we don't trouble ourselves about such things.

                               SCHWARTZE.

What world is that?

                                 MAGDA.

The world I rule, father dear. I have no other. There, whatever I do is
right because I do it.

                               SCHWARTZE.

That is an enviable position. But you are still young. There must be
cases when some direction--in short, whose advice do you follow in your
transactions?

                                 MAGDA.

There is no one who has the right to advise me, papa dear.

                               SCHWARTZE.

Well, my child, from this hour your old father claims that right.
Theresa! [Theresa _answers from outside_.] Go to the German House and
bring the baggage--

                                 MAGDA.

[_Entreatingly_.] Pardon, father dear, you forget that my orders are
necessary.

                               SCHWARTZE.

What?--Yes, yes, I forgot. Do what you will, my daughter.

                                 MARIE.

Magda--oh, Magda!

                                 MAGDA.

[_Taking her mantle_.] Be patient, darling. We'll have a talk soon all
to our two selves. And you'll all come to breakfast with me, won't you?
We can have a good chat and love each other!--so much!

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

We--breakfast with you?

                                 MAGDA.

I want to have you all under my roof.

                               SCHWARTZE.

The roof of a hotel?

                                 MAGDA.

Yes, papa dear, I have no other home.

                               SCHWARTZE.

And this?

                                 MARIE.

Don't you see how you've hurt him?

_Enter the_ Pastor. _He stops, and seems to control strong emotion_.
Magda _examines him with her lorgnette_.

                                 MAGDA.

He too! Let me see.

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Just think. She is going away again!

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

I don't know whether I am known to the lady.

                                 MAGDA.

[_Mockingly_.] You're too modest, Pastor. And now since I have seen you
all--[_Puts on her mantle_.]

                               SCHWARTZE.

[_Quickly, aside_.] You must keep her.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

I? If you are powerless, how can I--

                               SCHWARTZE.

Try!

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

[_Constraining himself, with embarrassment_.] Pardon me, madam, it
seems very officious of me--if I--will you give me a few moments'
interview?

                                 MAGDA.

What have we two to say to each other, my dear pastor?

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Oh, do, please! He knows best about everything.

                                 MAGDA.

[_Ironically_.] Indeed!

                                 MARIE.

I may never ask you for anything again, but do this one thing for my
sake!

                                 MAGDA.

[_Patting her and looking from one to the other_.] Well, the child asks
so prettily. Pastor, I am at your service. [Marie _thanks her
silently_.]

                               FRANZISKA.

[_Aside to_ Mrs. Schwartze.] Now he'll give her a lecture. Come.

                               SCHWARTZE.

You were once the cause of my sending her from my home. To-day you must
see to it that she remains. [Heffterdingt _expresses doubt_.]

                               SCHWARTZE.

Marie!

                                 MARIE.

Yes, papa.
            [_Exit_ Schwartze, Mrs. Schwartze, Franziska, _and_ Marie.

                                 MAGDA.

[_Sits down and examines him through her lorgnette_.] So this is the
man who undertakes by a five minutes' interview entirely and absolutely
to break my will. That they believe in your ability to do it shows me
that you are a king in your own dominions. I make obeisance. And now
let me see you ply your arts.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

I understand no arts, madam, and would avail myself of none. If they
put some trust in me here, it is because they know that I seek nothing
for myself.

                                 MAGDA.

[_Ironically_.] That has always been the case?

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

No, madam. I had, once in my life, a strong, an intense desire. It was
to have you for my wife. I need only look at you to see that I was
presumptuous. Since then I have put the wish away from me.

                                 MAGDA.

Ah, Pastor, I believe you're paying court to me now.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Madam, if it were not discourteous--

                                 MAGDA.

Oh, then even a shepherd of souls may be discourteous!

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

I should commiserate you on the atmosphere which has surrounded you.

                                 MAGDA.

[_With mocking superiority_.] Really? What do you know about my
atmosphere?

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

It seems to me that it has made you forget that serious men are to be
taken seriously.

                                 MAGDA.

Ah! [_Rising_.] Well, then I will take you seriously; and I will tell
you that you have always been unbearable to me, with your well-acted
simplicity, your droning mildness, your-- Since, however, you
condescended to cast your eyes on my worthlessness and drove me from
home with your suit,--since then, I have hated you.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

It seems to me that according to this I was the foundation of your
greatness.

                                 MAGDA.

You're right there. Here I was parched and stifled. No, no, I don't
hate you. Why should I hate you so much? It's all so far, so very far,
behind me. If you only knew how far! You have sat here day after day in
this heavy close air, reeking of lavender, tobacco, and cough mixture,
while I have felt the storm breaking about my head. Pastor, if you had
a suspicion of what life really is,--of the trial of strength, of the
taste of guilt, of conquest, and of pleasure,--you would find yourself
very comical with your clerical shop-talk. Ha, ha, ha! Pardon me, I
don't believe such a laugh has rung through this respectable house for
twelve years; for there's no one here who knows how to laugh. Is there,
eh?

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

No, I fear not.

                                 MAGDA.

Fear, you say. That sounds as though you deprecated it. But don't you
hate laughter?

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Most of us cannot laugh, madam.

                                 MAGDA.

And to those who could, laughter is sin. You might laugh yourself. What
have you to be solemn about? You need not look at the world with this
funereal mien. Surely you have a little blond wife at home who knits
industriously, and half a dozen curly heads around her, of course. It's
always so in parsonages.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

I have remained single, madam.

                                 MAGDA.

Ah! [_Silence_.] Did I hurt you so much, then?

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Let that be, shall we not? It is so long ago.

                                 MAGDA.

[_Letting her mantle fall_.] And your work,--does not that bring
happiness enough?

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Thank God, it does. But if one takes it really in earnest, one cannot
live only for one's self; at least, I cannot. One cannot exult in the
fulness of one's personality, as you would call it. And then many
hearts are opened to me-- One sees too many wounds there, that one
cannot heal, to be quite happy.

                                 MAGDA.

You're a remarkable man-- I don't know--if I could only get rid of the
idea that you're insincere.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Will you let me ask you one question before you go?

                                 MAGDA.

Well!

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

It is about an hour since you entered this house, your home--no, not so
much. I could not have been waiting for you nearly as long as that.

                                 MAGDA.

For me? You? Where?

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

In the corridor outside your room.

                                 MAGDA.

What did you want there?

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

My errand was useless, for now you are here.

                                 MAGDA.

Do you mean to say that you came for me--you to whom I-- If any one had
an interest in keeping me away, it was you.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Are you accustomed to regard everything which those about you do as the
result of selfish interest?

                                 MAGDA.

Of course. It's so with me! [_Struck by a new thought_.] Or perhaps
you-- No, I'm not justified in that assumption. [_Sharply_.] Ah, such
nonsense! it is only fit for fairy tales. Well, Pastor, I'll own that I
like you now better, much better than of old when you--what shall I
say?--made an honorable proposal.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

H'm!

                                 MAGDA.

If you could only end it all with a laugh--this stony visage of yours
is so unfriendly--one is quite _sconcertata_. What do you say? _Je ne
trouve pas le mot_.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Pardon me, may I ask the question now?

                                 MAGDA.

Good Lord, how inquisitive the holy man is! And you don't see
that I was coquetting with you a little. For, to have been a man's
fate,--that flatters us women,--we are grateful for it. You see I have
acquired some art meanwhile. Well, out with your question!

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Why--why did you come home?

                                 MAGDA.

Ah!

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Was it not homesickness?

                                 MAGDA.

No. Well, perhaps a very little. I'll tell you. When I received the
invitation to assist at this festival--why they did me the honor, I
don't know--a very curious feeling began to seethe within me,--half
curiosity and half shyness, half melancholy and half defiance,--which
said: "Go home incognito. Go in the twilight and stand before the
paternal house where for seventeen years you lived in bondage. There
look upon what you were. But if they recognize you, show them that
beyond their narrow virtues there may be something true and good."

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Only defiance then?

                                 MAGDA.

At first, perhaps. Once on the way, though, my heart beat most
wonderfully, as it used to do when I'd learnt my lesson badly. And I
always did learn my lessons badly. When I stood before the hotel, the
German House,--just think, the German House, where the great officials
and the great artists stayed,--there I had again the abject reverence
as of old, as if I were unworthy to step on the old threshold. I
entirely forgot that I was now myself a so-called great artist. Since
then, every evening I have stolen by the house,--very quietly, very
humbly,--always almost in tears.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

And nevertheless you are going away.

                                 MAGDA.

I must.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

But--

                                 MAGDA.

Don't ask me why. I must.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Has any one offended your pride? Has any one said a word of your
needing forgiveness?

                                 MAGDA.

Not yet--or, yes, if you count the old cat.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

What is there in the world which draws you away again after an hour?

                                 MAGDA.

I will tell you. I felt it the first minute I came. The paternal
authority already stretches its net over me again, and the yoke stands
ready beneath which I must bow.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

But there is neither yoke nor net here. Do not fear shadows. Here are
only wide-opened arms which wait to clasp the lost daughter to the
empty breast.

                                 MAGDA.

Oh, I beg you, none of that. I do not intend to furnish a pendant to
the prodigal son. If I came back as a daughter, as a lost daughter, I
should not hold my head up before you as I do; I should grovel in the
dust in full consciousness of all my sins. [_With growing
excitement_.] And that I will not do--that I cannot do--for I am
what I am, and I cannot be another. [_Sadly_.] And therefore I have no
home--therefore I must go forth again--therefore--

                        _Enter_ Mrs. Schwartze.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

For Heaven's sake, hush!

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Excuse me, Pastor, I only wanted to know about supper. [_Imploringly
to_ Magda, _who sits turned away with her hands before her face_.] We
happen to have a warm joint to-day. You know, Pastor, the gentlemen of
the card-club were to be with us. Now, Magda, whether you're going away
or not, can't you eat a mouthful in your father's house?

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Don't ask now, my dear madam.

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Oh, if I'm interrupting--I only thought--

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Later.

                                 MARIE.

[_Appearing in the doorway_.] Will she stay? [Magda _shrinks at the
sound of the voice_.]

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

'Sh! [_Exit_ Mrs. Schwartze _and_ Marie.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

You have no home, Miss Magda? Did you hear the old mother beseeching
and alluring with the best that she has, though it's only a poor dish?
Did you hear Marie's voice trembling with tears in the fear that I
should not prevail? They trust me too much; they think I only need to
speak the word. They don't suspect how helpless I stand here before
you. Look! Behind that door are three people in a fever of sorrow and
love. If you cross this threshold, you rob each of them of so much
life. And you have no home?

                                 MAGDA.

If I have one, it is not here.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

[_Embarrassed_.] Perhaps-- Nevertheless you should not go. Only a few
days,--just not to take away the idea that you belong here. So much you
owe to them!

                                 MAGDA.

[_Sadly_.] I owe nothing now to any one here.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

No? Really nothing? Then I must tell you about a certain day,--eleven
years ago now. I was called into this house in haste, for the Colonel
was dying. When I came, he lay there stiff and motionless, his face
drawn and white; one eye was already closed, in the other still
flickered a little life. He tried to speak, but his lips only quivered
and mumbled.

                                 MAGDA.

What had happened?

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

What had happened? I will tell you. He had just received a letter in
which his eldest daughter bade him farewell.

                                 MAGDA.

My God!

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

It was a long time before he recovered from the apoplectic stroke. Only
a trembling in the right arm, which you perhaps have noticed, now
remains.

                                 MAGDA.

That is indeed a debt I owe.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Ah, if that were all, Miss Magda! Pardon me, I call you by the name I
used long ago. It springs to my lips.

                                 MAGDA.

Call me what you like. Go on.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

The necessary result followed. When he received his discharge,--he will
not believe in the cause, don't speak to him of it,--then his mind
broke down.

                                 MAGDA.

Yes, yes; that is my debt too.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Then you see, Miss Magda, began my work. If I speak of it, you must not
think I am pluming myself on it to you. What good would that do me? For
a long, long time I nursed him, and by degrees I saw his mind revive
again. First I let him collect slugs from the rose-bushes.

                                 MAGDA.

[_With a shudder_.] Ugh!

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Yes, so far had it gone; then I gave him charge of some money, and then
I made him my assistant in the institutions with whose management I was
intrusted. There is a hospital and a soup-kitchen and an infirmary, and
it makes a great deal to be done. So he became a man once more. I have
tried to influence your step-mother too; not because I was greedy for
power. Perhaps you'll think that of me. In short, the old tension
between her and Marie has been slowly smoothed away. Love and
confidence have descended upon the house.

                                 MAGDA.

[_Staring at him_.] And why did you do all this?

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Well, first it is my calling. Then I did it for his sake, for I love
the old man; and above all--for--your sake.

      [Magda _starts, and points to herself interrogatively_.]

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Yes, for your sake. For this weighed upon me: The day will come when
she will turn homeward,--perhaps as victor; but perhaps also as
vanquished, broken and ruined in body and soul-- Pardon me these
thoughts, I had heard nothing of you-- In either case she shall find a
home ready for her. That was my work, the work of long years; and now I
implore you not to destroy it.

                                 MAGDA.

[_In anguish_.] If you knew through what I have passed, you would not
try to keep me.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

That is all shut out. This is home. Let it alone; forget it.

                                 MAGDA.

How can I forget it? How dare I?

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Why should you resist when all stretch their hands out to you in
rejoicing? It's very easy. Let your heart speak when you see all around
overflowing with love for you.

                                 MAGDA.

[_In tears_.] You make me a child again. [_A pause_.]

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Then you will stay?

                                 MAGDA.

[_Springing up_.] But they must not question me!

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Must not question you?

                                 MAGDA.

About my life outside there. They wouldn't understand,--none of them;
not even you.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Well, then, they sha'n't.

                                 MAGDA.

And you will promise me, for yourself and for the others?

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Yes, I can promise it.

                                 MAGDA.

[_In a stifled voice_.] Call them, then.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

[_Opening the door on the left_.] She will stay.

_Enter_ Marie; _then_ Mrs. Schwartze, Franziska, _and_ Schwartze. Marie
_throws herself joyfully into_ Magda's _arms_. Mrs. Schwartze _also
embraces her_.

                               SCHWARTZE.

It was your duty, my child.

                                 MAGDA.

Yes, father. [_She softly takes his right hand in both of hers, and
carries it tenderly to her lips_.]

                               FRANZISKA.

Thank Heaven! Now we can have supper at last! [_Opens the sliding door
into the dining-room. The supper-table is seen, all set, and lighted
brightly by a green-shaded hanging-lamp_.]

                                 MAGDA.

[_Gazing at it_.] Oh, look! The dear old lamp! [_The women go slowly
out_.]

                               SCHWARTZE.

[_Stretching out his hands_.] This is your greatest work, Pastor.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Oh, don't, I beg you! And there's a condition attached.

                               SCHWARTZE.

A condition?

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

We must not ask about her life.

                               SCHWARTZE.

[_Startled_.] What? What? I must, not--

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

No, no; you must not ask--you must not ask--or-- [_Struck by a new
thought_.] If you do not--yes--I am sure she will confess everything
herself.




                                ACT III.

Scene: _the same. Morning. On the table at the left, coffee-service and
flowers._


             [Mrs. Schwartze _and_ Franziska _discovered_.]

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

[_Excitedly_.] Thank Heaven, you've come. Such a time we've had this
morning!

                               FRANZISKA.

So?

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Just think, two people have come from the hotel,--a gentleman who looks
like a lord, and a young lady like a princess. They're her servants.

                               FRANZISKA.

What extravagance!

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

And they're calling and talking all over the house, and neither of them
knows any German. And her ladyship ordered a warm bath, that was not
warm enough; and a cold douche, which was not cold enough; and spirits,
which she simply poured out of the window; and toilet vinegar, which we
didn't have at all.

                               FRANZISKA.

What demands! And where is your famous young lady?

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

After her bath she has gone back to bed again.

                               FRANZISKA.

I would not have such sloth in my house.

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

I shall tell her so. For Leopold's sake-- [_Enter_ Theresa.] What do
you want, Theresa?

                                THERESA.

Councillor von Keller--he has sent his servant here to ask whether the
Lieutenant has come yet, and what is the young lady's answer.

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

What young lady?

                                THERESA.

That's what I don't know.

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Then just give our regards, and say that the Lieutenant has not come
yet.

                               FRANZISKA.

He is on duty till twelve. After that he'll come.

[_Exit_ Theresa. _As she opens the door, a great noise is heard in the
hall,--a man's voice and a woman's disputing in Italian_.]

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Listen to that! [_Speaking outside_.] Just you wait. Your Signora'll be
here soon. [_Shuts the door_.] Ah! And now, breakfast. What do you
think she drinks?

                               FRANZISKA.

Why, coffee.

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

No.

                               FRANZISKA.

Tea, then?

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

No.

                               FRANZISKA.

Then it must be chocolate!

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

No; coffee and chocolate mixed.

                               FRANZISKA.

Horrible! But it must be good.

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

And yesterday half a dozen trunks came from the hotel, and as many more
are still there. Ah, what there is in them all! One whole trunk for
hats! A peignoir of real point, and open-work stockings with gold
embroidery, and [_in a whisper_] silk chemises--

                               FRANZISKA.

What? Silk--

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Yes.

                               FRANZISKA.

[_With a gesture of horror_.] It is simply sinful.

_Enter_ Magda, _in brilliant morning toilette, speaking outside as she
opens the door_.

                                 MAGDA.

_Ma che cosa volete voi? Perche non aspettate, finché vi commando?_ Ha?

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Now they are getting their share!

                                 MAGDA.

No, no; _è tempo_! [_Shutting the door_.] _Va, bruto_! Good-morning,
mamma. [_Kisses her_.] I'm a late sleeper, eh? Ah, good-morning, Aunt
Frankie. In a good humor? So am I.

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

What did the strange gentleman want, Magda?

                                 MAGDA.

Stupid beast! He wanted to know when I was going away, the idiot! How
can I tell? [_Patting her_.] Eh, _mamma mia_? Oh, children, I slept
like the dead. My ear on the pillow, and off! And the douche was so
nice and cold. I feel so strong. _Allons, cousine_! Hop! [_Seizes_
Franziska _by the waist and jumps her into the air_.]

                               FRANZISKA.

[_Furiously_.] What do you--

                                 MAGDA.

[_Haughtily_.] Eh?

                               FRANZISKA.

[_Cringingly_]. You are so facetious.

                                 MAGDA.

Am I? [_Clapping her hands_.] Breakfast!

     _Enter_ Marie, _with a tray of coffee things_.

                                 MARIE.

Good-morning.

                               FRANZISKA.

Good-morning, my child.

                                 MAGDA.

I'm dying of hunger. Ah! [_Pats her stomach_. Marie _kisses_
Franziska's _hand_.]

                                 MAGDA.

[_Taking off the cover, with unction_.] Delicious! One would know
Giulietta was in the house.

                               FRANZISKA.

She has made noise enough, at least.

                                 MAGDA.

Oh, she couldn't live without a good row. And when she gets too
excited, she quietly throws a plate at your head. I'm accustomed to it.
What is papa doing?

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

He's making his excuses to the members of the Committee.

                                 MAGDA.

Is your life still half made up of excuses? What sort of a committee is
it?

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

It's the Christian Aid Society. They should have had a meeting here
this morning in our house. Now we thought it would not do. It would
look as if we wanted to introduce you.

                               FRANZISKA.

But, Augusta, now it will look as if your daughter were more important
to you--

                                 MAGDA.

Well, I hope she is!

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Of course! But--oh dear, you don't know what sort of people they are.
They are deserving of great respect. For instance, there's Mrs. General
von Klebs. [_Proudly_.] We are friends of hers.

                                 MAGDA.

[_With sham respect_.] Really?

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Now, they'll probably come to-morrow. Then you'll meet, besides, some
other pious and aristocratic ladies whose patronage gains us a great
deal of influence. I'm curious to see how they'll like you.

                                 MAGDA.

How I shall like them, you should say.

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Yes--that is--but we're talking and talking--

                                 MARIE.

[_Jumping up_.] Oh, excuse me, mamma.

                                 MAGDA.

No, you must stay here.

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Yes, Magda; but about your trunks at the hotel,--I am constantly on the
rack for fear something should be left.

                                 MAGDA.

Send for them, then, children.

                               FRANZISKA.

[_Aside to_ Mrs. Schwartze.] Now I'll question her thoroughly, Augusta.
Leave us alone.

                                         [_Exit_ Mrs. Schwartze.

                               FRANZISKA.

[_Sitting down, with importance_.] And now, my dear Magda, you must
tell your old aunt all about it.

                                 MAGDA.

Eh? Ah, look here, mamma needs help. Go on, quick! Make yourself
useful.

                               FRANZISKA.

[_Viciously_.] If you command it.

                                 MAGDA.

Oh, I have only to request.

                               FRANZISKA.

[_Rising_.] It seems to me that your requests are somewhat forcible.

                                 MAGDA.

[_Laughing_.] Perhaps.

                  [_Exit_ Franziska _in a rage_.

                                 MARIE.

Oh, Magda!

                                 MAGDA.

Yes, sweet. That's the way to go through the world,--bend or break;
that is, I never bend. It's the only way.

                                 MARIE.

Oh, good Heavens!

                                 MAGDA.

Poor child! Yes, in this house one learns quite other views. I bent,
myself, yesterday disgracefully. Ah, how nice our old mamma is!
[_Earnestly, pointing to the mother's picture_.] And she up there! Do
you remember her? [Marie _shakes her head_.]

                                 MAGDA.

[_Thoughtfully_.] She died too soon! Where's papa? I want him. And yet
I'm afraid of him too. Now, child, while I eat my breakfast, now you
must make your confession.

                                 MARIE.

Oh, I can't.

                                 MAGDA.

Just show me the locket!

                                 MARIE.

There!

                                 MAGDA.

A lieutenant! Naturally. With us it's always a tenor.

                                 MARIE.

Oh. Magda, it's no joke. He is my fate.

                                 MAGDA.

What is the name of this fate?

                                 MARIE.

It's Cousin Max.

                                 MAGDA.

[_Whistles_.] Why don't you many the good youth, then?

                                 MARIE.

Aunt Frankie wants a better match for him, and so she won't give him
the guaranty he needs. It's abominable!

                                 MAGDA.

_Si! C'est bête, ça!_ And how long have you loved each other?

                                 MARIE.

I don't remember when we did not.

                                 MAGDA.

And where does he meet you?

                                 MARIE.

Here.

                                 MAGDA.

I mean elsewhere--alone.

                                 MARIE.

We are never alone together. I think this precaution we owe to our own
self-respect.

                                 MAGDA.

Come here--close--tell me the truth--has it never entered your mind to
cast this whole network of precaution and respect away from you, and to
go with the man you love out and away--anywhere--it doesn't matter
much--and as you lie quietly on his breast, to hurl back a scornful
laugh at the whole world which has sunk behind you?

                                 MARIE.

No, Magda, I never feel so.

                                 MAGDA.

But would you die for him?

                                 MARIE.

              [_Standing up with a gesture of enthusiasm_.]
I would die a thousand deaths for him!

                                 MAGDA.

My poor little darling! [_Aside_.] They bring everything to naught. The
most terrible of all passions becomes in their hands a mere resigned
defiance of death.

                                 MARIE.

Whom are you speaking of?

                                 MAGDA.

Nothing, nothing. See here, how large is this sum you need?

                                 MARIE.

Sixty thousand marks.

                                 MAGDA.

When can you be married? Must it be now, or will afternoon do?

                                 MARIE.

Don't mock me, Magda.

                                 MAGDA.

You must give me time to telegraph. One can't carry so much money about
with one.

                                 MARIE.

[_Slowly taking it in, and then, with an outburst of joy, throwing
herself at_ Magda's _feet_.] Magda!

                                 MAGDA.

[_After a silence_.] Be happy, love your husband. And if you hold your
first-born on your arm, in the face of the world [_holding out her arms
with angry emphasis_]-- so, face to face, then think of one who-- Ah!
some one's coming.

                _Enter_ Heffterdingt _with a portfolio_.

                                 MAGDA.

[_Crossing to him_.] Oh, it's you. That's good. I wanted you.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

You wanted me? What for?

                                 MAGDA.

Only--I want to talk with you, holy man.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Isn't it good, Miss Magda, to be at home again?

                                 MAGDA.

Oh, yes, except for the old aunt's sneaking about.

                                 MARIE.

[_Who is collecting the breakfast-things; laughing, but frightened_.]
Oh, Heavens, Magda!

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Good-morning, Miss Marie.

                                 MARIE.

Good-morning, Pastor.

                                           [_Exit, with the table_.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Heavens, how she beams!

                                 MAGDA.

She has reason.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Isn't your father here?

                                 MAGDA.

No.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Isn't he well?

                                 MAGDA.

I think so. I haven't seen him yet. Yesterday we sat together till
late. I told him what I could tell. But I think he was very unhappy;
his eyes were always searching and probing. Oh, I fear your promise
will be badly kept.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

That seems like a reproach. I hope you don't regret--

                                 MAGDA.

No, my friend, I don't regret it. But I feel very curiously. I seem to
be in a tepid bath, I'm so weak and warm. What they call German
sentiment is awaking again, and I have been so unused to it. My heart
seems like a Christmas number of the "Gartenlaube,"--moonlight,
betrothals, lieutenants, and I don't know what! But the best of it is,
I know that I'm playing with myself. I can cast it all off as a child
throws away its doll, and be my old self again.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

That would be bad for us.

                                 MAGDA.

Oh, don't be angry with me. I seem to be all torn and rooted up. And
then I am so afraid--

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Of what?

                                 MAGDA.

I can't--I can't be quite one of you. I am an intruder. [_Aside,
fearfully_.] If a spectre from without were to appear, this whole idyl
would go up in flames. [Heffterdingt _suppresses a start of
astonishment_.] And I'm confined, hemmed in. I begin to be a coward.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

I don't think one should be terrified at feeling filial love.

                                 MAGDA.

Filial love? I should like to take that snow-white head in my lap and
say, "You old child!" And nevertheless I must bend my will, I must bend
my will. I am not accustomed to that. I must conquer; I must sing down
opposition. I sing or I live,--for both are one and the same,--so that
men must will as I do. I force them, I compel them to love and mourn
and exult and lament as I do. And woe to him who resists! I sing them
down,--I sing and sing until they become slaves and playthings in my
hands. I know I'm confused, but you understand what I mean.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

To work the impress of one's own personality,--that's what you mean,
isn't it?

                                 MAGDA.

_Si, si, si, si_! Oh, I could tell you everything. Your heart has
tendrils which twine about other hearts and draw them out. And you
don't do it selfishly. You don't know how mighty you are. The men
outside there are beasts, whether in love or hate. But you are a man.
And one feels like a man when one is near you. Just think, when you
came in yesterday, you seemed to me so small; but something grows out
from you and becomes always greater, almost too great for me.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Good Heavens, what can it be?

                                 MAGDA.

What shall I call it,--self-sacrifice, self-abnegation? It is something
with self--or rather the reverse. That is what impresses me. And that
is why you can do so much with me.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

How strange!

                                 MAGDA.

What?

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

I must own it to you--it is--it is nonsense; but since I have seen you
again, a sort of longing has awakened within me to be like you.

                                 MAGDA.

Ha, ha! You, model of men! Like me!

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

I have had to stifle much in my nature. My peace is the peace of the
dead. And as you stood before me yesterday in your freshness, your
natural strength, your--your greatness, I said to myself, "That is what
you might have been if at the right moment joy had entered into your
life."

                                 MAGDA.

[_In a whisper_.] And one thing more, my friend,-- sin! We must sin if
we wish to grow. To become greater than our sins is worth more than all
the purity you preach.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

[_Impressed_.] That would be-- [_Voices outside_.]

                                 MAGDA.

[_Starting and listening_.] 'Sh!

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

What's the matter?

                                 MAGDA.

Nothing, it's only my stupid nervousness; not on my own account,
believe me, only out of pity for all these. We shall still be friends?

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

As long as you need me.

                                 MAGDA.

And when I cease to need you?

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

There will be no change in me, Miss Magda. [_As he is going, he meets_
Schwartze _in the doorway_.]

                           _Enter_ Schwartze.

                               SCHWARTZE.

Good-morning, my dear pastor! Will you go out on the porch for a
moment? I will follow you. [_Exit_ Heffterdingt.] Now, did you sleep
well, my child? [_Kisses her on the forehead_.]

                                 MAGDA.

Finely. In my old room I found the old sleep of childhood.

                               SCHWARTZE.

Had you lost it?

                                 MAGDA.

Haven't you?

                               SCHWARTZE.

They say a good conscience-- Come to me, my child.

                                 MAGDA.

Gladly, papa! No, let me sit at your feet. There I can see your
beautiful white beard. When I look at it, I always think of Christmas
eve and a quiet snow-covered field.

                               SCHWARTZE.

My child, you know how to say pretty things. When you speak, one seems
to see pictures about one. Here we are not so clever; that is why we
have nothing to conceal here.

                                 MAGDA.

We also-- But speak quietly, papa.

                               SCHWARTZE.

Yes, I must. You know what agreement you made with the pastor.

                                 MAGDA.

Which you will keep?

                               SCHWARTZE.

I am accustomed to keep to what I have promised. But you must see
that the suspicion--whatever I may do, the suspicion weighs like a
mountain--

                                 MAGDA.

What do you suspect?

                               SCHWARTZE.

I don't know. You have appeared among us as wonderfully as gloriously.
But brilliance and worldly honor and all that don't blind a father's
eyes. You seem to be warm at heart too. At least, one would think so to
hear you speak. But there is something in your eyes which does not
please me, and a scornful curl about your lips.

                                 MAGDA.

Dear, good old papa!

                               SCHWARTZE.

You see! This tenderness is not that of a daughter towards her father.
It is so that one pets a child, whether it be a young or an old one.
And although I'm only a poor soldier, lame and disabled, I demand your
respect, my child.

                                 MAGDA.

I have never withheld it. [_Rising_.]

                               SCHWARTZE.

That is good, that is good, my daughter. Believe me, we are not so
simple as we may appear to you. We have eyes to see, and ears to hear,
that the spirit of moral revolt is abroad in the world. The seed which
should take root in the heart, begins to decay. What were once sins
easily become customs to you. My child, soon you will go away. When you
return, you may find me in the grave.

                                 MAGDA.

Oh, no, papa!

                               SCHWARTZE.

It's in God's hand. But I implore you-- Come here, my
child--nearer--so-- [_He draws her down to him, and takes her head
between his hands_.] I implore you--let me be happy in my dying hour.
Tell me that you have remained pure in body and soul, and then go with
my blessing on your way.

                                 MAGDA.

I have remained--true to myself, dear father.

                               SCHWARTZE.

How? In good or in ill?

                                 MAGDA.

In what--for me--was good.

                               SCHWARTZE.

[_Blankly_.] In what--for you--then?

                                 MAGDA.

[_Rising_.] And now don't worry any more. Let me enjoy these few days
quietly. They will be over soon enough.

                               SCHWARTZE.

[_Broodingly_.] I love you with my whole heart, because I have sorrowed
for you--so long. [_Threateningly, rising_.] But I must know who you
are.

                                 MAGDA.

Father dear-- [_Bell rings_. Mrs. Schwartze _bursts in_.]

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Just think! the ladies of the Committee are here! They want to
congratulate us in person. Do you think we ought to offer them coffee,
Leopold?

                               SCHWARTZE.

I will go into the garden, Augusta.

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

For Heaven's sake--they're just coming--you must receive their
congratulations.

                               SCHWARTZE.

I can't--no--I can't do it! [_Exit, left_.

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

What is the matter with your father?

              _Enter_ Mrs. General Von Klebs, Mrs. Justice
                Ellrich, Mrs. Schumann, _and_ Franziska.

                               FRANZISKA.

[_As she opens the door_.] My dear, the ladies--

                            MRS. VON KLEBS.

[_Giving her hand to_ Mrs. Schwartze.] What a day for you, my dear!
The whole town rejoices in the happy event.

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Permit me--my daughter--Mrs. General von Klebs, Mrs. Justice Ellrich,
Mrs. Schumann.

                             MRS. SCHUMANN.

I am only the wife of a simple merchant; but--

                            MRS. VON KLEBS.

My husband will do himself the honor soon--

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Won't you sit down, ladies? [_They sit_.]

                               FRANZISKA.

[_With aplomb_.] Yes, it is truly a joyful event for the whole family.

                            MRS. VON KLEBS.

We have unfortunately not shared the pleasures of the festival, my dear
young lady. I must therefore refrain from expressing that admiration to
which you are so well accustomed.

                             MRS. SCHUMANN.

If we had known, we should certainly have ordered tickets.

                            MRS. VON KLEBS.

Do you expect to remain here for very long?

                                 MAGDA.

That I really cannot say, madam--or, pardon me--your ladyship?

                            MRS. VON KLEBS.

I must beg you--no.

                                 MAGDA.

Oh, pardon me!

                            MRS. VON KLEBS.

Oh, please!

                                 MAGDA.

We are such birds of passage, my dear madam, that we can really never
plan for the future.

                             MRS. ELLRICH.

But one must have one's real home.

                                 MAGDA.

Why? One must have a vocation. That seems to me enough.

                               FRANZISKA.

It's all in the point of view, dear Magda.

                            MRS. VON KLEBS.

Ah, we're so far removed from all these ideas, my dear young lady.
Every now and then some person gives lectures here, but the good
families have nothing to do with it.

                                 MAGDA.

[_Politely_.] Oh, I can quite understand that. The good families need
nothing, as they have plenty to eat. [_A silence_.]

                             MRS. ELLRICH.

But at least you must have some residence?

                                 MAGDA.

If you call it so,--a place to sleep. Yes, I have a villa by the Lake
of Como and an estate at Naples. [_Sensation_.]

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

But you've said nothing to us about that.

                                 MAGDA.

I hardly ever make use of them, mamma dear.

                             MRS. ELLRICH.

Art must be a very trying occupation?

                                 MAGDA.

[_In a friendly tone_.] It depends upon how one follows it, my dear
madam.

                             MRS. ELLRICH.

My daughter used to take singing-lessons, and it always taxed her very
much.

                                 MAGDA.

[_Politely_.] Oh, I'm sorry for that.

                             MRS. ELLRICH.

Naturally, you only do it for pleasure.

                                 MAGDA.

Oh, it's so much pleasure! [_Aside to_ Mrs. Schwartze, _who sits near
her_.] Get these women away, or I shall be rude!

                            MRS. VON KLEBS.

Are you really engaged by a theatre, my dear young lady?

                                 MAGDA.

[_Very sweetly_.] Sometimes, my dear madam.

                            MRS. VON KLEBS.

Then you are out of an engagement at present?

                                 MAGDA.

[_Murmurs_.] Oh, come, come! [_Aloud_.] Yes, I'm a vagabond now. [_The
ladies look at each other_.]

                            MRS. VON KLEBS.

There are really not many daughters of good families on the stage, are
there?

                                 MAGDA.

[_In a friendly tone_.] No, my dear madam; most of them are too stupid.

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Oh, Magda!

                              _Enter_ Max.

                                 MAGDA.
Oh, that must be Max! [_Goes to him and shakes hands_.] Just think, I
had quite forgotten your face. We were great friends, were we not?

                                  MAX.

Were we? [_Astonished_.]

                                 MAGDA.

Well, we can begin now.

                             MRS. ELLRICH.

[_Aside_.] Do you understand this?

[Mrs. Von Klebs _shrugs her shoulder. The ladies rise and take their
leave, shaking hands with_ Mrs. Schwartze _and_ Franziska, _and bowing
to_ Magda.]

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

[_Confused_.] Must you go already, ladies? My husband will be so
sorry--

                                 MAGDA.

[_Coolly_.] _Au revoir_, ladies, _au revoir_!
      [_Exit the ladies in the order of their rank_.

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

[_Turning back from the door_.] Mrs. von Klebs was offended, or she
would have stayed. Magda, you certainly must have offended Mrs. von
Klebs.

                               FRANZISKA.

And the other ladies, too, were hurt.

                                 MAGDA.

Mamma dear, won't you see about my trunk?

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Yes, yes, I'll go to the hotel myself. Oh dear, oh dear, oh dear!
                                                      [_Exit_.

                               FRANZISKA.

Wait, I'm coming too. [_Spitefully_.] I must make myself useful, of
course!

                                 MAGDA.

Oh, Aunt Frankie, a word with you.

                               FRANZISKA.

Now?

                                 MAGDA.

We're going to celebrate a betrothal to-day.

                               FRANZISKA.

What betrothal?

                                 MAGDA.

Between him and Marie.

                                  MAX.

[_Joyfully_.] Magda!

                               FRANZISKA.

I think, as I occupy a mother's position towards him, that it is my
right--

                                 MAGDA.

No; the giver alone has rights, my dear aunt. And now don't fail.

                               FRANZISKA.

[_Furiously_.] I will make you--                         [_Exit_.

                                  MAX.

How shall I thank you, my dear Miss--

                                 MAGDA.

Magda, my dear cousin, Magda!

                                  MAX.

Pardon me, it was my great respect--

                                 MAGDA.

Not so much respect, my boy,--I don't like it; more weight, more
individuality!

                                  MAX.

Ah, my dear cousin, should a young lieutenant with twenty-five marks'
pay, not to speak of debts, have individuality? It would only be a
hindrance to him.

                                 MAGDA.

Ah!

                                  MAX.

If I manage my men properly, and dance a correct figure at our
regimental balls, and am not a coward, that is enough.

                                 MAGDA.

To make a wife happy, certainly. Go and find her. Go along!

                                  MAX.

[_Starts to go, and turns back_.] Oh, excuse me, in my happiness I
entirely forgot the message I-- Early this morning--by-the-by, you
can't think what a tumult the whole city is in about you--well, early
this morning--I was still in bed--an acquaintance came in who is also
an old acquaintance of yours, very pale from excitement, and he asked
whether it were all true, and if he might come to see you.

                                 MAGDA.

Yes, let him come.

                                  MAX.

He wanted me to ask you first. He would then send in his card this
morning.

                                 MAGDA.

What formalities the men go through here! Who is he?

                                  MAX.

Councillor von Keller.

                                 MAGDA.

[_Speaking with difficulty_.] He--what?--he?

                                  MAX.

[_Laughing_.] Pardon me, but you're as white now as he was.

                                 MAGDA.

[_Quietly_.] I? White?

                     _Enter_ Theresa _with a card_.

                                  MAX.

Here he is. Dr. von Keller.

                                 MAGDA.

Let him come up.

                                  MAX.

[_Smiling_.] I'll only say to you, my dear cousin, that he's a very
important man, who has a great career before him, and promises to be a
pillar of our religious circle.

                                 MAGDA.

Thank you!

                  _Enter_ Von Keller _with a bouquet_.

                                  MAX.

[_Crossing to him_.] My dear Councillor, here is my cousin, who is
delighted to see you. You will excuse me.

                                      [_Exit, with a bow to each_.

[Von Keller _remains standing at the door_. Magda _moves about
nervously. Silence_.]

                                 MAGDA.

[_Aside_.] Here is my spectre! [_Indicates a seat at the table, left,
and sits down opposite_.]

                              VON KELLER.

First, you must allow me to express my warmest and most sincere good
wishes. This is a surprise which you happily could not have expected.
And as a sign of my interest, allow me, my dearest friend, to present
you with these modest flowers.

                                 MAGDA.

Oh, how thoughtful! [_Takes the flowers with a laugh, and throws them
on the table_.]

                              VON KELLER.

[_In embarrassment_.] I--I see with sorrow that you resent this
approach on my part. Have I in any way been wanting in the necessary
delicacy? In these narrow circles a meeting could not have been
avoided. I think it is better, my dearest friend, that we should come
to an understanding,--that we should know the relations--

                                 MAGDA.

[_Rising_.] You're right, my friend. I was not at the height of my own
nature just now. Had I been, I might have played the deserted
Marguerite to the end. The morals of home had infected me a little. But
I am myself again. Give me your hand bravely. Don't be afraid, I won't
harm you. So--tight--so!

                              VON KELLER.

You make me happy.

                                 MAGDA.

I've painted this meeting to myself a thousand times, and have been
prepared for it for years. Something warned me, too, when I undertook
this journey home--though I must say I hardly expected just here
to-- Yes, how is it that, after what has passed between us, you came
into this house? It seems to me a little--

                              VON KELLER.

I tried to avoid it until quite recently; but since we belong to the
same circles, and since I agree with the views of this family--that is,
at least in theory--

                                 MAGDA.

Yes, yes. Let me look at you, my poor friend. How you have changed!

                              VON KELLER.

[_Laughing nervously_.] I seem to have the misfortune to make a rather
absurd figure in your eyes.

                                 MAGDA.

No, oh, no! I can see it all. The effort to keep worthy of respect
under such difficulties, with a bad conscience, is awkward. You
look down from the height of your pure atmosphere on your sinful
youth,--for you are called a pillar, my dear friend.

                              VON KELLER.

[_Looking at the door_.] Pardon me--I can hardly accustom myself again
to the affectionate terms. And if any one should hear us-- Would it not
be better--

                                 MAGDA.

[_Sadly_.] Let them hear us.

                              VON KELLER.

[_At the door_.] Good Heavens! Well [_sitting down again_], as I was
saying, if you knew with what real longing I look back from this height
at my gay, discarded youth--

                                 MAGDA.

[_Half to herself_.] So gay,-- yes, so gay.

                              VON KELLER.

Well, I felt myself called to higher things. I thought-- Why should I
undervalue my position? I have become Councillor, and that
comparatively young. An ordinary ambition might take satisfaction in
that. But one sits and waits at home, while others are called to the
ministry. And this environment, conventionality, and narrowness, all is
so gray,--gray! And the ladies here--for one who cares at all about
elegance--I assure you something rejoiced within me when I read this
morning that you were the famous singer,--you to whom I was tied by so
many dear memories and--

                                 MAGDA.

And then you thought whether it might not be possible with the help of
these dear memories to bring a little color into the gray background?

                              VON KELLER.

[_Smiling_.] Oh, pray don't--

                                 MAGDA.

Well, between old friends--

                              VON KELLER.

Really, are we that, really?

                                 MAGDA.

Certainly, _sans rancune_. Oh, if I took it from the other standpoint,
I should have to range the whole gamut,--liar, coward, traitor! But as
I look at it, I owe you nothing but thanks, my friend.

                              VON KELLER.

[_Pleased, but confused_.] This is a view which--

                                 MAGDA.

Which is very convenient for you. But why should I not make it
convenient for you? In the manner in which we met, you had no
obligations towards me. I had left my home; I was young and innocent,
hot-blooded and careless, and I lived as I saw others live. I gave
myself to you because I loved you. I might perhaps have loved any one
who came in my way. That--that seemed to be all over. And we were so
happy,--weren't we?

                              VON KELLER.

Ah, when I think of it, my heart seems to stop beating.

                                 MAGDA.

There in the old attic, five flights up, we three girls lived so
merrily in our poverty. Two hired pianos, and in the evening bread and
dripping. Emmy used to warm it herself over the oil-stove.

                              VON KELLER.

And Katie with her verses! Good Lord! What has become of them?

                                 MAGDA.

_Chi lo sà_? Perhaps they're giving singing-lessons, perhaps they're on
the stage. Yes, we were a merry set; and when the fun had lasted half a
year, one day my lover vanished.

                              VON KELLER.

An unlucky chance, I swear to you. My father was ill. I had to travel.
I wrote everything to you.

                                 MAGDA.

H'm! I did not reproach you. And now I will tell you why I owe you
thanks. I was a stupid, unsuspecting thing, enjoying freedom like a
runaway monkey. Through you I became a woman. For whatever I have done
in my art, for whatever I have become in myself, I have you to thank.
My soul was like--yes, down below there, there used to be an Æolian
harp which was left mouldering because my father could not bear it.
Such a silent harp was my soul; and through you it was given to the
storm. And it sounded almost to breaking,--the whole scale of passions
which bring us women to maturity,--love and hate and revenge and
ambition [_springing up_], and need, need, need--three times need--and
the highest, the strongest, the holiest of all, the mother's
love!-- All I owe to you!

                              VON KELLER.

What--what do you say?

                                 MAGDA.

Yes, my friend, you have asked after Emmy and Katie. But you haven't
asked after your child.

                              VON KELLER.

[_Jumping up and looking about anxiously_.] My child!

                                 MAGDA.

Your child? Who calls it so? Yours? Ha, ha! Dare to claim portion
in him and I'll kill you with these hands. Who are you? You're a
strange man who gratified his lust and passed on with a laugh. But I
have a child,--my son, my God, my all! For him I lived and starved
and froze and walked the streets; for him I sang and danced in
concert-halls,--for my child who was crying for his bread! [_Breaks out
in a convulsive laugh which changes to weeping, and throws herself on a
seat, right_.]

                              VON KELLER.

[_After a silence_.] I am confounded. If I could have suspected,--yes,
if I could have suspected--I will do everything; I will not shrink from
any reparation. But now, I beg you to quiet yourself. They know that I
am here. If they saw us so, I should be--[_correcting himself_] you
would be lost.

                                 MAGDA.

Don't be afraid. I won't compromise you.

                              VON KELLER.

Oh, I was not speaking for myself, not at all. But just think, if it
were to come out, what the town and your father--

                                 MAGDA.

Poor old man! His peace is destroyed, at any rate.

                              VON KELLER.

And think! the more brilliantly you are placed now, the more certain is
your ruin.

                                 MAGDA.

[_Madly_.] And if I wish for ruin! If I--

                              VON KELLER.

For Heaven's sake, hush! some one's coming.

                                 MAGDA.

[_Springing up_.] Let them come! Let them all come! I don't care, I
don't care! To their faces I'll say what I think of you,--of you and
your respectable society. Why should I be worse than you, that I must
prolong my existence among you by a lie! Why should this gold upon my
body, and the lustre which surrounds my name, only increase my infamy?
Have I not worked early and late for ten long years? Have I not woven
this dress with sleepless nights? Have I not built up my career step by
step, like thousands of my kind? Why should I blush before any one? I
am myself, and through myself I have become what I am.

                              VON KELLER.

Good! You may stand there proudly, but you might at least consider--

                                 MAGDA.

Whom? [_As he is silent_.] Whom? The pillar! Ha, ha! The pillar begins
to totter! Be easy, my dear friend. I am not revengeful. But when I
look at you in all your cowardly dignity--unwilling to take upon you
the slightest consequence of your doings, and contrast you with myself,
who sank through your love to be a pariah and an outcast-- Ah, I'm
ashamed of you. Pah!

                              VON KELLER.

For Heaven's sake! Your father! If he should see you like this!

                                 MAGDA.

[_In agony_.] My father! [_Escapes through the door of the dining-room,
with her handkerchief to her face_.]

_Enter_ Schwartze, _happy and excited, through the hall-door_.

                               SCHWARTZE.

Ah, my dear Councillor--was that my daughter who just disappeared?

                              VON KELLER.

[_In great embarrassment_.] Yes, it was--

                               SCHWARTZE.

Why should she run away from me? Magda!

                              VON KELLER.

[_Trying to block his path_.] Had you not better-- The young lady
wished to be alone for a little!

                               SCHWARTZE.

Now? Why? When one has visitors, one does not-- Why should she--

                              VON KELLER.

She was a little--agitated.

                               SCHWARTZE.

Agitated?

                              VON KELLER.

Yes; that's all.

                               SCHWARTZE.

Who has been here?

                              VON KELLER.

No one. At least, as far as I know.

                               SCHWARTZE.

Then, what agitating things could you two have to talk about?

                              VON KELLER.

Nothing of importance,--nothing at all, I assure you.

                               SCHWARTZE.

What makes you look so, then? You can scarcely stand.

                              VON KELLER.

I? Oh, you're mistaken, you're mistaken.

                               SCHWARTZE.

One question, Councillor-- You and my daughter-- Please sit down.

                              VON KELLER.

My time is unfortunately--

                               SCHWARTZE.

[_Almost threatening_.] I beg you to sit down.

                              VON KELLER.

[_Not daring to resist_.] Thank you. [_They sit_.]

                               SCHWARTZE.

You met my daughter some years ago in Berlin?

                              VON KELLER.

Yes.

                               SCHWARTZE.

Councillor von Keller, I know you to be as discreet as you are
sensible; but there are cases in which silence is a crime. I ask
you--and your life-long relations with me give me the right to ask, as
well as the mystery--which just now-- In short, I ask you, Do you know
anything discreditable about my daughter's life there?

                              VON KELLER.

Oh, for Heaven's sake, how can you--

                               SCHWARTZE.

Do you not know how and where she lived?

                              VON KELLER.

No. I am absolutely--

                               SCHWARTZE.

Have you never visited at her house?

                              VON KELLER.

[_More and more confused_.] No, no, never, never.

                               SCHWARTZE.

Not once?

                              VON KELLER.

Well, I called on her once; but--

                               SCHWARTZE.

Your relations were friendly?

                              VON KELLER.

Oh, entirely friendly--of course, only friendly. [_A pause_.]

                               SCHWARTZE.

[_Passes his hand over his forehead, looks earnestly at_ Von
Keller; _then, speaking absently_.] So? Then, honestly--if it might
be--if--if-- [_Gets up, goes to_ Von Keller, _and sits down again,
trying to quiet himself_.] Dr. von Keller, we both live in a quiet
world, where scandals are unknown. But I have grown old, very old. And
therefore I can't--can't control my thoughts as I should. And I can't
rid myself of an idea which has--suddenly--taken possession of me. I
have just had a great joy which I don't want to be embittered. But, to
quiet an old man, I beg you--give me your word of honor that--

                              VON KELLER.

[_Rising_.] Pardon me, this seems almost like a cross-examination.

                               SCHWARTZE.

You must know, then, what I--

                              VON KELLER.

Pardon me, I wish to know nothing. I came here innocently to make a
friendly visit, and you have taken me by surprise. I will not be taken
by surprise. [_Takes his hat_.]

                               SCHWARTZE.

Dr. von Keller, have you thought what this refusal means?

                              VON KELLER.

Pardon me, if you wish to know anything, I beg you to ask your
daughter. She will tell you what--what-- And now you must let me go.
You know where I live. In case-- I am very sorry it has happened so:
but-- Good-day, Colonel! [_Exit_.

                               SCHWARTZE.

[_After brooding for a time_.] Magda!

                                 MARIE.

[_Running in anxiously_.] For Heaven's sake, what's the matter?

                               SCHWARTZE.

[_Chokingly_.] Magda,--I want Magda.

                                 MARIE.

[_Goes to the door and opens it_.] She's coming now--down the stairs.

                               SCHWARTZE.

So! [_Pulls himself together with an effort_.]

                                 MARIE.

[_Clasping her hands_.] Don't hurt her! [_Pauses with the door open_.
Magda _is seen descending the stairs. She enters in travelling-dress,
hat in hand, very pale, but calm_.]

                                 MAGDA.

I heard you call, father.

                               SCHWARTZE.

I have something to say to you.

                                 MAGDA.

And I to you.

                               SCHWARTZE.

Go in--into my room.

                                 MAGDA.

Yes, father. [_She goes to the door, left_. Schwartze _follows her_.
Marie, _who has drawn back frightened to the dining-room door, makes an
unseen gesture of entreaty_.]




                                ACT IV.

                           Scene: _the same_.


[Mrs. Schwartze _and_ Marie _discovered_. Mrs. Schwartze, _in hat and
cloak, is knocking on the door at the left_.]

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Leopold! Oh, Heaven, I dare not go in.

                                 MARIE.

No, no, don't! Oh, if you'd only seen his face!

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

And they've been in there half an hour, you say?

                                 MARIE.

Longer, longer!

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Now she's speaking! [_Listening, frightened_.] He's threatening her.
Marie, Marie! Run into the garden. The pastor's there, in the arbor.
Tell him everything,--about Mr. von Keller's being here,--and ask him
to come in quickly.

                                 MARIE.

Yes, mamma. [_Hurries to the hall-door_.]

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Wait a minute, Marie. Has Theresa heard anything? If it should get
about--

                                 MARIE.

I've already sent her away, mamma.

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

That's right, that's right. [_Exit_ Marie. Mrs. Schwartze _knocks
again_.] Leopold! listen to me, Leopold! [_Retreating_.] Oh, Heaven!
he's coming! [_Enter_ Schwartze, _bent and tottering_.]

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

How do you feel, Leopold?

                               SCHWARTZE.

[_Sinking into a chair_.] Yes, yes,--just like the roses. The knife
conies, and cuts the stem, and the wound can never be healed. What am I
saying? What?

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

He's out of his mind.

                               SCHWARTZE.

No, no, I'm not out of my mind. I know quite well-- [Magda _appears at
the door, left_.]

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

What have you done to him?

                               SCHWARTZE.

Yes, what have you--what have you? That is my daughter. What shall I do
with my daughter now?

                                 MAGDA.

[_Humbly, almost beseechingly_.] Father, isn't it best, after what has
happened, that you should let me go,--that you should drive me into the
streets? You must get free of me if this house is to be pure again.

                               SCHWARTZE.

So, so, so! You think, then, you have only to go--to go away, out
there, and all will be as before? And we? What will become of us?
I--good God!--I--I have one foot in the grave--soon it will be
over--but the mother, and your sister--your sister.

                                 MAGDA.

Marie has the husband she wants--

                               SCHWARTZE.

No one will marry a sister of yours. [_With aversion_.] No, no. Don't
think it!

                                 MAGDA.

[_Aside_.] My God!

                               SCHWARTZE.

[_To_ Mrs. Schwartze.] See, she's beginning now to realize what she has
done.

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Yes; what--

                                 MAGDA.

[_In tender sympathy, but still with a tinge of superiority_.] My poor
old father--listen to me--I can't change what has passed. I will give
Marie half my fortune. I will make up a thousand times all that I have
made you suffer to-day. But now, I implore you, let me go my way.

                               SCHWARTZE.

Oho!

                                 MAGDA.

What do you want of me? What am I to you? Yesterday at this time you
did not know even whether I still lived; and to-day-- It is madness to
demand that I should think and feel again as you do; but I am afraid of
you, father, I'm afraid of you all--ah, I am not myself-- [_Breaking
out in torment_.] I cannot bear the sorrow.

                               SCHWARTZE.

Ha, ha!

                                 MAGDA.

Father dear, I will humble myself before you willingly. I lament with
my whole heart that I've brought sorrow to you to-day, for my flesh and
blood still belong to you. But I must live out my own life. That I owe
to myself,--to myself and mine. Good-by!

                               SCHWARTZE.

[_Stopping her_.] Where are you going?

                                 MAGDA.

Let me pass, father.

                               SCHWARTZE.

I'll kill you first. [_Seizes her_.]

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Leopold! [_Enter_ Heffterdingt. _He throws himself between them with a
cry of horror_. Magda, _freed by the old man, goes slowly back, with
her eyes fixed on the_ Pastor, _to the seat, left, where she remains
motionless_.]

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

[_After a silence_.] In God's name!

                               SCHWARTZE.

Yes, yes, yes, Pastor--it made a fine family group, eh? Look at her!
She has soiled my name. Any scoundrel can break my sword. That is my
daughter; that is--

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Dear Colonel, these are things which I do not understand, and which I
do not care to understand. But it seems to me there must be something
to do, instead of--

                               SCHWARTZE.

Yes, to do,--yes, yes,--there's much to do here. I have much to do. I
don't see why I'm standing here. The worst of it is--the worst of it
is, he can say to me--this man--you are a cripple--with your shaking
hand--with such a one I can't fight, even if I have had your daughter
for a-- But I will show him-- I will show him-- Where is my hat?

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Where are you going, Leopold? [Magda _rises_.]

                               SCHWARTZE.

My hat!

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

[_Gives him hat and stick_.] Here, here!

                               SCHWARTZE.

So! [_To_ Magda.] Learn to thank the God, in whom you disbelieve, that
he has preserved your father until this hour, for he shall bring you
back your honor!

                                 MAGDA.

[_Kneeling, and kissing his hand_.] Don't do it, father! I don't
deserve this of you.

                               SCHWARTZE.

[_Bends weeping over her head_.] My poor, poor child!

                                 MAGDA.

[_Calling after him_.] Father!

                       [_Exit_ Schwartze _quickly_.

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

My child, whatever happens, we women--we must hold together.

                                 MAGDA.

Thanks, mamma. The play will soon be played out now.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

My dear Mrs. Schwartze, Marie is out there, full of sorrow. Go and say
a kind word to her.

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

What shall I say to comfort her, when all the happiness has gone out of
her life? [Magda _jumps up in anguish_.] Oh, Pastor, Pastor!

                                                          [_Exit_.

                                 MAGDA.

[_After a silence_.] Oh, I am so tired!

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Miss Magda!

                                 MAGDA.

[_Brooding_,] I think I shall see those glaring bloodshot eyes before
me always--wherever I go.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Miss Magda!

                                 MAGDA.

How you must despise me!

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Ah, Miss Magda, I have long been a stranger to despite. We are all poor
sinners--

                                 MAGDA.

[_With a bitter laugh_.] Truly we are-- Oh, I am so tired!--it is
crushing me. There is that old man going out to let himself be shot
dead for my sake, as if he could atone for all my sins with his single
life! Oh, I am so tired!

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Miss Magda--I can only conjecture--what all this means--but you have
given me the right to speak to you as a friend. And I feel that I am
even more. I am your fellow-sinner, Miss Magda!

                                 MAGDA.

Good Heavens! Still harping on that!

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Do you feel the obligation, Miss Magda, to bring honor and peace back
to this house?

                                 MAGDA.

[_Breaking out in anguish_.] You have lived through the sorrow, and ask
whether I feel it?

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

I think your father will obtain from that gentleman the declaration
that he is ready for any sort of peaceable satisfaction.

                                 MAGDA.

Ha, ha! The noble soul! But what can I do?

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

You can--not spurn the hand which he will offer you.

                                 MAGDA.

What? You don't mean-- This man--this strange man whom I despise--how,
how could I--

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Dear Miss Magda, there comes an hour to almost every man when he
collects the broken pieces of his life, to form them together into a
new design. I have found it so with myself. And now it is your turn.

                                 MAGDA.

I will not do it--I will not do it.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

You will have to.

                                 MAGDA.

I would rather take my child in my arms and throw myself into the sea.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

[_Suppresses a violent start; continues after a silence, hoarsely_.] Of
course, that is the simplest solution. And your father can follow you.

                                 MAGDA.

Oh, have pity on me! I must do whatever you demand. I don't know how
you have gained such power over me. Oh, man, if the slightest memory of
what you once felt, if the least pity for your own youth, still lives
within you, you cannot sacrifice me so!

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

I do not sacrifice you alone, Miss Magda.

                                 MAGDA.

[_With awakening perception_.] Good God!

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

There's no other way. I see none. You know yourself that the old man
would not survive it. And what would become of your mother, and what
would become of your poor sister? Miss Magda, it is as if with your own
hand you set fire to the house and let everything burn that is within.
And this house is still your home--

                                 MAGDA.

[_In growing agony_.] I will not, I will not. This house is not my
home. My home is with my child!

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

This child, too. He will grow up fatherless, and will be asked, "Where
is your father?" He will come and ask you, "Where is my father?" What
can you answer him? And, Miss Magda, he who has not peace in his heart
from the beginning will never win it in the end.

                                 MAGDA.

All this is not true, and if it were true, have I not a heart too? Have
I not a life to live also? Have I not a right to seek my own happiness?

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

[_Harshly_.] No; no one has that. But do as you will. Ruin your home,
ruin your father and sister and child, and then see what heart you have
to seek your own happiness. [Magda _bows her head, sobbing. The_ Pastor
_crosses to her, and leans over the table pityingly, with his hand on
her hair_.] My poor--

                                 MAGDA.

[_Seizing his hand_.] Answer me one question. You have sacrificed your
life for my sake. Do you think, to-day, in spite of what you know and
what you do not know, do you think that I am worth this sacrifice?

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

[_Constrained, as if making a confession_.] I have said already I am
your fellow-sinner, Miss Magda.

                                 MAGDA.

[_After a pause_.] I will do what you demand.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

I thank you.

                                 MAGDA.

Good-by.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Good-by. [_Exit. He is seen through the open door speaking to_ Marie
_and sending her in_. Magda _remains motionless, with her face in her
hands until he has gone_.

                             _Enter_ Marie.

                                 MARIE.

What can I do, Magda?

                                 MAGDA.

Where has the pastor gone?

                                 MARIE.

Into the garden. Mamma is with him.

                                 MAGDA.

If father asks for me, say I shall wait there. [_Nods towards left_.]

                                 MARIE.

And haven't you a word for me, Magda?

                                 MAGDA.

Oh, yes. Fear nothing. [_Kisses her on the forehead_.] Everything will
come out well, so well--no, no, no. [_In weary bitterness_.] Everything
will come out quite well. [_Exit, left_. Marie _goes into the
dining-room_.]

_Enter_ Schwartze. _He takes out a pistol-case and opens it. Takes a
pistol, cocks it with difficulty, examines the barrel, and aims at a
point on the wall. His arm trembles violently. He strikes it angrily,
and lets the pistol sink. Enter_ Max.

                               SCHWARTZE.

[_Without turning_.] Who's there?

                                  MAX.

It's I, uncle.

                               SCHWARTZE.

Max? Ah, you may come in.

                                  MAX.

Uncle, Marie told me-- What are the pistols for, uncle?

                               SCHWARTZE.

Ah, they used to be fine pistols,--beautiful pistols. See, boy, with
this I have hit the ace of hearts at twenty paces, or say fifteen.
And fifteen would be enough. We ought to have been in the garden
already, but--but [_helplessly touches his trembling arm, almost in
tears_]--but I can nevermore--

                                  MAX.

[_Hurrying to him_.] Uncle? [_They embrace each other for a moment_.]

                               SCHWARTZE.

It's all right,--it's all right.

                                  MAX.

Uncle, I need not say that I take your place, that I meet any man you
point out; it is my right.

                               SCHWARTZE.

Yours,--why? In what capacity? Will you marry into a disgraced family?

                                  MAX.

Uncle!

                               SCHWARTZE.

Are you prepared to strip off the uniform of our regiment? Yes, I might
set up a gambling-house, and you could play the stool-pigeon for a
living. There is no knowing what we might do. What! you, with your
beautiful name, your noble name, propose this sacrifice,--and I to
profit by it! Ha, ha! No, my boy; even if you still were willing, I am
not. This house and all within are marked for ruin. Go your way from
it. With the name of Schwartze you have nothing more to do.

                                  MAX.

Uncle, I demand that you--

                               SCHWARTZE.

Hush! Not now! [_Motions to the door_.] Soon I may need you as one
needs a friend in such affairs, but not now--not now. First I must find
the gentleman. He was not at home--the gentleman was not at home. But
he shall not think he has escaped me. If he is out a second time, then,
my son, your work begins. Until then, be patient,--be patient.

                      _Enter_ Theresa _from hall_.

                                THERESA.

Councillor von Keller. [Schwartze _starts_.]

                                  MAX.

He here! How--

                               SCHWARTZE.

Let him come in. [_Exit_ Theresa.

                                  MAX.

Uncle! [_Points to himself in great excitement_. Schwartze _shakes his
head, and signs to_ Max _to leave the room. Enter_ Von Keller. _Exit_
Max. _They meet in the doorway_. Von Keller _greets_ Max _courteously_.
Max _restrains himself from insulting him_.]

                              VON KELLER.

Colonel, I am grieved at having missed you. When I returned from the
Casino, where I am always to be found at noon,--where, I say, I am
always to be found,--your card lay on the table; and as I imagine that
there are matters of importance to be discussed between us, I made
haste--as I say, I have made haste--

                               SCHWARTZE.

Councillor, I do not know whether in this house there should be a chair
for you, but since you have come here so quickly, you must be tired. I
beg you to be seated.

                              VON KELLER.

Thanks. [_Sits down, near the open pistol-case, starts as he sees it,
watches the_ Colonel _apprehensively_.] H'm!

                               SCHWARTZE.

Now, have you nothing to say to me?

                              VON KELLER.

Allow me first one question: Did your daughter, after our conversation,
say anything to you about me?

                               SCHWARTZE.

Councillor, have you nothing to say to me?

                              VON KELLER.

Oh, certainly, I have a great deal to say to you. I would gladly, for
instance, express to you a wish, a request; but I don't quite know
whether-- Won't you tell me, at least, has your daughter spoken of me
at all favorably?

                               SCHWARTZE.

[_Angrily_.] I must know, sir, how we stand, in what light I am to
treat you.

                              VON KELLER.

Oh, pardon me, now I understand-- [_Working himself up_.] Colonel,
you see in me a man who takes life earnestly. The days of a light
youth-- [Schwartze _looks up angrily_.] Pardon me, I meant to
say--since early this morning a holier and, if I may say so, a more
auspicious resolution has arisen within me. Colonel, I am not a man of
many words. I have already wandered from the point. As one man of honor
to another, or-- in short, Colonel, I have the honor to ask you for the
hand of your daughter. [Schwartze _sits motionless, breathing
heavily_.] Pardon me, you do not answer--am I perhaps not worthy--

                               SCHWARTZE.

[_Groping for his hand_.] No, no, no; not that,--not that. I am an old
man. These last hours have been a little too much for me. Don't mind
me.

                              VON KELLER.

H'm, h'm!

                               SCHWARTZE.

[_Rising, and closing the lid of the pistol-case_.] Give me your hand,
my young friend. You have brought heavy sorrow upon me,--heavy sorrow.
But you have promptly and bravely made it good. Give me the other hand.
So, so! And now do you wish to speak to her also? You will have much to
say. Eh?

                              VON KELLER.

If I might be allowed.

                               SCHWARTZE.

[_Opens the hall-door and speaks off, then opens the door, left_.]
Magda!

                             _Enter_ Magda.

                                 MAGDA.

What is it, father?

                               SCHWARTZE.

Magda, this gentleman asks for the honor-- [_As he sees the two
together, he looks with sudden anger from one to the other_.]

                                 MAGDA.

[_Anxiously_.] Father?

                               SCHWARTZE.

Now everything's arranged. Don't make it too long! [_To_ Magda.] Yes,
everything's all right now. [_Exit_.

                              VON KELLER.

Ah, my dearest Magda, who could have suspected it?

                                 MAGDA.

Then we are to be married.

                              VON KELLER.

Above all, I don't want you to entertain the idea that any design of
mine has been at the bottom of this development which I welcome so
gladly, which I--

                                 MAGDA.

I haven't reproached you.

                              VON KELLER.

No, you have no reason.

                                 MAGDA.

None whatever.

                              VON KELLER.

Let me further say to you that it has always been my strongest wish
that Providence might bring us together again.

                                 MAGDA.

Then you have really never ceased to love me?

                              VON KELLER.

Well, as an honorable man and without exaggeration I can scarcely
assert that. But since early this morning a holier and a more
auspicious resolution has arisen within me--

                                 MAGDA.

Pardon me, would this holy and auspicious resolution have arisen within
you just the same if I had come back to my home in poverty and shame?

                              VON KELLER.

My dearest Magda, I am neither self-seeking nor a fortune-hunter, but I
know what is due to myself and to my position. In other circumstances
there would have been no social possibility of making legitimate our
old relations--

                                 MAGDA.

I must consider myself, then, very happy in these ten long years to
have worked up unconsciously towards such a high goal.

                              VON KELLER.

I don't know whether I am too sensitive, but that sounds almost like
irony. And I hardly think that--

                                 MAGDA.

That it is fitting from me?

                              VON KELLER.

[_Deprecatingly_.] Oh!

                                 MAGDA.

I must ask for your indulgence. The role of a patient and forbearing
wife is new to me. Let us speak, then, of the future [_sits and motions
to him to do the same_]--of our future. What is your idea of what is to
come?

                              VON KELLER.

You know, my dearest Magda, I have great designs. This provincial town
is no field for my statesmanship. Besides, it is my duty now to find a
place which will be worthy of your social talents. For you will give up
the stage and concert-hall,--that goes without saying.

                                 MAGDA.

Oh, that goes without saying?

                              VON KELLER.

Oh, I beseech you--you don't understand the conditions; it would be a
fatal handicap for me. I might as well leave the service at once.

                                 MAGDA.

And if you did?

                              VON KELLER.

Oh, you can't be in earnest. For a hardworking and ambitious man who
sees a brilliant future before him to give up honor and position, and
as his wife's husband to play the vagabond,--to live merely as the
husband of his wife? Shall I turn over your music, or take the tickets
at the box-office? No, my dearest friend, you underestimate me, and the
position I fill in society. But don't be uneasy. You will have nothing
to repent of. I have every respect for your past triumphs, but
[_pompously_] the highest reward to which your feminine ambition can
aspire will be achieved in the drawing-room.

                                 MAGDA.

[_Aside_.] Good Heaven, this thing I'm doing is mere madness!

                              VON KELLER.

What do you say? [Magda _shakes her head_.] And then the wife, the
ideal wife, of modern times is the consort, the true, self-sacrificing
helper of her husband. For instance, you, by your queenly personality
and by the magic of your voice, will overcome my enemies, and knit even
my friends more closely to me. And we will be largely hospitable. Our
house shall be the centre of the most distinguished society, who still
keep to the severely gracious manners of our forefathers. Gracious and
severe may seem contradictory terms, but they are not.

                                 MAGDA.

You forget that the child on whose account this union is to be
consummated will keep the severely inclined away from us.

                              VON KELLER.

Yes, I know, dear Magda, it will be painful for you; but this child
must of course remain the deepest secret between us. No one must
suspect--

                                 MAGDA.

[_Astounded and incredulous_.] What--what do you say?

                              VON KELLER.

Why, it would ruin us. No, no, it is absurd to think of it. But we can
make a little journey every year to wherever it is being educated. One
can register under a false name; that is not unusual in foreign parts,
and is hardly criminal. And when we are fifty years old, and other
regular conditions have been fulfilled, [_laughing_], that can be
arranged, can't it? Then we can, under some pretext, adopt it, can't
we?

                                 MAGDA.

[_Breaks into a piercing laugh; then, with clasped hands and
staring eyes_.] My sweet! My little one! _Mio bambino! Mio
povero_--_bam_--you--you--I am to--ha, ha, ha! [_Tries to open the
folding door_.] Go! go!

                           _Enter_ Schwartze.

                               SCHWARTZE.

What--

                                 MAGDA.

Good you're here! Free me from this man, take this man away from me.

                               SCHWARTZE.

What?

                                 MAGDA.

I have done everything you demanded. I have humbled myself, I have
surrendered my judgment, I have let myself be carried like a lamb to
the slaughter. But my child I will not leave. Give up my child to save
his career! [_Throws herself into a chair_.]

                               SCHWARTZE.

Mr. von Keller, will you please--

                              VON KELLER.

I am inconsolable, Colonel. But it seems that the conditions which for
the interest of both parties I had to propose, do not meet the
approbation--

                               SCHWARTZE.

My daughter is no longer in the position to choose the conditions under
which she-- Dr. von Keller, I ask your pardon for the scene to which
you have just been subjected. Wait for me at your home. I will myself
bring you my daughter's consent. For that I pledge you my word of
honor. [_Sensation_. Magda _rises quickly_.]

                              VON KELLER.

Have you considered what--

                               SCHWARTZE.

[_Holding out his hand_.] I thank you, Dr. von Keller.

                              VON KELLER.

Not at all. I have only done my duty.

                                              [_Exit, with a bow_.

                                 MAGDA.

[_Stretching herself_.] So! Now I'm the old Magda again. [Schwartze
_locks the three doors silently_.] Do you think, father, that I shall
become docile by being shut up?

                               SCHWARTZE.

So! Now we are alone. No one sees us but He who sees us--there
[_pointing upward_] Quiet yourself, my child. We must talk together.

                                 MAGDA.

[_Sits down_.] Good! We can come to an understanding, then,--my home
and I.

                               SCHWARTZE.

Do you see that I am now quite calm?

                                 MAGDA.

Certainly.

                               SCHWARTZE.

Quite calm, am I not? Even my arm does not tremble. What has happened,
has happened. But just now I gave your betrothed--

                                 MAGDA.

My betrothed?-- Father dear!

                               SCHWARTZE.

I gave your betrothed my word of honor. And that must be kept, don't
you see?

                                 MAGDA.

But if it is not in your power, my dear father.

                               SCHWARTZE.

Then I must die,--then I must simply die. One cannot live on when
one-- You are an officer's daughter. Don't you understand that?

                                 MAGDA.

[_Compassionately_.] My God!

                               SCHWARTZE.

But before I die, I must set my home in order, must I not? Every one
has something which he holds sacred. What is sacred to your inmost
soul?

                                 MAGDA.

My art.

                               SCHWARTZE.

No, that is not enough. It must be more sacred.

                                 MAGDA.

My child.

                               SCHWARTZE.

Good! Your child,--your child,--you love it? [Magda _nods_.] You wish
to see it again? [_She nods_.] And--yes--if you made an oath upon its
head [_makes a motion as if he laid his hand upon a child's head_],
then you would not perjure yourself? [Magda _shakes her head, smiling_.]
That's well. [_Rising_.] Either you swear to me now, as upon his head,
that you will become the honorable wife of his father, or--neither of
us two shall go out of this room alive. [_Sinks back on the seat_.]

                                 MAGDA.

[_After a short silence_.] My poor, dear papa! Why do you torture
yourself so? And do you think that I will let myself be constrained by
locked doors? You cannot believe it.

                               SCHWARTZE.

You will see.

                                 MAGDA.

[_In growing excitement_.] And what do you really want of me? Why do
you trouble yourself about me? I had almost said, what have you all to
do with me?

                               SCHWARTZE.

That you will see.

                                 MAGDA.

You blame me for living out my life without asking you and the whole
family for permission. And why should I not? Was I not without family?
Did you not send me out into the world to earn my bread, and then
disown me because the way in which I earned it was not to your taste?
Whom did I harm? Against whom did I sin? Oh, if I had remained the
daughter of the house, like Marie, who is nothing and does nothing
without the sheltering roof of the home, who passes straight from the
arms of her father into the arms of her husband; who receives from the
family life, thought, character, everything,--yes, then you would have
been right. In such a one the slightest error would have ruined
everything,--conscience, honor, self-respect. But I? Look at me. I was
alone. I was as shelterless as a man knocked about in the world,
dependent on the work of my own hands. If you give us the right to
hunger--and I have hungered--why do you deny us the right to love, as
we can find it, and to happiness, as we can understand it?

                               SCHWARTZE.

You think, my child, because you are free and a great artist, that you
can set at naught--

                                 MAGDA.

Leave art out of the question. Consider me nothing more than the
seamstress or the servant-maid who seeks, among strangers, the little
food and the little love she needs. See how much the family with its
morality demand from us! It throws us on our own resources, it gives us
neither shelter nor happiness, and yet, in our loneliness, we must live
according to the laws which it has planned for itself alone. We must
still crouch in the corner, and there wait patiently until a respectful
wooer happens to come. Yes, wait. And meanwhile the war for existence
of body and soul is consuming us. Ahead we see nothing but sorrow and
despair, and yet shall we not once dare to give what we have of youth
and strength to the man for whom our whole being cries? Gag us, stupefy
us, shut us up in harems or in cloisters--and that perhaps would be
best. But if you give us our freedom, do not wonder if we take
advantage of it.

                               SCHWARTZE.

There, there! That is the spirit of rebellion abroad in the world. My
child--my dear child--tell me that you were not in earnest--that
you--that you--pity me--if-- [_Looking for the pistol-case_]. I don't
know what may happen--child--have pity on me!

                                 MAGDA.

Father, father, be calm, I cannot bear that.

                               SCHWARTZE.

I will not do it--I cannot do it-- [_Looking still for the
pistol-case._] Take it from me! Take it from me!

                                 MAGDA.

What, father?

                               SCHWARTZE.

Nothing, nothing, nothing. I ask you for the last time.

                                 MAGDA.

Then you persist in it?

                               SCHWARTZE.

My child, I warn you. You know I cannot do otherwise.

                                 MAGDA.

Yes, father, you leave me no other way. Well, then, are you sure that
you ought to force me upon this man--[Schwartze _listens_] that,
according to your standards, I am altogether worthy of him?
[_Hesitating, looking into space_.] I mean--that he was the only one in
my life?

                               SCHWARTZE.

[_Feels for the pistol-case and takes the pistol out_.] You jade! [_He
advances upon her, trying to raise the weapon. At the same moment he
falls back on the seat, where he remains motionless, with staring eyes,
the pistol grasped in his hand, which hangs down by his side_.]

                                 MAGDA.

[_With a loud cry_.] Father! [_She flies toward the stove for shelter
from the weapon, then takes a few steps, with her hands before her
face_.] Father! [_She sinks, with her knees in a chair, her face on the
back. Calling and knocking outside. The door is broken open_.] _Enter_
Max, Marie, Heffterdingt, and Mrs. Schwartze.

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

Leopold, what's the matter? Leopold! [_To the_ Pastor.] O my God, he's
as he used to be!

                                 MARIE.

Papa dear! Speak, one word! [_Throws herself down at his right_.]

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

Get the doctor, Max.

                                  MAX.

Is it a stroke?

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

I think so. [_Exit_ Max. _Aside to_ Magda.] Come to him. [_As she
hesitates_.] Come; it is the end. [_Leads her trembling to_ Schwartze's
_chair_.]

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

[_Who has tried to take the pistol_.] Let it go, Leopold; what do you
want with it? See, he's holding the pistol and won't let it go.

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

[_Aside_.] It is the convulsion. He cannot. My dear old friend, can you
understand what I'm saying to you? [Schwartze _bows his head a little_.
Magda _sinks down at his left_.] God, the All-Merciful One, has called
you from on high. You are not her judge. Have you no sign of
forgiveness for her? [Schwartze _shakes his head slowly_.]

                                 MARIE.

[_Sinking down by_ Magda.] Papa, give her your blessing, dear papa! [_A
smile transfigures his face. The pistol escapes from his hand. He
raises his hand slowly to place it on_ Marie's _head. In the midst of
this motion a spasm goes through his body. His arm falls back, his head
sinks_.]

                            MRS. SCHWARTZE.

[_Crying out_.] Leopold!

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

[_Taking her hand_.] He has gone home. [_He folds his hands. Silent
prayer, broken by the sobbing of the women_.]

                                 MAGDA.

[_Springing up and spreading out her arms in agony_.] Oh, if I had only
never come! [Heffterdingt _makes a motion to beg her silence. She
misunderstands_.] Are you going to drive me away? His life was the cost
of my coming. May I not stay now?

                             HEFFTERDINGT.

[_Simply and peacefully_. ] No one will hinder you from praying upon
his grave.



                        [_Curtain falls slowly_.]
﻿                           CAST OF CHARACTERS

      Mr. Brauer              Proprietor of a large country estate
      Mrs. Brauer             His wife
      Gertrude                Their daughter
      George Von Harten       Their nephew
      An old Gypsy Woman
      Haffner                 Assistant Pastor
      Mr. Paul                Overseer
      Katie                   Housekeeper
      Servant Girl

                     _and_

      Marie                   A Foundling

            _Time of action, about 1880_

            _Place of action, Pomerania_ (_Prussia_)





                         THE FIRES OF ST. JOHN




                                ACT ONE

_Breakfast-room at the Brauer residence. The back wall is formed by
three glass doors, separated by marble pillars. Behind this, the
veranda is visible, and balustrade, hung with fine rug, and stairs,
leading into the garden. The glass doors have practical, solid wooden
shutters, with bars, fastening inside. Doors R. and L. Large table C.
with breakfast laid. Front, to the left, sofa, table and easy-chair. To
the right, sewing-machine, and basket filled with table-linen.
Old-fashioned photos and engravings on walls. Otherwise, well-to-do
family home._

_Time of day: Morning._


                              [Gertrude _busy at breakfast-table_.]

                                Brauer.

[_Enters with_ Paul, _from R_.] Confound it! Everything seems to go
wrong this morning!

                             [_Throws his cap on chair, angrily_.]

                               Gertrude.

[_Happily_.] Good-morning, papa!

                                Brauer.

Morning, my child. Such carelessness! You ought to be ashamed of
yourself. If this thing had happened earlier in the season, out on the
meadows--but at this time of the year--!!! Oh! Confound it all,
anyway!!!!! It is inexcusable!!!

                               Gertrude.

What is the matter, papa?

                                Brauer.

The black cow has been overfed. But of course, when Marie is not about
to look after everything, things go to rack and ruin. Well, man, what
excuse are you going to make?

                                 Paul.

None, Mr. Brauer.

                                Brauer.

Now that's the most sensible thing you have said this morning. Here,
take a cigar and get to work; but mind! send for the veterinary surgeon
at once. Have you had breakfast?

                                 Paul.

Yes, sir!

                                Brauer.

Then what the devil are you waiting for?

                                 Paul.

I--I--I wanted to excuse myself, and----

                                Brauer.

[_Impatiently_.] It's all right! it's all right!

                                 Paul.

[_Remains--hesitatingly_.] G--Good-morning!!

                                Brauer.

Well?

                                 Paul.

I--I have something else to tell you----

                                Brauer.

Then out with it.

                                 Paul.


[_With a glance at_ Gertrude.] But----

                                Brauer.

H'm! Gertrude, darling, will you please see if it is still threatening
rain?

                               Gertrude.

Yes, papa!                            [_Goes out on the veranda_.]

                                Brauer.

Well?

                                 Paul.

[_Confidentially_.] The old hag has turned up again.

                                Brauer.

[_Alarmed_.] Wha---- The devil you say! H'm! Who--who has seen her?

                                 Paul.

She was seen begging in the village--and last night, one of my men
observed her creeping stealthily around the sheds yonder.

                                Brauer.

[_Scratching his head_.] Yes, yes! I had almost forgotten. She has
served her last sentence--fully five years!--we have been free from her
annoying presence and now, she has returned. Well, what does she want?

                                 Paul.

She has heard her daughter is about to be married, she says.

                                Brauer.

[_Laughs_.] _Her_ daughter? ha, ha! I see! no doubt she has learned of
Gertrude's betrothal. Well? and----

                                 Paul.

And so she has come to get her share of the wedding-cake--so she says;
but she dare not venture here.

                                 Brauer.

Well, I should advise her to keep a respectful distance. Take good
care, Mr. Paul, that she approaches no one of this house. Do you hear?
No one. I will see the constable myself; and perhaps we'll soon get rid
of her again. Good-morning.

                                 Paul.

Good-morning, Mr. Brauer.                                [_Exit_.]

                               Gertrude.

[_Enters_.] Shall I pour your coffee, papa?

                                Brauer.

What? My little one looking after the breakfast, eh? Can you do all
that?

                               Gertrude.

Oh papa! if I couldn't do even that----

                                Brauer.

But Marie?

                               Gertrude.


Oh, of course--not as well as she--you must have patience with me,
papa!

                                Brauer.

Why certainly, my pet! [_Embraces her_.] And now, let me see--how many
days are you left to me?

                               Gertrude.

Only four more days, papa.

                                Brauer.

Now, you rascal! must you leave me? must you go and marry, eh? must
you?

                               Gertrude.

But papa, dear, it is all your own arrangement!

                                Brauer.

Of course, of course! what is a poor old man to do? Have you seen
George this morning? [Gertrude _shakes her head_.] Such sloth! He does
nothing but sleep, sleep, sleep.

                               Gertrude.

He worked until very late last night, papa. At dawn this morning I saw
his light still burning; and then it was past three o'clock.

                                Brauer.

Yes, I must admit, he is diligent and industrious--but also
stubborn--damned stubborn. [_The last is said almost to himself.
Aloud_.] Has mama been down?

                               Gertrude.

No, not yet.

                                Brauer.

And Marie? has she returned?

                               Gertrude.

She arrived by the early morning train.

                                Brauer.

And how nearly finished is the lover's nest, eh?

                               Gertrude.

Only one more trip to the city, I believe she said.

                                Brauer.

Well, and do you like the arrangement?

                               Gertrude.

I don't know, papa dear. I am kept entirely in the dark. It is to be a
surprise to me. Oh, I will like it very much indeed, I think.

                                Brauer.

And are you happy, my pet?

                               Gertrude.

Oh, papa, dear, I sometimes feel as if I didn't deserve all this
happiness.

                                Brauer.

Well, my dear, a housewife who calls these soft-boiled eggs, certainly
does not deserve such happiness.

                               Gertrude.

[_Embarrassed_.] I only boiled them about three-quarters of an hour----

                                Brauer.

Ha, ha, ha, ha!

                               Gertrude.

Oh, I beg your pardon, papa, I will----

                                Brauer.

There, there, I was only joking; never mind it. And Marie, I suppose,
is taking her rest now?

                               Gertrude.

If she only would do so. Papa, you must compel her to take a rest. No
one can endure such a strain. One day she is looking after this house,
and the next day she is in the city, furnishing our new home; and the
nights she passes on the train. I am sure she will break down.

                                Brauer.

Well, well, I will look after that.

                              Mrs. Brauer.

[_Enters from L_.] Good-morning!

                                Brauer.

Morning! Well?

                               Gertrude.

[_Throws her arms around her mother_.] Good-morning, mama dear!

                              Mrs. Brauer.

[_Caressing her_.] My sweet! my pet! only four more good-mornings, and
then----

                               Gertrude.

You must come to visit me soon, mama!

                              Mrs. Brauer.

[_Crying_.] Visit? ah, yes!

                                Brauer.

No tears now, no tears, I beg of you! Tears on an empty
stomach--b-r-r-r-r-r, that's poison.

                              Mrs. Brauer.

My darling, who dressed your hair last night?

                               Gertrude.

The housekeeper.

                              Mrs. Brauer.

There! I knew Marie could not have done that. But do you know--Marie--a
few moments ago I opened her door softly, to see how she was resting,
and found her still fully dressed, just as she came from the train,
seated at the open window, a book in her lap, and staring out into
space.

                                Brauer.

Well, well, well! I thought her passion for novels had passed away long
ago.

                              Mrs. Brauer.

I've been thinking--we must watch her more closely.

                                Brauer.

She needs no one to watch over her! She is well able to take care of
herself; but we must spare her----

                              Mrs. Brauer.

But, Henry, just now--three days before the wedding--who could think of
sparing one's self?

                                Brauer.

Well, you know--h'm----

                              Mrs. Brauer.

Henry, you know how I love the girl; but, good gracious, she is not our
own dear, sweet one----

                               Gertrude.

Oh, she is more than that, mama dear.

                              Mrs. Brauer.

You are entirely too modest, my darling.

                               Gertrude.

Well, just imagine, mama dear, she was going to be married--and I
remained at home----

                              Mrs. Brauer.

Then we would retain our sunshine, our consolation, our---- [_Looking
at breakfast table with a questioning expression_.] But, children, I
can't understand----

                               Gertrude.

What, mama dear?

                              Mrs. Brauer.

Gracious! Everything is so--so-- [_Topsy-turvy indicated by action_.]
If she is not going to sleep, she may as well come down here----

                               Gertrude.

[_Laughingly caressing her mama_.] There, you see, mama, dear, not even
a single meal can you eat without her.

                                      [George von Harten _enters_.]

                                Brauer.

Well, at last you have aroused yourself; you----

                                George.

[_Interrupts him, tapping his hand_.] There, softly, softly, dear
uncle; don't begin scolding so early in the morning.

                                Brauer.

Don't you think it's pretty near time to call me father, my boy?

                                George.

Not until after the wedding, dear uncle.--Good-morning, auntie.

[_Kissing her hand_.] Well, little one? [_Kissing her_.]

                               Gertrude.

[_Leans on him lovingly_.] My George. [_Laughs suddenly_.] Oh, just
look! he is simply covered with hay!

                                George.

Then you may make yourself useful by brushing me off.

                                Brauer.

The hayloft seems to be your favorite sleeping-place lately.

                                George.

Sleep? Heavens! who could sleep in this weather? I roam about. Lord
knows where, over meadows and fields. Such St. John days!!! It's enough
to drive one mad. The days never seem to end. Late last night I was
sitting in front of my window. Said I to myself: "No sleep for me
to-night, until that cursed nightingale runs out of melody"--when
suddenly a meadow-lark announces the break of day--and there, it's
morning. To the left, the twilight: to the right, the dawn, peacefully
together. From glow to glow a new day arises. Children, I tell you, it
was beautiful. Give me a cup of coffee.

                                Brauer.

But, tell me! Are you going to remain here now?

                                George.

Why, certainly, until after the wedding.

                                Brauer.

But the propriety of such a thing----

                               Gertrude.

[_Imploringly_.] Oh, papa dear----

                                George.

Its immaterial to me. Under no circumstances do I desire to offend your
sense of propriety; but then I will stay down at the inn, as the
nearest place.

                                Brauer.

And in the morning you will bring us the house full of fleas.

                              Mrs. Brauer.

But, Henry----

                                Brauer.

Well, it's so.

                                George.

If you will allow me! The wedding was set for the twentieth; therefore
I obtained my first furlough from the nineteenth--and I trust you
realize that I can't change the dates to suit myself. I arrived on the
twentieth--and the wedding, of course--it was postponed.

                              Mrs. Brauer.

But, George dear, neither your home, nor anything else was ready.

                                George.

And besides, where am I to go? My own home is broken up; Marie has had
everything torn up. By the way, has she returned?

                               Gertrude.

[_Nods_.]

                              Mrs. Brauer.

Why, what's the matter? Have you two had another quarrel?

                                George.

No, certainly not; but I should not have allowed the girl to make a
drudge of herself for my sake. I almost wish I had remained at home.

                               Gertrude.

Why, she is not doing all this for your sake, but for mine.

                                George.

Now there, don't be conceited.

                              Mrs. Brauer.

[_Caressing her_.] I think she has cause to be conceited.

                                George.

As my future wife, she certainly has cause to be that.

                                Brauer.

There, there, don't you overrate yourself.

                                George.

I don't, dear uncle; I am too practical for that.

                                Brauer.

So, so, you are too practical, eh? then what the devil possessed you to
leave this piece of paper on my desk? eh?

                                George.

Uncle, I beg of you, don't let us begin quarreling so early in the day.

                                Brauer.

[_Angry still_.] Very well, but what does it mean?

                                George.

It is simply a statement of my affairs. I am a free and independent
man, and that is to show you that I am not only willing but also able
to properly support my wife.

                                Brauer.

[_Still worked up_.] But I tell you----

                                 Marie.

[_Enters R_.] Oh--pardon me, papa--good-morning!

                               Gertrude.

[_Throws arms around her_.] Marie!

                                 Marie.

[_Kisses her_.] My darling!

                     [_She goes to_ Brauer _and kisses his hand_.]

                                Brauer.

You are back all right, I see! Here, here! [_Puts hand under her
chin_.] Head thrown back, I say--why, what's the matter? anything gone
wrong with you, eh?

                                 Marie.

[_Uncertain_.] N--no!

                                Brauer.

[_To his wife_.] Look at her--she is positively livid.

                              Mrs. Brauer.

What is the matter, my child?

                                 Marie.

Mama, dear, I sat up all night in the train and have had no sleep at
all.

                                Brauer.

And how much longer will it take you----?

                                 Marie.

Only one more trip to town,--but pardon me, papa, the new assistant
pastor is at the gate and----

                                Brauer.

Who?

                                 Marie.

The new assistant pastor.

                                            [Gertrude _snickers_.]

                                Brauer.

[_To_ Gertrude.] What are you laughing at?

                               Gertrude.

[_Pulling at_ Marie's _skirt and can hardly keep from bursting out
laughing_.] I--I--oh, I am not laughing.

                                Brauer.

[_To_ Marie.] But what does he want?

                                 Marie.

He says he does not wish to disturb the ladies so early in the morning,
and asks you to please come out----

                                Brauer.

Nonsense! tell him to come in.

                                 Marie.

Yes, papa.

                                George.

Good-morning, Marie.

                                 Marie.

Good-morning, George.                                    [_Exit_.]

                                Brauer.

Gertrude, come here. Now remember, my dear, such conduct is not at all
becoming to a full-grown young lady.

                               Gertrude.

My dear, sweet papa, I am so ashamed of myself--I--I'll never do it
again--never. But it's so funny--ha, ha, ha! he is gone on Marie----

                              Mrs. Brauer.

My dear, remember you are now a bride and it would be far more proper
to say----

                                George.

Smitten with her?

                              Mrs. Brauer.

[_Somewhat reproachfully_.] George!!!

                                Brauer.

Sh, sh--silence!

      [_During following scene_, Marie _noiselessly clears off the
      table_.]

                                Pastor.

[_Enters_.] I should not have dared to annoy the ladies at this early
hour, if----

                                Brauer.

[_Laughingly_.] Eight o'clock is not so very early in the country, my
dear Pastor; you will soon learn that here.

                              Mrs. Brauer.

And how is the good old pastor?

                                Pastor.

[_Doubtfully shrugging his shoulders_.] Well!

                              Mrs. Brauer.

[_Alarmed_.] He is not worse, I hope?

                                Pastor.

At the age of eighty, my dear lady, one cannot be said to be growing
stronger.

                                Brauer.

Ah, I see, Pastor, you are somewhat of a philosopher. Will you take
something?

                                Pastor.

You are very kind. A good glass of brandy is half the morning sun.

                                Brauer.

Now that is a manly word, Pastor.

                                Pastor.

Oh! thank you! Your health!                            [_Drinks_.]

                                Brauer.

Will you take something, George?

                                George.

No thank you, uncle, not now.

                              Mrs. Brauer.

When did you arrive, Pastor?

                                Pastor.

Just three weeks ago.

                              Mrs. Brauer.

And do you like our town?

                                Pastor.

Very much indeed, thank you. I find the whole world beautiful; but the
surroundings here are exceptionally so. Yes, this place to me seems
doubly attractive, for here every one seems smiling and happy----
Pardon me. Miss, you have dropped the napkin.

                      [Marie _smilingly bows her acknowledgment_.]

                              [Gertrude _exits, stifling a laugh_.]

                                Brauer.

Pastor, you will pardon this rudeness, she is still a child.

                                Pastor.

Oh, certainly, certainly; for she is right. I have not yet been able
to overcome my old tendency to play the gallant in the presence of
ladies--and in this frock--I know--I must look somewhat ridiculous.

                                Brauer.

Tell me. Pastor, how did you happen to obtain this position?

                                Pastor.

Well, you see, that, too, is partly connected with this coat. There
were four of us, classmates--who, after graduating, were eagerly
awaiting the call to save the sinful world--and among them, myself the
only one who was, what you might say, in fairly good financial
circumstances. We were now and then compelled, first one and then the
other, to present ourselves at the board of directors--and as a
consequence my coat suffered severely. Now it really never fitted any
one of my comrades and at my suggestion we finally purchased a coat,
that came nearer fitting each of us, striking a happy medium, as it
were, to every one's satisfaction. Then, about four weeks ago, an
ex-fellow-student--the curate of the cathedral--came to us, with this
information: "Ye holy men, list ye to me. In yon Lithuanian mountains
lives a minister of the gospel, who, on account of his extreme age and
feebleness, is incapacitated from properly performing his duties. And
as there are four of you, I propose that you draw straws and leave it
to chance who shall be the favored one." At that the others unanimously
declared: "No, he who has shared with us his clothing shall be the
favored one"--and--well, here I am and, I fear, not half as pious as I
look.

                                Brauer.

Ah, courage, Pastor, courage----

                                Pastor.

Pray do not think that I am ashamed of my calling; believe me, like our
Lord and Master, my heart aches for suffering humanity, and therefore
it has ever been my desire to follow in His footsteps. Besides,
it was my father's wish. You must know my father is a well-to-do
farmer--there are no really large estates in the lowlands--but he has
considerable--yes, I might say, a great deal of money--and owing to my
early surroundings, I'm afraid I am much better suited for a farmer
than a minister of the gospel. But I will not give up, and continue to
struggle and rid myself of all my bad habits. Your health!

                                Brauer.

Do you know, Pastor, I am beginning to like you! Do you wish to remain
here and take the old pastor's place?

                                Pastor.

I really would like----

                                Brauer.

Very well, my vote you shall have!

                                Pastor.

You are very kind, indeed. With such a position I should be quite
content, and to complete my happiness----but, by-the-bye, the object of
my visit was, really, the bridal-sermon. I am afraid our good old
pastor will not be able now----

                              Mrs. Brauer.

Ah----

                                Brauer.

[_Simultaneously_.] Will not be equal to the exertion, you mean; ah--I
feared as much.

                                Pastor.

Therefore, if you will allow me--unless you desired some one else----

                                Brauer.

Pastor, if we had not already heard you in the pulpit I would deny your
request, point blank, as you are practically a stranger to us. But your
ways and sentiments please me, and therefore--what say you, wife? [_She
nods_.]--And you, George?

                                George.

Oh, I don't know; but unless I am very much mistaken, there is already
a great deal of sympathy between us, eh, Pastor?

                                Pastor.

Now I must confess that is rather meaningless, at least so far as I am
concerned; for my sympathy extends towards the whole world.

                                George.

At any rate I am glad----

                                Pastor.

[_Jestingly_.] Then will you kindly leave us for awhile? I desire to
inquire into your past record.

                                George.

[_Shakes his finger laughingly_.] With pleasure, if you promise not to
be too severe on me.                                     [_Exit_.]

                                Pastor.

Now, then, with your kind permission, I will take a few notes----

                                Brauer.

Certainly, Pastor!

                                Pastor.

This young gentleman, your nephew, is especially close to the family,
is he not?

                                Brauer.

Correct!

                                Pastor.

Pardon me, but may I ask in what way?

                                Brauer.

I will tell you. Pastor. It was in the year '67, when we had here in
East Prussia, a terrible drought--a year of distress and--do you
remember anything about it?

                                Pastor.

Very little, as I was then still quite young.

                                Brauer.

Ah, it was terrible! Potatoes and fodder rotted before ripening. Of
wheat and rye hardly a trace. We farmers, I tell you--! Then it was,
when my brother-in-law, the husband of my sainted sister, whose estates
were in the neighboring township yonder, realized one day his financial
ruin and with all his aristocratic pride--you understand--he saw no
other way--he resorted to the pistol--he committed suicide.

                                Pastor.

And the--your sister, still lives?

                                Brauer.

Thank God, no! but from that day----

                                Pastor.

Pardon the interruption; but I have heard your daughter, Miss Marie,
called "the calamity child" by some of the villagers. Has that any
connection with this year of distress?

                              Mrs. Brauer.

And you didn't know that, Pastor--how she came into our house? Well,
during that same terrible winter, we were returning one night, my
husband and myself, from the town, where we had at our own expense
erected a soup-kitchen--when suddenly, at the corner of the woods
yonder, where the road makes a sharp turn, our horses shied--and there,
in the middle of the road, we saw lying, a woman, with a child pressed
closely to her bosom. She refused to stir and begged us to put her out
of her misery. Of course, we took her into the sleigh at once--ah, she
was in an awful condition----

                                Brauer.

I tell you, Pastor, it was months before we could rid the blankets of
vermin.

                              Mrs. Brauer.

And the child, the poor little thing----! But after being bathed and
fed, and lying there, between the clean white covers, we both stood
over its bed--the little thing, with its pinched face, laughed at us
and stretched out its tiny hands--my husband said to me: "Wife, I
believe this is our share of all this sorrow and misery that heaven has
sent us."

                                Brauer.

For you must know. Pastor, that our own daughter, Gertrude was then
not yet born.

                              Mrs. Brauer.

No, not until three years later. Well, we bought the child from that
miserable, drunken woman, in proper, legal form--determined and glad to
get rid of her, for she did smell so of gin, I could not endure it any
longer.

                                Brauer.

That is what the worst drunkards in these parts prefer to brandy.

                                Pastor.

Unfortunately!!!

                                Brauer.

But to come back to my nephew----

                                Pastor.

Pardon me, another question. What became of the mother?

                                Brauer.

Ah, that is a bad story--and just to-day----

                                Pastor.

Yes----

                                Brauer.

Oh--nothing, nothing. Anyway--that woman really did return, and as we
did not want the child to see her, we gave her more money. Of course
she remembered that and so finally she became a positive plague.

                              Mrs. Brauer.

Oh, Henry, I have often thought since, perhaps a mother's heart
prompted her----

                                Brauer.

You think so, eh? Then perhaps a mother's heart also prompted her to
steal at the same time! for every time she honored us with a visit,
something or other disappeared, until I grew suspicious, had her
watched, she was caught red-handed--and, of course, a long term in
prison was the result.

                                Pastor.

And the girl--does she know or suspect anything at all?

                              Mrs. Brauer.

We told her, her mother was dead. But one day she really did see her.

                                Pastor.

How did that misfortune happen?

                              Mrs. Brauer.

It was on her confirmation day, just as the girls left the church in a
body, when we heard a cry. What had happened? Why, that woman had been
lying in wait for the procession; when suddenly she appeared, seized
her child, and kneeling before her in the road, passionately covered
her hands and feet with kisses.

                                Pastor.

[_Shuddering_.] Horrible!!!!!!

                              Mrs. Brauer.

I tore the child from her arms, of course, and carried her into the
house. We had to make some kind of an explanation; a drunken vagabond,
I told her! Did she believe it?--H'm?--Then she fell ill----

                                Pastor.

And how is it now?

                                Brauer.

[_Humorously_.] Why, Pastor, you seem very much interested.

                                George.

[_Enters_. Gertrude _follows him in_.] I presume I am pretty well done
by this time.

                                Brauer.

We haven't even started with your case. The pastor is interested in
something of far greater importance.

                                Pastor.

[_With meaning and moved_.] You must not believe that, Mr. von
Harten; but there are lives whose fates are surrounded by so much
mystery---- [_with a glance at_ Marie, _who enters L. with package of
linen_.]

                                George.

[_Who follows his glance_.] Yes, yes, you are right.

                                Pastor.

If you will allow me, I will call again about the sermon.

                              Mrs. Brauer.

[_Giving him her hand_.] Pastor, you know you are always welcome in
this house.

                                Brauer.

Give my regards to our good old pastor. Towards evening we will see
him, as usual.

                                Pastor.

Oh, I had almost forgotten! He desires me to ask you kindly, should you
again favor him with eggnog, to please add a little more sugar, for the
last was a trifle tart.

                              Mrs. Brauer.

Why, of course, the poor old soul.

                                Pastor.

Do not say that, madame; for when the time has come when all our wishes
and hopes and desires are concentrated upon a small quantity of sweets,
our sufferings are near the end. And now, adieu. Miss Marie, adieu.

                                 Marie.

[_Preoccupied_.] Adieu.

                          [Pastor _exits, accompanied by_ Brauer.]

                                              [Gertrude _enters_.]

                              Mrs. Brauer.

Don't be afraid dear, no one will scold you.

                               Gertrude.

Oh mama, I'm so ashamed of myself. When he arrived he seemed so
jolly--and now--I am sure he is offended.

                                George.

He was not offended, dear, only a little grave.

                              Mrs. Brauer.

At any rate, what do you think of him, Marie?

                                 Marie.

[_Glancing up from her work, sorting linen_.] Of whom, mama dear?

                              Mrs. Brauer.

Why, the new pastor.

                                 Marie.

Oh mama, my mind is so occupied, I hadn't given him a thought.

                               Gertrude.

[_Aside to_ George.] Now you tell her, George.

                                 Marie.

Gertrude, how about our manzanillo-tree--any blossoms this morning?

                              Mrs. Brauer.

You don't mean to say you haven't looked after that beloved tree of
yours this morning?

                                 Marie.

I have had no time, mama dear.

                               Gertrude.

[_To_ George.] Now tell her.

                                George.

Marie, both Gertrude and myself insist, that you cease this endless
drudgery for our sakes; it isn't right.

               [Marie, _humming, pays no heed--looks into space_.]

                               Gertrude.

See, she is not even listening.

                              Mrs. Brauer.

What's that you are singing?

                                 Marie.

I--? Was I singing?

                              Mrs. Brauer.

Well then, humming.

                                 Marie.

Oh yes, last night at the station I heard a strange song--some one in a
fourth-class coach was singing. Listen. [_Sings_.]

"Zwirio czenay, zwirio tenay--kam'mano bernyczo--Rid wid wil dai
dai--Ne'r mano bernyczo."

                                George.

And the Lithuanian text--you memorized it just from hearing it?

                                 Marie.

Certainly.

                                George.

Well, where did you learn all that?

                                 Marie.

Why, I have always known it.

                                George.

And could you translate it readily?

                                 Marie.

Oh, it means nothing, really--[_makes one or two
attempts_.]--"here"--no!

"I look here and I look there--where may be my lover? Rid wid will dai
dai--Nowhere is my lover!"

                                Brauer.

[_Enters during this, unseen by her, puts arms around her. She
shrieks_.] There, there--[_caressing her_.] Patience, my darling, some
day you will have one--perhaps very soon. Why, what's the matter, dear?

                                 Marie.

[_Leans on him in tearless sobbing_.] Oh, you have frightened me so!

                                Brauer.

What is the matter with you this morning? What has happened?

                                 Marie.

I have already told you, nothing.

                                Brauer.

Tut, tut! something has gone wrong! I can see it--and now, I demand
that you tell me the truth.

                                 Marie.

Well, then--yes!

                                Brauer.

What is it? Come, come, out with it.

                                 Marie.

Some one attacked me.

                                Brauer.

Attacked you?

                                 Marie.

Not far from here.

                                Brauer.

As you came from the station?

                                 Marie.

Yes.

                                Brauer.

Well, I never--but everyone around here knows you and your character;
how did he look? was it a vagabond?

                                 Marie.

[_Hesitatingly._] N--No. It was--a gentleman----

                                Brauer.

Did he lay hands on you, or even try to touch you?

                                 Marie.

No.

                                Brauer.

But you say he attacked you?

                                 Marie.

Attacked me--yes!

                                Brauer.

You mean he followed you?

                                 Marie.

Yes.

                                Brauer.

How far?

                                 Marie.

As far as the gate, which I opened quickly and then he disappeared.

                                Brauer.

[_To the others_.] Now, what do you say to that? [George _shrugs his
shoulders_.] There is something queer about it all. [_To_ Marie.] And
that is what upset you so?

                                 Marie.

Oh, I am already much composed.

                                Brauer.

[_Raises her head_.] Yes--you look it.

                               Gertrude.

Oh, papa, don't torment her so.

                                Brauer.

Now, then, go and take a good nap.

                                 Marie.

Not yet, papa dear, I can't. I must speak with George first. About the
large bookcase--I really don't know where to place it.

                                Brauer.

But you can do that later, can't you?

                                 Marie.

I fear I might forget it.

                                Brauer.

Very well; I am going down to look after the cow. Will you come, wife?

                              Mrs. Brauer.

[_Rising and putting up her handwork_.] Yes, dear.

                                Brauer.

[_To_ Marie.] And one thing more,--don't you put your foot outside of
the gate without an escort hereafter! Understand? Not once!

                                 Marie.

But why not, papa dear?

                                Brauer.

After what has happened? But I never heard of such a thing--never, as
long as I----

                              Mrs. Brauer.

But, Henry, in broad daylight, it is hardly necessary----

                                Brauer.

No matter; I have my reasons for that; besides--well, I'll tell you
later.

                              Mrs. Brauer.

[_In passing taps_ Marie _on cheek_.] Now, pet, go and take a good
rest.                                               [_Both exit_.]

                                 Marie.

You must go, too, Gertrude!

                               Gertrude.

[_Peevishly_.] But why should I?

                                 Marie.

You know, dear, your future home----

                               Gertrude.

Ah, yes; those stupid furnishings! Do you know, I don't think a wedding
half so much fun as Christmas. Now don't be long, will you? [_Exit_.]

                                                        [_Pause_.]

                                George.

Why so deep in thought, suddenly?

                                 Marie.

I--? Oh, I was thinking. I was picturing to myself that cosy little
nook, your corner room!

                                George.

Marie, dear, how can I ever thank you for all the----

                                 Marie.

Don't speak of it, George, for I take great delight in having the
furniture moved about; and then, I say to myself: "Here is where they
will take their tea, and there they will while away their leisure
hours"--so---- But, what I meant to tell you! Yesterday we had an
accident--the large mirror in the parlor was broken. I know it portends
ill----

                                George.

What care I, so long as our friendship will not be broken.

                                 Marie.

But why should it?

                                George.

It shall never be my fault, Marie.

                                 Marie.

Certainly never mine. But what I wanted to say,--I had the large
mahogany bookcase repolished. Is that satisfactory?

                                George.

Anything you choose to do is satisfactory to me.

                                 Marie.

[_Hesitatingly_.] And then--I must tell you, George, something
important. When I unpacked the bookcase, I found a blue manuscript.

                                George.

[_Unsuspecting_.] What kind of a manuscript?

                                 Marie.

George, you must not leave that lying around--not even hidden behind
the books, especially now, when you take your wife to your home.

                                George.

In heaven's name, what manuscript?

                                 Marie.

I believe--it contains some poems----

                                George.

You believe--it contains some poems. I have missed it since early last
winter; I thought I had lost it. Marie, now tell me truthfully, have
you read its contents?

                                 Marie.

N--no!

                                George.

Then why do you tell me not to leave it around?

                                 Marie.

Well, I read the first part, and had begun on the second, when I
concluded to go no further.

                                George.

And you really looked no further than the first? Absolutely no further?

                                 Marie.

No.

                                George.

Can you swear to that?

                                 Marie.

I can!

                                George.

Then swear!

                                 Marie.

I swear! Are you satisfied?

                                George.

Yes, thank heaven! But you must not imagine for a moment that the book
contains anything I am ashamed of; on the contrary, I consider it so
sacred I would not have it desecrated by a stranger's eye. About four
years ago, something occurred within me--within my soul. No one
knows--no one could even guess, and no one shall ever know.

                                 Marie.

No one? Not even I?

                                George.


No, not even you. But where is the book? Give it to me!

                                 Marie.

[_Turns up stage and takes it from her bosom_.] Here it is.

                                George.

How shall I ever thank you?

                                 Marie.

I want you to do me one favor. Will you promise me?

                                George.

If it's in my power, certainly!

                                 Marie.

Then I must first confess to you. A few moments ago, when papa
questioned me, I deceived him. I was attacked last night--yes--but not
by a man, but by a woman--a Lithuanian woman. George, that woman was my
mother!

                                George.

But I understood your mother was dead.

                                 Marie.

No, no; that is not so. Not one of you ever told me the truth. On the
day of my confirmation I was waylaid by that very same woman--I cannot
have been mistaken.

                                George.

Come, tell me, how did it happen?

                                 Marie.

I was walking along quietly--'twas already dawning--when suddenly a
gaunt form arose from the ditch beside the road. I looked, and saw
before me a miserable beggarwoman, who called out to me in a trembling
voice: "Marie--Madame--Daughter!" I turned cold in fear and horror,
and, unable to utter one sound, I began to run; and I ran, ran, ran,
and behind me I only heard her agonizing call: "My Marie--my daughter!"
And so, I ran away from my own mother. And now, after a few hours'
thought, I realize I did wrong. I must see her and speak to her, and
learn from her own lips who and what I am; and as papa has forbidden me
to leave this house--I would go in spite of him, but I have a fear--I
beg of you, George, dear, go to her, I implore you, find her for
me--she cannot be far away, and----

                                George.

And then?

                                 Marie.

Then bring her to me, into the garden, or, better still, into this room
towards evening, when papa and mama are calling on the old pastor----

                                George.

Marie, I cannot do that!

                                 Marie.

The first time I ask a favor of you--and you say you cannot do it?

                                George.

Marie, dear, listen to me! You have been so kind to me of late--and
that has not always been so; but if you had sacrificed for me even more
than your own comfort and rest, I--I could not do it--I could not
deceive your father and mother, for I fear the consequences.

                                 Marie.

Then can't you understand that, a foundling though I am, a desire might
come over me to see my own mother, though she be but a common beggar
and an outcast? That I might want to lay my head on her shoulder and be
petted and fondled, and cry myself to sleep on mine--on my own mother's
breast?

                                George.

Are you not fondled, are you not petted--has mama not always been kind
to you?

                                 Marie.

Yes, but it is not the same--not the same. Never have I felt the
desire, the demand within me for my own flesh and blood, as just now.

                                George.

But why just now?

                                 Marie.

[_Imploringly_.] Because my heart is bursting. Oh, George!

                                George.

I cannot. I dare not do it!

                                 Marie.

Then you refuse me?

                                George.

You know I must!!

                                 Marie.

Then have you forgotten what took place in there, in your heart, four
years ago?

                                                        [_Pause_.]

                                George.

Marie, you have read my manuscript!

                                 Marie.

Yes, I read it. Will you do it now?

                                George.

Marie, you have sworn falsely!!!

                                 Marie.

[_Shrugging her shoulders_.] Will you do as I ask?

                                George.

'Tis well! I will do as you ask!!!!

                                                      [_Curtain_.]



                         END OF THE FIRST ACT.




                                ACT TWO

_The same scene as Act I_.

[Marie, _seated, with some linen in her lap, at the sewing-machine,
looking dreamily out of the window_.]

                           Housekeeper Katie.

                                                    [_In door R_.]
May I come in, Miss Marie?

                                 Marie.

Oh, is that you? Yes, come in!

                                 Katie.

I see you are working on Miss Gertrude's wedding outfit. How beautiful,
fit for a princess. But what I wanted to ask you: Madame has given me
the menu for the wedding feast, and as to fish, it calls for carp. Now
you know I am economical, but carp--common carp----

                                 Marie.

Why, carp is a very fine fish----

                                 Katie.

Oh yes, and good enough for--say--your wedding feast; but not good
enough for Miss Gertrude.

                                 Marie.

For my wedding feast even carp is too good.

                                 Katie.

Oh no; carp is not too good for you, though it may be good enough--and
do you know I will prepare a special Polish sauce--but Miss
Gertrude--she must have deep sea fish. Now will you see Madame about
that, please?

                                 Marie.

Very well, I will speak to mama about it.

                                 Katie.

And you are not offended?

                                 Marie.

Oh no!

                                 Katie.

For, after all, you know, you are only a foundling.

                                 Marie.

Oh yes, I know.

                                 Katie.

But we all love you, Miss Marie, and----

                                 Marie.

Thank you. But have you seen Mr. von Harten this morning?

                                 Katie.

No, I have not! But I have some good news for you--the assistant pastor
has fallen deeply in love with you.

                                 Marie.

Yes?

                                 Katie.

And he is going to ask for your hand!!! I always said you were a lucky
girl. Just think, you may be a St. John's-bride.

                                 Marie.

And what is a St. John's-bride?

                                 Katie.

_You_ don't know that, Miss Marie? Well, I'll tell you. It is written
in the new seal of Solomonis: "Whoever shall give or receive their
first kiss on St. John's eve, their love is sealed and they will be
faithful unto death." So it is written in the new seal of Solomonis.

                               Gertrude.

                     [_Enter C., hands behind her, with bouquet_.]

Marie, I have something for you. No, first I want Katie to leave the
room. Go now, go!!!

                                 Katie.

Oh, I am going--I am going!!!!!!!!!                      [_Exit_.]

                               Gertrude.

Shut your eyes now! [Marie _does so, as_ Gertrude _holds bouquet to_
Marie's _face_.] Now what is it?

                                 Marie.

The tulip-tree! the first blossoms from our manzanillo-tree! It
blooms--it blooms!!! [_Burying her face in the flowers_.]

                               Gertrude.

Are you glad, Marie?

                                 Marie.

Yes, darling, so glad!!! Thank you!

                               Gertrude.

And do you know who picked them?--George!

                                 Marie.

For me?

                               Gertrude.

Why, of course, for you!

                                 Marie.

He--did this--for me?

                               Gertrude.

He would do even more than that for me, I am sure!

                                 Marie.

Oh yes, certainly! But where is he now?

                               Gertrude.

I don't know!

                                 Marie.

Did he say he had to go somewhere?

                               Gertrude.

Yes, he had to go out on the fields, he said--and that was quite some
time ago. I wanted to accompany him, I begged and begged, but he flatly
refused to let me go.

                                 Marie.

[_Breathing heavily_.] Oh!!!!!!!!

                               Gertrude.

I don't know how it is; but to-day he is acting so strangely. Papa has
asked for him several times--and do you know, dear, at times he is not
at all pleasant to me!

                                 Marie.

But why should he----

                               Gertrude.

That's just it! why should he? Oh, if I only knew--if I was only
certain he loved me--and then, another thing--I don't know if I should
tell you--I have a growing fear, some other girl will take him away
from me.

                                 Marie.

[_With forced laugh_.] Away from you, dear? how could that be possible?

                               Gertrude.

Oh yes, you may laugh; but at times, when he looks at me, I see a
strange look come in his eyes. Half affection--half pity--and I don't
want to be pitied! Why should he? Am I not happy?

                                 Marie.

[_Caressing her_.] Yes, dear; you ought to be very, very happy.

                               Gertrude.

But I cannot rid myself of the fear, perhaps he really loves another
and is only taking compassion on me! Oh, if I only knew----

                                 Marie.

But, my darling----

                               Gertrude.

For you see, I am still so young--and think, how ill-mannered I was
only this morning! I was so sorry afterwards--but I do love to laugh.
[_Laughs_.]

                                 Marie.

[_With strange y desperate tone of voice_.] And you shall
laugh--laugh--laugh--so--so!!!!!!!

                               Gertrude.

Mama, too, insists that my love for him is only that of a child and not
of a woman and a bride; but you see she would rather I'd not marry at
all and so remain at home with her all my life. But you will be good to
her, won't you? You will soon be her only one.

                                 Marie.

I----?

                               Gertrude.

Why yes!

                                 Marie.

I shall soon know whose only one I am!

                               Gertrude.

What are you saying?

                                 Marie.

[_As_ George _enters_.] There he is!

     [Gertrude _runs towards him_. Marie _takes a few steps, then
      hesitates and stops_.]

                               Gertrude.

[_Pulling him, as she runs towards him_.] Oh, George!!! [_Then_]
Confound you!

                                George.

[_Reproachfully_.] _Gertrude!!!!!!_

                               Gertrude.

[_Crushed_.] Why, what did I say?

                                George.

[_Lovingly_.] Now listen to me, little one. Such language may be
excusable in your papa, but never in my bride.

                               Gertrude.

[_Pouting_.] Everything I say seems to displease you. You never find
fault with Marie! You can go and marry her!!!

                                George.

Marie does not want to marry me.

                                 Marie.

My very best thanks, George!

                                George.

For what?

                                 Marie.

[_Picking up bouquet_.] For this!

                                George.

Oh, don't mention it.

                                 Marie.

Were you out in the fields?

                                George.

Yes.

                               Gertrude.

Yes, papa is angry with you, too. He is looking for you!

                                George.

Oh yes--I know----! Well?

                                 Marie.

In what direction did you go?

                                George.

I have been everywhere.

                                 Marie.

And have you found----?

                               Gertrude.

What was he to find?

                                George.

Yes, what was I to find? But, children, your tulip-tree is certainly a
strange fellow. There he stands, blooming alone, like the last rose of
summer----

                               Gertrude.

My great-grandfather brought it from South America!

                                George.

[_To_ Marie.] And that is why you love it so, because it is so foreign
and strange?

                                 Marie.

[_Busy with linen_.] Perhaps!

                               Gertrude.

No, that is not the reason----

                                 Marie.

Well then, what is it?

                               Gertrude.

I'm going to tell on you. One day papa took her to the Opera, down in
the city; there they saw the African----

                                George.

"L'Africaine," you mean?

                               Gertrude.

Yes, yes, that's what she called it.

                                 Marie.

Gertrude, please don't----

                               Gertrude.

In that play occurs a poison-tree--I think----

                                George.

Yes, a manzanillo-tree!

                               Gertrude.

Yes, yes; and whosoever inhales the odor of its blossoms must die. And
do you know what she did? Oh, yes, I did the same--we would go to this
tree, smell of its blossoms, and lay down----

                                George.

To die?

                               Gertrude.

To die.

                                 Marie.

Now you can imagine, George, how long ago that must have been.

                               Gertrude.

Yes, it was long, long ago. But about four years ago, one day Marie
really wanted to die very badly.

                     [Marie _casts a frightened glance at_ George,
                      _who returns it thoughtfully_.]

                               Gertrude.

But we didn't.

                                George.

No, no, thank heaven. Now, little one, run along and tell papa that I
am here.

                               Gertrude.

Marie, will you come, too?

                                 Marie.

No; I think I will remain here a little while longer.

                               Gertrude.

Then I'll stay, too.

                                George.

Now, little one----

                                   [Gertrude _exits with a sigh_.]

                                 Marie.

[_Quickly and suppressed_.] Did you find her? [George _nods_.] Will she
come? Why don't you answer?

                                George.

Marie, when you exacted this promise from me this morning, I did not
realize what it meant. I had never seen your--I don't want to speak
that word--I had never seen this person until to-day. She must not come
to this house, secretly--she must not!!!

                                 Marie.

George!!!

                                George.

Take uncle into your confidence, at least.

                                 Marie.

No, no one--no one but you!!

                                George.

What do you want with her? You know you belong to this house. Here you
have everything your heart desires. Here you have love--here you
have----

                                 Marie.

[_Interrupts him_.] Bread! Why don't you say it? Yes, here I have
bread!

                                George.

I did not mean to say that.

                                 Marie.

No; but I did! And do I not earn it, as well as the little love I
obtain in this house? I am "The Calamity Child"--and I do not ask for
charity.

                                George.

You seem to be possessed of the very devil to-day!

                                 Marie.

Perhaps!

                                George.

I implore you, do not insist. I fear the consequence. You will see! for
whatever is done against nature, punishes itself.

                                 Marie.

And is it against nature when a child cries out for its own mother?

                                George.

She is not your mother; your mother is in this house.

                                 Marie.

Gertrude's mother is in this house, not mine. A mother must feel for
her child, she must see----

                                George.

Sh--sh!

                                               [_Enter_ Gertrude.]

                               Gertrude.

You two are continually talking in whispers; can't you tell _me_? It
makes me so unhappy!

                                 Marie.

[_Caressing her_.] But darling, it is all done for your sake!

      [_During this_, George _looks at her disapprovingly, while_ Marie
      _casts a timid glance at him_.]

                                Brauer.

[_Enters_.] At last you have come. Where in thunder have you been all
day? It almost seemed to me as if you were trying to avoid me!

                                George.

But, uncle----

                                Brauer.

Well, girls, have you prepared the pastor's eggnog?

                                 Marie.

Oh, I had entirely forgotten it.

                                Brauer.

Then see to it at once. And don't forget the sugar, you know.

                                 Marie.

Yes, papa.

                                Brauer.

And Gertrude dear, you can go and help her. It is time you were
learning to do something yourself.

                               Gertrude.

Yes, papa!

                                 Marie.

I hardly think it will be ready in time to take with you and mama.

                                Brauer.

Then bring it later--yourself.

                                 Marie.

[_With a glance at_ George.] Could not Gertrude bring it, papa? I have
so much work to do!

                               Gertrude.

No, no, papa!!!

                                Brauer.

Yes, yes, you shall!--bring it up when done; and mind, you remain at
the pastor's as long as your mother and I, this time. Understand?

                               Gertrude.

Oh, papa dear! The last time, the old pastor insisted upon holding my
hand in his so long; and they are so cold and clammy, so shriveled and
hairy, like the hands of the dead!

                                Brauer.

Come here, my child. Those hairy hands once christened you, and at your
confirmation the same shriveled hands were laid upon your head and
invoked for you the blessings of heaven; and would you, after all that,
refuse to hold them in your own warm young hands? My daughter, I do not
wish to hear that again. [_Kisses her_.]

                                 Marie.

[_Slowly has approached_ George. _Softly, aside to him_.] You will do
as I ask?

                                Brauer.

And now, leave us.

                                     [Marie _and_ Gertrude _exit_.]

"Now, then, comes your turn," says the stork to the worm.

                                George.

[_Looking after the girls, turns_.] I suppose so, but take a care,
uncle, I am not so easily digested.

                                Brauer.

We shall see! We shall see!

                                George.

What do you want with me? My financial condition is satisfactory. I
have a good position, and my future is assured. I desire to enjoy the
results of my own labors, not those of yours.

                                Brauer.

So, so!

                                George.

Yes, dear uncle. If you were so determined upon giving a large dowry,
you should have found another husband for Gertrude than myself.

                                Brauer.

[_Riled_.] Oh, hang you and your confounded pride!

                                George.

Yes, I am proud; and because of my pride and determination, and, I may
say, defiance, I have become what I am!

                                Brauer.

[_Rather arrogantly_.] And was there no diligence?

                                George.

That, also, was nothing but defiance.

                                Brauer.

I almost believe you are determined to create another rumpus, as you
did twelve years ago.

                                George.

If necessary, yes!

                                Brauer.

And was it necessary, even then?

                                George.


You ask me that question? When one day I came here, during vacation
from college, you insisted upon my attending your church. I refused.
You gave me my choice, either to do as you asked, or have my allowance
cut off. Then I resolved in my mind never to comply with your command,
in spite of everything. Oh, it is no pleasure to hunger, as I was
forced to do then; but you may believe me, as I stand before you now, a
free and independent man, I owe all of it to my stubborn confidence in
myself, looking neither to right nor left, but straight ahead, without
concessions, without falsehoods, always able to look every man straight
in the face. And this good conscience is my proudest possession. From
it do I draw all my strength, and I will never give it up.

                                Brauer.

Well, who the devil asked you to give it up?

                                George.

And one thing more. Of course, I belong to this house; fate has made it
my lot. Therefore it has ever been far from my mind to seek a wife
elsewhere, so strongly attached do I feel myself to this house; and
that would have been impossible, had I not from that day been a free
man. And now, dear uncle, you are at heart a good and kind man; but
your hand is heavy, and it must not lie upon me again as that of the
master. For that reason do I refuse to touch even one penny of the
dowry, now or any other time.

                                Brauer.

So, so! Then you are really afraid of me?

                                George.

Afraid of you? Bah!!!

                                Brauer.

And at heart you are nothing but a coward!!

                                George.

Uncle, I forbid you----

                                Brauer.

_You_ forbid me? Ha! This is my house, and here I am the master!

                                  [George _shrugs his shoulders_.]

                                Brauer.

Yes, yes; it seems to annoy you to have any one keep an eye on you and
your conduct----

                                George.

My life has been as an open book to this day.

                                Brauer.

But after to-day--what about that? Who can look into the future? Who
can look into your heart and read your thoughts? Who knows what may
happen over night, eh?

                                George.

Uncle, these are insults I will not endure, even from you----

                                Brauer.

_Well_! What then! Come on! [_Jumps up, facing him, ready to fight_.]

                              Mrs. Brauer.

[_Enters, ready to go out, dressed_.] Henry, what on earth have you
done to Gertrude? She is in her room, crying as if her heart would
break.

                      [Marie _has also come in with_ Mrs. Brauer.]

                                Brauer.

How is the eggnog getting on, Marie?

                                 Marie.

It is not quite done, papa!

                                Brauer.

Then let her have her cry; she can bring it up later.

                                 Marie.

Yes, papa.

                              Mrs. Brauer.

And are you ready?

                                Brauer.

Ready for what?

                              Mrs. Brauer.

Are you ready to go now?

                                Brauer.

Well, wait for me out on the veranda; we have something to settle
first, we two!

                              Mrs. Brauer.

What's the matter with George?

                                Brauer.

Oh, I have just asked him for an explanation, and that does not seem to
please him.

                              Mrs. Brauer.

[_Caressing him_.] Don't you mind him, George dear. After the wedding
you can laugh at him.

                                Brauer.

Well, we shall see about that!!!

                                 [Mrs. Brauer _and_ Marie _exit_.]

                                Brauer.

We can't go on like this, for I fear the consequences; but,
nevertheless, I shall handle you without gloves.

                                George.

Well?

                                Brauer.

My child loves you. You are her ideal, her all, and the wedding must
take place. But tell me, what right have you to all this pride--I might
even say arrogance?

                                George.

Must I perhaps ask your permission----?

                                Brauer.

That is the same old defiance, the same unreasonable stubbornness of
your father's!!!!!

                                George.

[_Starts_.] My father has been dead these twenty years--what do you
want of him now?

                                Brauer.

What do I want of him? That he left you to me, to bring up from
childhood, I will hardly mention; although that ought to be sufficient
to temper your untamable pride--at least towards me; but----

                                George.

Uncle, you may abuse me as much as you please, but my father I will not
have disturbed! My father--you shall let him rest in peace!

                                Brauer.

And who was it--who took care--who made it possible, that he could rest
in peace?

                                George.

Uncle, what do you mean?

                                Brauer.

Well then, who was it, when he laid there, dead, before us, who paid
his debts of honor and saved your father's name from disgrace?

                                                        [_Pause_.]

                                George.

Uncle, you should not have said that!

            [_Sinks in chair and covers his face with his hands_.]

                                Brauer.

My boy----[_Emotion stops him from saying more--walks about_.] See
here----[_Again the same--tries to light a cigar, breaks it and throws
it away_.]

                                George.

You should not have said that, uncle! No, no----

                                Brauer.

My God, you knew of it?

                                George.

Yes, I knew of it, and yet you should not have said it; you should not
have repeated it. Twelve years ago, in our quarrel, when you raised
your whip to me--and I reached for the carving-knife--no, no--I should
not have done that. You should not have raised your whip, nor I the
knife. That is the reason I refused anything from you at all. Now you
know it. From that day I swore to scratch the gold from the ground
with my finger nails and fling it in your face. From that day I hated
you--and rightly so!

                                Brauer.

And all that because I saved your and your father's name from dishonor
and disgrace?

                                George.

_No!_ But because you turned that same deed into a weapon to crush my
youthful pride.

                                Brauer.

My boy, one uses the weapon nearest to hand.

                                George.

[_Bitterly_.] Even if it is only a whip. But then, I see my mistake. I
have no right to pride; my fatherly inheritance does not permit it.
Give me your gold! I'll take it! All--all!

                                Brauer.

No, no; in your present state of mind I will force nothing on you. You
might again turn to hating me.

                                George.

Ah no, dear uncle, that is past. Hereafter, I will swallow my pride.

                                Brauer.

My boy----

                                 Marie.

[_Enters_.] Pardon me papa, but mama asks, if you are not yet ready to
go?

                                Brauer.

[_With a glance at_ George.] Well, as far as I am concerned, I am ready
now! [_Takes his hat_.] Marie, give him a glass of brandy to brace him
up. [_Goes to door and returns_.]. George?

                                George.

Uncle? [Brauer _offers his hand_.] My hand I cannot refuse you.

                                Brauer.

[_Goes to door. In door_.] Yes, and your heart, too, I will win
again--or I'll be damned!!!!

                                         [_Exits, slamming door_.]

                                 Marie.

What did he say to you, George?

                                George.

Do not ask me, do not ask me! [_Walks about_.] All these years I have
struggled and deprived myself with only one thing in view--to be
free--free--and yet I must bow--I must bow. If it were not for the sake
of this beautiful child, who is innocent of it all, I would be tempted
to---- But the die is cast, the yoke is ready--and so am I!!!!!!!

                                 Marie.

[_Softly and hesitating_.] But, George, dear, here in this house, I see
nothing for you but love--the yoke seems so light----

                                George.

How pious and tame you have suddenly become!

                                 Marie.

I am not pious.

                                George.

What was that you said a few moments ago? "I am the calamity child. I
am the child of misery; but I do not ask for charity." That is what you
said of yourself, and it is also true of me. I, too, am a child of
misery, a calamity child; but I am a subject of charity. I accept all
they have to give--all--all--ha, ha, ha----!

                                 Marie.

You, George, a calamity child?

                                George.

Yes! Was I not picked up from the street, as my uncle so kindly
informed me for the second time--like yourself? Do I not belong to this
house, and am I not smothered with the damnable charity of my
benefactors, like yourself?

                                 Marie.

I receive my share with thanks.

                                George.

And you enjoy serving----

                                 Marie.

I enjoy serving!!

                                George.

But I--I wish to rule--to command!!!

                                 Marie.

And you shall rule--you shall command----

                                George.

[_Walking about and ironically_.] Ah yes!!!

                                 Marie.

[_Timidly_.] George?

                                George.

Well?

                                 Marie.

[_The same_.] Pardon me; but have you forgotten--?

                                George.

Oh, I see!

                                 Marie.

I know it is wrong in me to annoy you at this time, when you are so
occupied with affairs of your own---- Besides, you have already refused
me once----

                                George.

Wha--yes, now in spite of them all, I am my own master. I am
responsible to no one. I have promised you--I shall keep my word!!!!!

                                 Marie.

Thank you, George!

                                George.

Oh, don't thank me----



                                 Marie.

Where is she now?

                                George.

She is waiting, behind yonder garden hedge.

                                 Marie.

My God! Do not keep her waiting any longer; call her in here.

                                George.

Gertrude is still in the house.

                                 Marie.

I will get her out of the way. When I appear out there on the veranda,
the coast is clear!!

                                George.

Marie, for your own sake, I warn you for the last time; discovery means
certain disaster.

                                 Marie.

One disaster more or less, it matters little!

                                George.

Is that your last word? Very well, I will bring her to you. [_Gets his
hat and goes out centre door_.]

                                 Marie.

[_Opens door L. and calls out_.] Gertrude! Gertrude!

                                      [_A door is heard to open_.]

                               Gertrude.

[_Outside with crying voice_.] What is it?

                                 Marie.

Come quickly, or papa will be angry!

                               Gertrude.

[_After a moment's pause_.] I am coming! [_Another short pause and she
appears in door_.]

                                 Marie.

How red your eyes are! You have been crying! What's the matter, dear?
[_Caressing her_.]

                               Gertrude.

Where is George?

                                 Marie.

[_Lightly_.] He went out again a few moments ago.

                               Gertrude.

And he didn't ask to see me?

                                 Marie.

He heard you were crying and did not want to disturb you.

                               Gertrude.

But, Marie, what is the matter with your own eyes? And you look so
queerly----

                                 Marie.

My pet, they are the eyes that God has given me and----

                               Gertrude.

[_Suspiciously_.] What?

                                     [_A knock at door is heard_.]

                                 Marie.

Come in!

                             Maid Servant.

[_Enters with basket_.] Here are the eggnog and cakes, for the pastor.
Now be careful and don't crush them!

                                 Marie.

Very well!

                                                 [_Exit_ Servant.]

                               Gertrude.

[_Taking basket_.] Good-bye, Marie!

                                 Marie.

Good-bye, Gertie dear!

                          [Gertrude _starts towards centre door_.]

                                 Marie.

[_Frightened_.] Where are you going?

                               Gertrude.

I am going through the garden across the fields; perhaps I will meet
George.

                                 Marie.

[_Concerned_.] No, no; you must not walk across the fields alone. Papa
has forbidden it.

                               Gertrude.

But I may meet George.

                                 Marie.

But if you shouldn't, what then? No, no, I will not allow it! I will
not! I had such a fright last night.

                               Gertrude.

[_Goes up to the other door and turns back once more_.]
Marie, you are not angry with me?

                                 Marie.

[_Embracing her_.] My darling!!!

                               Gertrude.

Then I will go that way! [_Looks all around_.] Give my love to George!

                                 Marie.

But I won't see him, dear----

                               Gertrude.

Well, perhaps you may!

                                 Marie.

In that case, I will tell him----

                               Gertrude.

Very well.

                                                       [_Exit R_.]

    [Marie _goes out on veranda--gives sign--returns--locks doors R.
      and L.--then at C. door--in terror, with searching eyes, she
      slowly retreats backwards, her eyes glued on the outer
      darkness--until she finally covers her face with her hands, and
      is standing against the wall_.]

                                George.

[_Enters_.] Here she is!!

                                 Gypsy.

[_Enters_. George _goes out on veranda, looking off_.] Mine lady, mine
daughter--yes--don't be afraid. Oh, you are such a fine lady--you have
lover--you marry, they say----?

                                 Marie.

[_Forcing herself to speak_.] No; I'm not to be married! It is
Gertrude, my foster sister.

                                 Gypsy.

You no marry, eh? Never mind--you marry some day--some day [_Examining_
Marie's _dress with her fingers_.] What a fine dress you have, and all
wool---- [_Same with apron_.] Oh, and a silk apron--all silk! Give me,
give me?

                       [Marie _takes it off and gives it to her_.]

                                 Gypsy.

Thank you--thank you!!! [_Kisses_ Marie's _sleeve and dress, but when
she would kiss her hand_, Marie _withdraws it quickly_.]

                                 Marie.

No, no! _Ne dosu ranka!_

                                 Gypsy.

All right, all right! You are fine lady. [_Looks about_.] Is the old
man home, eh?

                                 Marie.

No, he is out.

                                 Gypsy.


That is good, that is good! He is an old devil--is the old man! All
Prussians are devils. But he have fine house, he have! Like a prince!!!
[_Rubs her hand over table cover_.] Ah, nice shawl that would
make---- [_Sees linen_.] And what fine linen--[_Motions to_ Marie.] Come
here!

                                 Marie.

[_Approaching her_.] What do you want?

                                 Gypsy.

[_Pointing with thumb_.] Give me an drink--just an little drink!
[_Indicates with finger and thumb_.]

                [_While_ Marie _turns to sideboard, she quickly
                  takes two or three pieces of linen and with
                  left hand holds them hidden under her apron_.]

                                 Gypsy.

[_After taking drink from Marie_.] Thanks, mine daughter, thanks!
[_After drinking, rubs her stomach_.] Ah, that's good, that's
good!--Give me another! [Marie _fills another glass for her--she drinks
it_.] Thank you, thank you!! But now I must be going!

                [_In her anxiety to get out she drops one piece, while
                  going to the door_.]

                                 Marie.

[_Horrified_.] Mo--mo--what were you trying to do?

                                 Gypsy.

[_Pretending surprise_.] My, my--just see! I found this out on the
field. [_Picks it up and puts it under her arm_.]

                                 Marie.

Put that down, it is not yours.

                                 Gypsy.

[_Doing so_.] All right, all right--my--my--my----

                                 Marie.

Put down all you have!

                                 Gypsy.

I have no more, no, no more, I swear!

                                 Marie.

[_Goes quickly to door and calls_.] George!

                                George.

[_Enters._] Well?

                                 Marie.

Give me some money! [_He gives her a gold piece_.] [Marie _to her
mother_.] Here, here is money; now give me the linen----

                                 Gypsy.

[_Takes the money as she gives up the linen, greedily_.] A ducat! A
whole ducat! A golden ducat! Mine daughter, thank you!

                                 Marie.

And now, go!

                                 Gypsy.

[_Goes anxiously to the door_.] Alright, alright!!!

                     [_Throws a kiss to_ Marie, _and quick exit_.]

                                 Marie.

[_Quickly takes key from board_.] George, take this key and lock the
garden gate after her, so she does not return.

[George _exits_. Marie _looks after them, then slowly returns to the
table, leans against same, and stares vacantly. Knock is heard at door
L_.]

                                 Marie.

[_Mechanically_.] Come in!

                                Servant.

[_Trying the door from the outside_.] The door is locked!

                                         [Marie _opens the door_.]

                                Servant.

[_Enters with dishes_.] It is time to lay the table for supper--will
you help me, please? Why, what's the matter? You are not listening to
me----

                                 Marie.

Never mind, Lena, I will set the table myself!

                                Servant.

Will you? Very well!!! [_Exit_ Servant.]

                                George.

[_Enters. To_ Marie, _who does not stir_.] Remember what I told you.
But come, come, this will never do! Don't stare at me like that----

                                 Marie.

[_Leaning on him and weeping_.] Oh, George!

                                George.

[_Stroking her hair_.] That's it, dear, the tears will relieve you! Ah,
I well know the anguish of an aching heart!

                                 Marie.

Yes, you know, you know all! Now I have no one in this whole world but
you--you alone. [_As she bursts out crying she throws herself on his
breast_.]

                                George.

[_Stroking her hair_.] Yes, yes; we two understand each other. We two
were meant, were intended for each other. Were we not, dear?

                                 Marie.

My God! Yes!!

                                George.

And we will ever remember this day--the day that brought us together.
It is the day before St. John's Eve. Will you remember it, dear?

  [_Short pause_. Marie _silent, then struggles to free herself_.]

                                 Marie.

Don't, George! Go away! Please don't!

                                George.

[_Embarrassed_.] But why should I suddenly go away, Marie?

                                 Marie.

Go, George, I beg of you! I must lay the table!! Now go!

                                George.

Marie, you said yourself you had no one but me!

                                 Marie.

If you do not want to despise me, please go----

                                George.

[_With forced laugh_.] I despise you? Very well--I'll go----

           [_Turns once more in the door and hesitatingly exits_.]

                                   [Marie _breaks down, weeping_.]

                                                      [_Curtain_.]



                         END OF THE SECOND ACT.




                               ACT THREE

_Same setting. Above the centre table a lighted hanging-lamp. Another
lamp on table, L. The glass doors to garden are open. Full moonshine
falls partly into the room. At rise of curtain, at table, L., are_
Brauer, Mrs. Brauer _and_ Pastor. _At centre table_, Gertrude _and_
George. _It is evening_.


                                Brauer.

Now, then, tell Marie to bring the bowl!

                                Pastor.

Ah! you are going to have a bowl?

                              Mrs. Brauer.

Why, of course, Pastor. This is St. John's Eve. The villagers will set
off tar-barrels and bonfires, and we will celebrate it with a bowl.

                                Brauer.

[_Mischievously_.] But perhaps this festival is too heathenish for the
clergy----

                                Pastor.

Bless you, that all depends. If you have not the clergy's sanction,
then it is wicked and heathenish----

                                Brauer.

But if they are invited, then it is Christianly and good? Ha, ha----!

                                Pastor.

Well, I did not say that. You had better apply to the consistory, they
are better able to decide that point.

                                Brauer.

Ah, Pastor, you are a diplomat. Well, what are you two doing over
there? You are not saying a word.

                               Gertrude.

George is too lazy. He is drawing little men, and I am writing.

                                Brauer.

In his place I think I would prefer to draw little women. Eh, Pastor?

                                George.

Just as you say, uncle!

                                Brauer.

[_Aside_.] What the devil is the matter with him to-day? Come,
children, be jolly, this is St. John's Eve! Ah, here is the punch! Now,
then, Gertrude, lend a hand!

                  [Marie _has entered with the bowl and glasses_.]

                               Gertrude.

Yes, papa.

                                Brauer.

[_Drinks_.] Excellent, Marie! Superb! I tell you, Pastor, whoever gets
her for a wife will be a lucky man indeed.

                               Gertrude.

[_With a glass to_ George, _who has gone back and is looking out_.]

Don't you want some, George?

                                George.

[_Caressing her, with a shy glance at_ Marie.] Why, yes, little one,
thank you! Look, how bright and beautiful the moon shines to-night!
Everything wrapped as in silvery spider web! How beautiful!

                                 Marie.

[_Oppressed_.] They will soon set off the bonfires.

                                Brauer.

See, see--at last you have spoken; I feared you had lost your tongue.
Come here, my child. Get your glasses, all of you---- Your health! The
Pastor shall give us a toast; yes, yes, Pastor!--a genuine pagan toast,
well suited to this night! Now, tell me, my child, are you obliged to
go to the city again to-night?

                                 Marie.

Yes, papa dear.

                                Brauer.

But if I will not allow it?

                                 Marie.

You gave your permission quite two weeks ago, papa dear!

                                Brauer.

But not to go in the middle of the night!

                                 Marie.

I must go, papa. The men are to be there at seven in the morning, and
if I am not there to give instructions the house will never be finished
in time.

                              Mrs. Brauer.

Never mind, Henry, there is no help for it.

                                Brauer.

But look at her!

                                 Marie.

Why, papa, there is nothing the matter with me. I am well and merry----

                                Brauer.

You are merry, eh? Let me hear you laugh!

                                 Marie.

[_Tries to laugh_.] Ha, ha, ha----!

                                Brauer.

[_Imitating her_.] Yes, yes--ha, ha, ha----!

                              Mrs. Brauer.

Come here, my child. [_Strokes her hair_.] Did you sleep well last
night?

                                 Marie.

Yes, mama.

                                Brauer.

But if this stranger should attack you again?

                                Pastor.

Pardon me, but what do I hear?

                                Brauer.

Oh, nothing of importance, Pastor. [_To_ Marie.] You will take the one
o'clock train----

                                 Marie.

Yes, papa.

                                Brauer.

There is another--at four--t'will be daylight then----

                                 Marie.

But I would not reach the city in time.

                                Brauer.

Very well, you needn't go to bed, then. George can take you to the
depot.

                                 Marie.

[_Startled_.] George?

                                George.

[_Startled and simultaneously_.] What--I?

                                Brauer.

Certainly! Why not?

                                Pastor.

Pray do not think me obtrusive; but I am at your service.

                                Brauer.

No, no, thank you. Pastor; your time will come some other day.
[_Aside_.] It will at least give him something to do. [_Meaning_
George.]

                               Gertrude.

I want to go too, papa! I love moonshine promenades.

                                Brauer.

No, no, my pet. In the first place, it is very improper for lovers to
be out so late at night, without a chaperon.

                                 Marie.

I would much prefer to go alone. I am not at all afraid--and I do not
wish to trouble George--or any one else----

                                Brauer.

Any one else is out of the question, for in this house every one rises
at five in the morning. [_To_ George.] Now, then, what excuse have you
to offer?

                                George.

Excuse? I? Why, none at all, except that she does not want me to go.
You heard it yourself!

                                Brauer.

Have you two been quarreling again?

                              Mrs. Brauer.

Don't insist, Henry, if they don't want to----

                                Brauer.

By the way, send for Mr. Paul--I wish to speak to him. Pastor, your
health! [_Drinks_.]

      [_At this_ Marie _and_ Gertrude _go to door C., and speak to
        some one outside in pantomime. A voice is heard_.]

                                 Voice.

Mr. Paul! Mr. Paul!

                                 Paul.

[_From behind scene_.] I am coming in one moment! [_Short pause. He
enters_.] Here I am!

                                Brauer.

Ah, there you are! Give him a glass of punch!

                                 Paul.

Thank you, I have just had a glass of beer.

                                Brauer.

Very well! Now, don't let us disturb you, children! Pastor, this is the
time to prepare your toast. [_Aside to_ Paul.] Well, have you learned
anything of this stranger?

                                 Paul.

Not a sign of one, excepting two tramps at the inn, the gendarme placed
under arrest; but that was the day before yesterday.

                                Brauer.

H'm! If I had ever had the slightest reason to doubt her
word---- Marie, my child, come here to me.

                                 Marie.

Yes, papa!

                                Brauer.

[_Looks at her sharply_.] Never mind, now.

                                 Paul.

[_Aside to_ Brauer.] By the way, I saw the old woman again!

                                Brauer.

Sh! not so loud! Where?

                                 Paul.

She had money, too----

                                Brauer.

I wonder where she stole it?

                                 Paul.

I wonder! The innkeeper said she had a gold piece. But don't you worry,
Mr. Brauer. She will soon give us cause to have her locked up again.
She is incorrigible!

                                Brauer.

Does she sleep at the inn?

                                 Paul.

No, sir! At night she leaves there, only to reappear in the morning.

                                Brauer.

H'm! that would almost be sufficient reason---- George!

                                George.

Uncle?

                                Brauer.

I have changed my mind. You must accompany Marie!

                                George.

Just as you say, uncle!

                                Brauer.

And no quarreling this time, Marie!

                                 Marie.

Yes, papa.

                               Gertrude.

[_On the veranda_.] There, there, look! The first bonfire!!

      [_Singing and laughter is heard in distance. A red glow is
        seen_.]

                              Mrs. Brauer.

Have you taken care, Mr. Paul, to keep them far enough away from the
sheds?

                                 Paul.

Yes, Mrs. Brauer!

                              Mrs. Brauer.

For you must know. Pastor, last year the sparks came very near setting
fire to the straw roofs.

                               Gertrude.

There is a second one now, and there on the hill, another. See, George,
see! How beautiful!

                                George.

Yes, yes, darling, I see!

                               Gertrude.

[_Pulls him forward softly_.] Why do you call me darling to-day?

                                George.

Well, shan't I?

                               Gertrude.

Oh, of course; but do you love me more to-day?

                                George.

I love you always, my pet!

                               Gertrude.

[_Softly and with emotion_.] But you usually call me "little one," and
to-day nothing but "darling."

                                Brauer.

Now, then, Pastor, we are ready for the toast! Take up your glass, and
fire away!

                                Pastor.

I am afraid it will be hardly as wicked and heathenish as you seem to
expect.

                                Brauer.

Come, come, Pastor, don't keep us waiting!

                                Pastor.

Well, what shall I say? I am not going to preach you a sermon!

                                Brauer.

No, no, Pastor; we are content to wait for that till Sunday.

                                Pastor.

Well, then, you see, on a beautiful and dreamy night like this--may I
say dreamy?

                                Brauer.

You may, Pastor, you may!

                                Pastor.

For we all dream at times, more or less, both young and old!

                                Brauer.

Ah, yes! that is a failing we all have!!!

                                Pastor.

On such a dreamy night, different emotions are aroused within us. We
seem to be able to look into the future, and imagine ourselves able to
fathom all mystery and heal all wounds. The common becomes elevated,
our wishes become fate; and now we ask ourselves: What is it that
causes all this within us--all these desires and wishes? It is _love_,
brotherly love, that has been planted in our souls, that fills our
lives; and, it is life itself. Am I not right? And now, with one bound,
I will come to the point. In the revelation you will find: "God is
love." Yes, God is love; and that is the most beautiful trait of our
religion--that the best, the most beautiful within us, has been granted
us by _Him_ above. Then how could I, this very evening, so overcome
with feeling for my fellow-man--how could I pass _Him_ by? Therefore,
Mr. Brauer, no matter, whether pastor or layman, I must confess my
inability to grant your wish, and decline to give you a genuine pagan
toast----

                                Brauer.

[_Grasps his hand_.] That was well spoken, Pastor! Pardon me, I was
only jesting!

                                George.

No, no, dear uncle, not altogether. There I must defend you against
yourself. A devout and pious man like yourself, t'was not entire
wantonness, your desire to hear something other than religious, and
since the Pastor has so eloquently withdrawn, I will give you a toast.
For, you see, my dear Pastor, something of the old pagan, a spark of
heathenism, is still glowing somewhere within us all. It has outlived
century after century, from the time of the old Teutons. Once every
year that spark is fanned into flame--it flames up high, and then it is
called "The Fires of St. John." Once every year we have "free night."
Then the witches ride upon their brooms--the same brooms with which
their witchcraft was once driven out of them--with scornful laughter
the wild hordes sweep across the tree-tops, up, up, high upon the
Blocksberg! Then it is, when in our hearts awake those wild desires
which our fates could not fulfill--and, understand me well, dared not
fulfill--then, no matter what may be the name of the law that governs
the world on that day, in order that that one single wish may become a
reality, by whose grace we prolong our miserable existence, thousand
others must miserably perish. Part because they were never attainable;
but the others, yes, the others, because we allowed them to escape us
like wild birds, which, though already in our hands, but too listless
to profit by opportunity, we failed to grasp at the right moment. But
no matter. Once every year we have "free night." And yonder tongues of
fire shooting up towards the heavens--do you know what they are? They
are the spirits of our dead and perished wishes! That is the red
plumage of our birds of paradise we might have petted and nursed
through our entire lives, but have escaped us! That is the old chaos,
the heathenism within us; and though we be happy in sunshine and
according to law, to-night is St. John's night. To its ancient pagan
fires I empty this glass. To-night they shall burn and flame up
high--high--and again high! Will no one drink to my toast?

                                                        [_Pause_.]

                                 Marie.

[_Trembling_.] I will!

           [_They look into each other's eyes and clink glasses_.]

                               Gertrude.

[_Hesitatingly_.] I, too, George!

                                George.

[_Stroking her hair sadly, patronizing_.] Yes, yes; you, too.

                                Brauer.

[_Suddenly bursting out_.] You--you idiots! What do you know about it,
anyway? I--I didn't understand it myself, but I have a presentiment
there is something sinful about it all!

                                Pastor.

My dear Mr. von Harten, above all your heathenism watches our good old
God, our Father, and therefore I fearlessly drink to your toast.

                                Brauer.

Well, well, I'll not be the only exception. [_Drinks also. A glow much
nearer, behind the trees. Louder yelling and laughter_.] Well, what is
it now?

                                 Paul.

They are dangerously near the sheds now.

                                Brauer.

Didn't I tell you to take the proper precautions?

                                 Paul.

I did. They had only three tar-barrels early this evening. Where they
got the fourth from, I don't know.

                                Brauer.

I'll wager they found the barrel of axle-grease! Why didn't you lock it
up?

                                 Paul.

You know yourself, on this day no lock or key is of any avail.

                                Brauer.

Don't talk nonsense, but see what's to be done. I will be there myself,
presently. Be quick! [Paul _exits_.] I can't depend on anybody these
days! Where is my hat? [Marie _gets it_.]

                               Gertrude.

Can't we go, too, papa?

                                Brauer.

Will you come, wife?

                              Mrs. Brauer.

Yes, gladly, but stop scolding. There isn't a breath of air stirring,
and therefore no danger.

                                Brauer.

Come along, Pastor!

              [_Exit_ Brauer, George, Gertrude _and_ Mrs. Brauer.]

                                Pastor.

Won't you accompany us, Miss Marie?

                                 Marie.

No, thank you, Pastor!

                                Pastor.

Then may I remain with you for a while?

                            Several Voices.

[_Outside, calling_.] Pastor, Pastor!

                                Pastor.

[_Speaks through door_.] I will be with you in a moment! [_To_ Marie.]
Well, may I!

                                 Marie.

Why, certainly, if it gives you pleasure!

                                Pastor.

Pleasure is hardly the proper word. I wanted to thank you for insisting
upon my writing the bridal-poem. It has been a work of pleasure, I
assure you. Do you like it?

                                 Marie.

It is very nice. Pastor!

                                Pastor.

Have you memorized it already?

                                 Marie.

I think so!

                                Pastor.

Then would you mind reciting it for me? Come, I will assist you: "The
flowers, the beautiful blossoms"---- Well?---- "are a maiden's----"

                                 Marie.

No, Pastor!

                                Pastor.

You are acting so strangely to-day! You are so shy--so----

                                 Marie.

The St. John's night oppresses me!

                                Pastor.

That will soon be over.

                                 Marie.

Would that it were over now!

                                Pastor.

Perhaps the thought of traveling alone at night has something to do
with it?

                                 Marie.

Oh! [_Recovering herself--lightly_.] You are right, Pastor; but it
can't be helped!

                                Pastor.

Shall I come with you? Oh, I'll find something to be done in the city.
I won't even have to ask permission. Anyway, I am longing for a glimpse
of the good old town. I will inform the old pastor--I don't think he
has retired as yet----

                                 Marie.

Then please tell him---- I usually visit him myself every day, but now,
just before the wedding, it's impossible for me to call. Will you
please tell him that? I am so fond of him! Tell him that, and in
thought I kiss his hand.

                                Pastor.

Certainly. And may I accompany you!

                                 Marie.

No, thank you. Pastor!

                                Pastor.

Now let us speak openly, Miss Marie. I have been watching you all the
evening. You appear to me--what shall I call it--like a mouse before a
cat! You need a protector; some one in whom you can confide, some
one----

                                 Marie.

And so you would like to be my father confessor! Eh, Pastor?

                                Pastor.

You know very well we do not have that institution in the Protestant
Church, though at times it might prove a blessing----

                                 Marie.

[_Mischievously_.] And then again it might not?

                                Pastor.

You are quite right. We should all rely more upon ourselves----

                                 Marie.

[_With emphasis_.] I do that, Pastor, I do!

                                Pastor.

Yes, my dear Marie--pardon me, I should not have said that--and yet I
must speak frankly with you; you seem to have a fear--a dread----

                                 Marie.

Of the cat?

                                Pastor.

I wish I knew!!!

                                 Marie.

But supposing I were the cat, who would then be the mouse?

                                Pastor.

That would be sinful and wicked in you!!!

                                 Marie.

But one cannot be the cat and the mouse at the same time?

                                Pastor.

Yes, one can! But he who does, plays with his own destruction!

                                 Marie.

And if one destroys one's self, who cares?

                                Pastor.

You should not talk like that, Miss Marie.

                                 Marie.

Oh, it is all nonsense, all nonsense, for to-night is St. John's night.
Do you see that fire yonder. Pastor? They had to put it out! But there,
on the hill--look, there, there! How beautiful! How wild!

                                Pastor.

Yes, and when you look closely, it is nothing more than a mass of dirty
lumber.

                                 Marie.

For shame, Pastor!

                                Pastor.

Like everything that blazes, except the sun----

                                 Marie.

You should not have said that, Pastor--you should not. I don't want it!
I will not have you slander my St. John's fires! I want to enjoy it
once--only once--then nevermore!!!

                                Pastor.

[_Disturbed_.] My dear Miss Marie, I do not understand the reason for
your agitation, and I will not question you! But of your struggles--you
shall know that you have a friend near you, on whom you can rely, now
and for all time to come. Marie, I don't know how to express myself;
but I desire to shield and protect you all your life--I will worship
you----

                                 Marie.

Pastor, do you know who and what I am?

                                Pastor.

I do!

                                 Marie.

And who my mother is?

                                Pastor.

I know all!

                                 Marie.

Pastor, how am I to understand this?

                                Pastor.

Marie, I know I should not have spoken, at least not now. I should have
waited--it was stupid of me, I know; but I have such a fear--a fear for
you. You are going to the city to-night and I don't know what may
happen! But you shall know before you go, where you belong and that
your future is assured!

                                 Marie.

[_With a sigh of relief--almost a sob_.] Ah--ah--ah----!

                                Pastor.

Marie, I do not want an answer now. Besides, I must first notify
my father. Though he is but a simple farmer, he shall not be
slighted-- Marie----

                                 Marie.

[_Shrinking--dully_.] Yes, that is--perhaps--what I need--ah! [_Sinks
in chair_.]

                                Pastor.

Why, what is the matter? Shall I get you a glass of water? Or would you
prefer wine?

                                 Marie.

[_With an effort_.] Wine--wine--there--in the bowl! [_He helps her--she
drinks_.] Thank you! [_Stirred_.] No one has ever waited on me before!

                                Pastor.

I will carry you upon my hands

                                 Marie.

Very well, Pastor; but no one must know before the wedding!

                                Pastor.

Perhaps on the wedding day--at the wedding feast? Papa might make the
announcement; that would be such a fitting occasion!

                                 Marie.

No, no! I will have to much to do then.

                                Pastor.

Then, when the happy pair have gone?

                                 Marie.

[_With sudden, impulsive decision_.] Yes, when they have gone!

                                Pastor.

[_Takes her hand_.] Thank you. Miss Marie.

                                     [_Voices are heard outside_.]

                                 Marie.

Sh--[_Withdrawing her hand_.]

                               Gertrude.

[_Enters_.] Ah, here you are, Pastor; we have been looking for you
everywhere!

                                Pastor.

I am coming now, Miss Gertrude.

                               Gertrude.

It's too late, Pastor, they are all returning!

                                Pastor.

Impossible! Well, well, how the time passes, and one hardly knows how!

                                                  [_Exit_ Pastor.]

                                 Marie.

[_Embracing_ Gertrude.] Will you forgive me, darling?

                               Gertrude.

[_Timidly_.] I have nothing to forgive!

                                 Marie.

Do not say that! I have done everything--everything--you must----

                                                    [_Enter all_.]

                                 Brauer.

Well, my dear Pastor, time stands still for no one; so you had better
stop excusing yourself and empty your glass. 'Twill all come out right
in the end.

                                Pastor.

I think I had better go now; for here every one is making fun of me.

                                Brauer.

Pastor, I need hardly tell you, that you are always welcome in this
house.

                                Pastor.

I am sure of it, Mr. Brauer! If I did not think so, I would not take
that matter so lightly----

                                Brauer.

[_Jokingly threatens him with finger_.] Pastor----

                                Pastor.

[_With a happy glance at_ Marie.] Good-night. [_Shakes hands with
all_.]

                                Brauer.

Good-night!

                                Pastor.

Good-night, Miss Marie!

                                 Marie.

[_Shaking his hand_.] Good-night, Pastor!

    [George, _with a questioning glance, advances a step or two_.]

                                Brauer.

George, see the Pastor to the gate!

                                George.

[_As though awakening_.] Yes, uncle.

                                                    [_Both exit_.]

                              Mrs. Brauer.

Well, Henry, everything has quieted down!

                                Brauer.

It's about time, too! Why, its eleven o'clock! Come, let's to bed.

                               Gertrude.

Good-night, papa!

                                Brauer.

[_Affectionately_.] Good-night, my pet!

                                 Marie.

Good-night!

                                Brauer.

By the bye--when will you be back?

                                 Marie.

To-morrow, about ten, papa!

                                Brauer.

Now be careful; no unnecessary exertions--understand? The day of the
wedding will be hard enough on all of us.

                                 Marie.

Yes, papa dear! [_Kisses him_.]

                                George.

[_Enters at this moment_.] We have still an hour and a quarter till
train time. I will wait for you here, Marie.

                              Mrs. Brauer.

You might help each other pass away the time.

                               Gertrude.

I want to sit up, too.

                                Brauer.

Tut, tut, ray pet; you go to bed, you need the rest.

                               Gertrude.

[_Whiningly_.] Well then, good-night.

                                 Marie.


[_In silent fear_.] I can't stay here---- Mama, I want to ask you about
something----

                                George.

Then you will come down in time for the train?

                                 Marie.

Yes, in time for the train.

                              Mrs. Brauer.

Good-night, George.

                                George.

Good-night, auntie!

                       [_Exit_ Mrs. Brauer, Gertrude _and_ Marie.]

                                Brauer.

You know where my cigars are?

                                George.

Yes!

                                Brauer.

And if you need anything to keep you awake--I have left the key----

                                George.

[_In monosyllables_.] Thank you!

                                Brauer.

Well, what in----

                                George.

What's the matter---- Oh, my dear uncle, if I have failed to pay you
the necessary respect, I beg your pardon.

                                Brauer.

Respect? Oh, damn you and your respect!

                                George.

Uncle----

                                Brauer.

See here, perhaps I did wrong?

                                George.

You--wrong? How?

                                Brauer.

Have you forgotten what passed between us yesterday?

                                George.

My dear uncle, that seems to me so far, far away!

                                Brauer.

It strikes me you are going at a pretty fast gait!

                                George.

At any rate, uncle, do not worry about it. It will all come out right
in the end. [_As he is listening towards the door, gives a sudden
start_.]

                                Brauer.

What's the matter?

                                George.

I thought I heard some one----

                                Brauer.

Some one of the family perhaps, upstairs. Very well, then all is well,
my boy! Good-night, my son.

                                George.

Good-night, uncle!
                               [Brauer _exits, shaking his head_.]

                                George.

[_Sits at table--tries to read--listens, goes to door C.--calls out
softly into the garden_.] Who is there? [_Still softer_.] Is that you,
Marie?

                               Gertrude.

[_Whining outside_.] It's only me!

                                George.

[_Surprised_.] Gertrude, what do you want?

                               Gertrude.

[Gertrude _enters in nightgown and flowing hair_.] I am so uneasy,
George dear; I just wanted to look at you once more before going to
sleep.

                                George.

But, little one, if papa should see you like this---- Quick, go back to
your room.

                               Gertrude.

I cannot, my heart is so heavy.

                                George.

How so, dear?

                               Gertrude.

George, I have been thinking; I really am not good enough to be your
wife.

                                George.

Wha--what nonsense----

                               Gertrude.

I am too silly--oh, yes; I never know what to say to you! I am so
stupid.

                                George.

Why, my child--darling--pet----

                               Gertrude.

A while ago, out in the garden, and the moon shining so brightly, you
walked by my side in deep silence----

                                George.

Why, mama was with us----

                               Gertrude.

George, it is yet time. If you love some one else----

                                George.

In heaven's name, child, have you ever mentioned this to any one?

                               Gertrude.

Only to papa; he was very angry and scolded me dreadfully.

                                George.

H'm! Now listen to me, my pet----

                               Gertrude.

Rather than make you unhappy, I would jump into the river----

                                George.

In the first place, your presence here in this condition is decidedly
improper----

                               Gertrude.

But we are to be married in three days----

                                George.

So much more reason. [_Stroking her hair_.] What beautiful hair
you have, dear!

                               Gertrude.

[_Happily_.] Do you like it?

                                George.

And in the second place, I will have none other than you. We will
love each other very much. At first you will be my playmate--and
then--later, perhaps--my real mate. Are you satisfied?

                               Gertrude.

Yes, dear!

                                George.

And now, you must go to bed!

                               Gertrude.

Then I will wrap myself in my hair--and I will dream of you and what
you said--that it is beautiful--and so I will fall asleep. Good-night,
George dear!

                                George.

[_Kisses her on the forehead_.] Good-night!

      [_He gloomily takes position at table with a sigh when_ Gertrude
      _exits, covering his face with his hands_. Marie _enters
      softly_.]

                                George.

Marie, you have come----

                                 Marie.

It is early yet, is it not?

                                George.

We have a full hour more. Have they all gone to bed?

                                 Marie.

I think so. All the lights are out.

                                George.

Come, sit here----

                                 Marie.

I--I--I think I will go back upstairs!

                                George.

No, no; here is something to read! You see, I'm reading myself.

                                 Marie.

Very well. [_Sits_.] But, George, I would really prefer to go to the
depot alone.

                                George.

[_Softly_.] Marie! [_She shuts her eyes_.] Are you tired? [_She shakes
her head_.] One whole hour I will have you all to myself!

                                 Marie.

George----

                                George.

Marie!!!

                                 Marie.

The fires have all gone out, I suppose?

                                George.

Ah, yes; a small pyre of wood--it is soon burned down!

                                 Marie.

And then it's as dark as ever!!! But, George, how beautifully you spoke
this evening! I have never heard anything like it before.

                                George.

You were the only one who understood me.

                                 Marie.

No wonder! It was as though I spoke the words myself--that is, I don't
mean to say----

                                George.

What, dear?

                                 Marie.

Oh, you know!

                                George.

But I don't know!

                                 Marie.

[_After a pause_.] George, I have something to confess to you. In fact,
that is why I came down here so soon. You shall know it, you alone. I
have this day given my hand----

                                George.

[_With a start_.] _Marie!!!!_

                                 Marie.

[_Astonished_.] Well?

                                George.

To whom?

                                 Marie.

Why, to the pastor! Who else could it be? There is no one else!

                                George.

[_Reproachfully_.] Why did you do that? Why did you?

                                 Marie.

I have my whole life before me, and the fires [_pointing to fields and
to heart_] will not burn forever----

                                George.

[_Bitterly_.] You should not have done it--you--it is a----

                                 Marie.

Sh--not so loud!

                                George.

But you do not love him at all!!!!

                                 Marie.

How do you know?

                                George.

[_Bitterly_,] How? Of course, how should I? I don't know! Pardon me!
Well, I congratulate you!

                                 Marie.

[_Quietly_.] Thank you!

                                George.

But why am I the first one to be taken into your confidence? Why not
uncle? We two have not been so intimate as----

                                 Marie.

No, we two have not been very intimate--I only thought----

                                George.


So, then, we have both our burden; and we soon will have to part.
Therefore we can now safely speak of the past. My manuscript you read!
You even went so far as to perjure yourself on account of it. Oh, you
don't mind a little thing like that! I wish I were the same! You know
the subject of my verses, and we must now understand each other fully.
Now, tell me openly, why, why did you treat me so unkindly, to say
nothing worse, in former days?

                                 Marie.

Did I, George?

                                George.

'Tis hardly necessary to remind you of all the indignities you heaped
upon me. It almost seemed to me as if you purposely intended to drive
me mad. Do you remember the day when I followed you into the cellar,
and you turned and ran out and locked the door, and compelled me to
remain there all night?

                                 Marie.

[_Smiling_.] Yes, I remember!

                                George.

Why did you do that?

                                 Marie.

That is very simple. You are Count von Harten--and I?--I am but a poor
Lithuanian foundling--aye, worse than that. If you follow such a one
into the cellar, she knows, or at least thinks she knows, your purpose.

                                George.

So, that was the reason! And at the same time you went under your
manzanillo-tree to die?

                                 Marie.

[_Nods_.]

                                George.

And did you never realize the real state of things? Gertrude was then
still a child--and because I could not win you, I took her. Did that
thought never occur to you?

                                 Marie.

How could I ever dare to think that?

                                George.

But later?

                                 Marie.

The day before yesterday, when I read your book, I felt it for the
first time.

                                George.

And now, it is too late----

                                 Marie.

Yes, now it is too late! Had I felt then as I do now, I would not have
resisted you----

                                George.

Marie, do you know what you are saying?

                                 Marie.

[_Breaking out_.] Oh I don't care, I don't care! It is my fate. You
must rule and govern--and I--I must serve; and in the end--we both must
die----

                                George.

Marie, you should be loved, you must be loved--beyond all senses--loved
beyond all measure!

                                 Marie.

[_Pointing towards R_.] He loves me!

                                George.

He?--Bah!!!

                                 Marie.

Don't be angry, George dear; you don't dare love me yourself. You can
never be anything to me!

                                George.

No, never; for this house must be kept clean. No, no, this house must
not be soiled. We would both suffocate in our shame. But we can think
of what might have been; that is not sin, is it?

                                 Marie.

What were your words? "They are the wild birds of paradise, that have
escaped us." That was it, was it not? How beautiful!

                                George.

I don't remember!

                                 Marie.

But I am not a wild bird, George; I am tame--so tame----

                                George.

You are tame?

                                 Marie.

For you, George dear, only for you!!!

                                George.

_Marie_, my love! [_Strokes her hair affectionally, then moves away_.]
No, no, we must be strong! Only a few minutes ago, Gertrude came softly
down those stairs; if she should come again--my God----!

                                 Marie.

What did she want?

                                George.

You can imagine----

                                 Marie.

The poor thing! But you will love her?

                                George.

As well as possible! But then I must not think of you.

                                 Marie.

But you must not think of me--and I will try and not think of you!

                                George.

Never, Marie?

                                 Marie.

Only occasionally--on holidays----

                                George.

Only then?

                                 Marie.

And on St. John's eve----

                                George.

When the fires are burning?

                                 Marie.

Yes, and when the fires are out, then I shall cry----

                                George.

Marie!!!!

                                 Marie.

No, no, George, sit still--I will sit here. Some one might be in the
garden, after all.

                                George.

They are all sound asleep!

                                 Marie.

Even so! We must be brave; not for mine--but for your sake, George.

                                George.

Why did you say that? What do you think of me?

                                 Marie.

I think you are hard-hearted.

                                George.

And yet you love me?

                                 Marie.

Yes, I love you, for your own sake. For you have had to struggle and
fight--and that is what made you what you are. I have also fought and
struggled; but I have lost faith in myself--lost faith in everything.
If you only knew!! Sometimes I am afraid of myself--sometimes I would
commit murder, so restless and without peace I am.

                                George.

With me you would have found peace. We would have worked together and
planned through half the nights--and you know how ambitious I am.

                                 Marie.

And so am I, for you! You should be the first and greatest. They all
shall bow before you--I myself will kneel before you and say to you:
"You love to rule and command? Now rule--now command!!!!!!"

      [_Throws herself before him--her arms around his knees, looking
      up_.]

                                George.

Marie, in heaven's name rise! If any one should see you so----

                                 Marie.

Let them see me----

                                George.

_Marie!!_

                                 Marie.

[_Rising_.] You are right. It was low in me. But he who originates
where I do, is low--so low----

                                George.

Don't think of it, Marie! Think of this house and all the love it has
given you!

                                 Marie.

How quiet everything is--not a sound to be heard--as silent as the
grave----

                                George.

Then be content, for they have buried us together!

                                 Marie.

If they only had----!

                                George.

And see the pale moon--how it throws its silvery rays over the
garden--and yonder is your manzanillo-tree.

                                 Marie.

Yes, yes, do you see it?

                                George.

And its white, trembling leaves; see, see, each one seems alive--though
not a breath of air is stirring. Come, let us go to it.

                                 Marie.

[_Cowering_.] No, no, I think it is time--we must----

                                George.

Sh!--Sh!----

                                 Marie.

What is it?

                                George.

There--something moved. It must be Gertrude. [_Goes to door C. and
calls_.] "Gertrude!!!"

                                                  [_Short pause_.]

                                 Marie.

You must have been mistaken!

                                George.

No, no; I saw a shadow. "Gertrude!" Remain here, I'll go see! [_Exit
into garden_.]

                                 Marie.

Oh, I'm so afraid, George--so afraid----!

                                                        [_Pause_.]

            [George _returns, pale and agitated, trying to control
             himself_.]

                                 Marie.

Who was it? Who was it?

                                George.

Oh, no one--no one----

                                 Marie.

Yes, there was--I can see it in your face!! Was it Gertrude?

                                George.

No.

                                 Marie.

Then it was papa?

                                George.

No, no.

                                 Marie.

George, you are as pale as death; What has happened? Tell me!

                                George.

Nothing, nothing! There was a stranger in the garden--I sent him away.

                                 Marie.

What stranger?

                                George.

[_Pained_.] Do not ask me!

                                 Marie.

[_Dully_.] Oh, I know--I know! It was--my mother----

                                George.

Well, since you have said it----

                                 Marie.

What did she want? But why do I ask? [_Covers her face with her
hands_.] Oh, my God--my God!!!!

                                George.

_Marie_!

                                 Marie.

[_Suddenly_.] Close the blinds--I have a fear--tight--so!! Now put up
the bars--so--and here, so--so----

                                George.

[_Embracing her_.] _Marie_! my darling!!!!

                                 Marie.

Hold me tight!!!

                                George.

Like this?

                                 Marie.

Yes, like that! [_She moves close to him_.] Here I want to sit
still----

                                George.

[_Looks at watch_.] If we only have time to catch that train---- [_The
whistle of a locomotive is heard in the distance. He starts_.] Did you
hear that?

                                 Marie.

[_Smilingly_.] Yes!

                                George.

What was it?

                                 Marie.

It was the train!

                                George.

Can you hear it this far?

                                 Marie.

At night you can!

                                George.

               [_Sinks into chair L. of table, back to audience_.]

My God! what shall we do now?

                                 Marie.


[_Softly_.] I will tell you what we will do! We will sit still
here--quietly--till the next train--till four o'clock!!!!

      [_Throws herself upon George, passionately kissing him_.]

                                George.

Marie! My love, my all! [_Kisses her_.]

                                 Marie.

Kiss me again! Now, then, do you understand me? I am my own master, and
care not for myself---- To-night is St. John's night!!!!!!!

                                George.

And the fires are burning low----

                                 Marie.

No, no; let them burn----

                                George.

Yes, yes; let them burn--they shall burn!!!!!

                                     [Marie _disengages herself_.]

                                 Marie.

Kiss me no more--let me kiss you--I will take all upon myself--I will
take all the consequences--_my mother is a thief, and so am I!
George_--

           [_Throws herself into his arms with complete abandon_.]

                                          [_Lights out. Curtain_.]



                         END OF THE THIRD ACT.




                                ACT FOUR

_Same setting. Morning. Centre table is decorated with flowers_.
Brauer, George _and_ Gertrude _are on veranda at rise of curtain. In
open door, C._, Mrs. Brauer. _All listening to quartet, singing, "This
is the day of our Lord" by Kreutzer. As curtain rises_, Katie _enters,
L., listens also, and dries her eyes. At the end of the serenade_,
Brauer _starts to make an address, and with_ George _and_ Gertrude
_leaves the veranda_.


                                 Katie.

Mrs. Brauer, I would like to speak to you a moment.

                              Mrs. Brauer.

[_Wiping her eyes_.] What is it, Katie?

                                 Katie.

[_Sniveling_.] Oh, I'm so happy----

                [_Church bells are heard softly in the distance_.]

                              Mrs. Brauer.

There go the church bells. Have you put plenty of wine and luncheon in
the arbor?

                                 Katie.

Yes, ma'am! Miss Marie and I have prepared a lot!

                              Mrs. Brauer.

What did you want to see me about?

                                 Katie.

I wanted to ask you about the roast; shall we put it in the oven now,
and just warm it up for dinner? Miss Marie thinks----

                              Mrs. Brauer.

Never mind! I'll be down in the kitchen in a moment!

                                 Katie.

And another thing, Mrs. Brauer; won't you please try and get Miss Marie
to take a little rest? She has been hard at work since two o'clock this
morning, and all day yesterday she was in the city. She can't stand it.

                              Mrs. Brauer.

Oh, on a day like this, we must all put our shoulders to the wheel.

                                 Katie.

Ah, Mrs. Brauer, you and I are old, and not much good for anything but
work; but we must spare our young people. Why, at times she almost
gives out.

                              Mrs. Brauer.

Well, I will come and see for myself.

                                 Katie.

Thank you!!! Oh, such a day!!! I am so happy---- [_Exit both L_.]

                                Brauer.

[_Enters with_ George _and_ Gertrude.] Thank goodness, that's over. Let
me see: first it was the old soldiers, then the Turners, and now
the Singing Society---- But do you know, I am so sick of all this
wine--give me a brandy.

                               Gertrude.

[_Gets drink from sideboard_.] Yes, papa!

                                Brauer.

[_To_ George.] And what's the matter with you?

                                George.

[_With a sigh_.] Nothing!

                                Brauer.

[_Imitating him_.] Nothing!!! I can't quite make you out---- Here, have
a drink?

                                George.

No, thank you!

                                Brauer.

Well, then, don't! Your health, my pet!

                               Gertrude.

Drink hearty, papa!

                                Brauer.

[_Rises_.] The carriage will arrive here sharply at ten! Understand?

                                George.

Yes!

                                Brauer.

And your friend from the city--we will find him at the station?

                                George.

Yes; he arrives quarter to ten.

                                Brauer.

For we must have two witnesses.--Do you know what I would like?
[_Tapping him on breast_.] I would like to be able to look in there.

                               Gertrude.

Oh, let him alone, papa! He is now my George. If I am satisfied with
him----

                                Brauer.

You are right! He who gets my child can laugh--but he also shall laugh.
Understand?                                            [_Exit R_.]

                               Gertrude.

Never mind him, George dear. You need not laugh if you don't want to.
Not on my account. [_Bells_.] Do you hear, George? The church bells,
ringing softly, singing, like human voices!!!! That is for you and me!!

                                George.

Why for us?

                               Gertrude.

It is the old pastor's desire; half an hour this morning, and then
again this afternoon, when we exchange rings. Do you know, George, mama
says a bride's dream the night before her wedding is surely an omen.
Do you believe that?

                                George.

[_Preoccupied_.] Yes.

                               Gertrude.

I dreamed last night of a large, yellow wheat-field, in which a poor
little rabbit had hidden itself; and high above, in the air, I saw a
large hawk. Then it appeared to me that I was the little rabbit, and in
fear and dread I called out "George! George!" when suddenly it shot
down upon me!--just think----

                                George.

And then?

                               Gertrude.

Then I awoke. The cold perspiration stood thickly upon my brow---- Oh,
George dear, you will protect me? You won't let any one hurt me, will
you? For I am only a poor little rabbit, after all----

                                George.

[_Staring before him_.] My God!

                               Gertrude.

George, I wanted to ask you something.

                                George.

Well?

                               Gertrude.

You don't love some one else, do you?

                                George.

[_Disturbed_.] But, my child----

                               Gertrude.

Well, you know that if a bride cannot laugh on her wedding day, she
loves another----

                                George.

Why, nonsense----

                               Gertrude.

[_Unshaken_.] Oh, yes, George; I read it myself. And even if you do,
George, I feel so--my love for you is so great, it could move
mountains. I love you so dearly---- She will surely learn to forget
you, I will love you so much.

                                George.

But, my pet----

                               Gertrude.

No, no, George. You see, I don't blame you so much. How could I? For
what am I, compared to other women?--George, does she love you so very
much?

                                George.

Who?

                               Gertrude.


Oh, you know. But don't worry, George dear; she will forget you in
time! Don't you remember Robert, our neighbor's son? He threatened to
kill himself if I didn't marry him, and he has already forgotten me!
And to-day, when we stand at the altar, at the Doxology and the
exchange of rings, I will nudge you softly, and then we will both pray
to our good Father in heaven to make it easy for her; for no one shall
be unhappy on this day! Why, George, you are crying!!!!

                                George.

Crying--I?

                               Gertrude.

Why, yes! Here are two large tears running down your cheek. [_Wipes his
eyes with her handkerchief_.] So there----

                                George.

Tell me, my pet; and if we should be parted, after all?

                               Gertrude.

How could that be possible?

                                George.

If I should die--or----

                               Gertrude.

[_Embracing him_.] No, no! Don't say that! Don't say that!!!

                        [Marie _appears in door, seeing embrace_.]

                                George.

[_Startled_.] Some one is here----

                               Gertrude.

It is only Marie.

                                 Marie.

[_Pointedly_.] You seem to be particularly affectionate to-day.

                               Gertrude.

[_Miffed_.] We always love each other. Oh, perhaps that doesn't please
you----

                                 Marie.

It is nothing to me!

                               Gertrude.

[_Half Jesting_.] Besides, what do you want here? Isn't there anything
to do in the kitchen?

                                 Marie.

[_Stung, but controlling herself_.] Mama has sent me----

                               Gertrude.

Yes, yes, dear; you are just in time to dress my hair. Have you
hairpins?

                                 Marie.

[_Shaking her head_.] I will get some. [_Reels_.]

                               Gertrude.

[_Affectionately_.] What's the matter, dear? Oh, you must be tired!

                                 Marie.

I am not tired.

                               Gertrude.

Yes, yes, you are. Now you sit down here. I will fetch them myself.
[_Quick exit_.]

                                 Marie.

[_Full of fear_.] Gertrude!!!

                                George.

I must speak with you!

                                 Marie.

Speak; I am listening.

                                George.

Why this tone? Does it perhaps mean that between us all is over?

                                 Marie.

If it is or is not, it matters little.

                                George.

Am I, then, to understand----

                                 Marie.

My God! Have you not Gertrude? But now I saw her in your arms! What do
you want with me?

                                George.

I must speak with you----

                                 Marie.

Not now----

                               Gertrude.

[_Re-enters_.] Here are the hairpins. [Marie _takes them_.] I have also
brought my dressing-sacque and combs. Now we will excuse you for a
little while, George dear. You can give your judgment later.

                                George.

[_With a glance at_ Marie.] May I not remain?

                               Gertrude.

No, no. You would criticise and find fault, and embarrass Marie, and
me, too. Now be good, George, and go into the garden. [George _exits_.]

                                 Marie.

[_Holding sacque_.] Will you put this on?

                               Gertrude.

No, I will put it around me.

                                 Marie.

As you please. How do you want your hair dressed, high or low?

                               Gertrude.

But Marie, we had decided upon that! Have you forgotten?

                                 Marie.

Oh, pardon me--I--of course we had!

                               Gertrude.

Then give me a kiss!

      [Marie _suddenly takes her head in both hands and stares at her_.]

                               Gertrude.

[_Frightened_.] Why do you look at me so strangely?

                                 Marie.

[_Embraces her fiercely_] My darling!!!!

                               Gertrude.

Oh, you hurt me!

                                 Marie.

Perhaps you hurt me, too----

                               Gertrude.

I? How so?

                                 Marie.

[_Has begun to comb_.] How can you ask? You are about to be
married--and--and--I--I am jealous of you!

                               Gertrude.

Just wait, Marie, dear. [_Sings_.]

"In a year, in a year, when the nightingale comes----"

                                 Marie.

[_Intensely_.] When the nightingale comes?

                               Gertrude.

You will be Pastor's wife. [_Laughs_.]

      [Marie, _with one braid in her hand, bending back, laughing
        loudly and forced_.]

                               Gertrude.

[_In pain_.] Oh, you are pulling my hair----

                                 Marie.

Any one as happy as you should be able to bear a little pain. There! I
will braid it into your hair--for you are happy, are you not? Very
happy?

                               Gertrude.

Yes! I am--that is--I would like to be--but George--he is so sad.

                                 Marie.

_George_?

                               Gertrude.

Yes!

                                 Marie.

[_Lurkingly_.] Perhaps you were right! Perhaps he _does_ love another!

                               Gertrude.

[_Softly groaning_.] Oh, why did you say that?

                                 Marie.

Because---- No, no--how could he? That was wicked in me, wasn't it? How
could he think of another, when he looks at you?

                               Gertrude.

No, no, Marie, you are right! I told him so myself!

                                 Marie.

[_Slowly and marked_.] And what did he say?

                               Gertrude.

He?--He said nothing! And then--he cried----

                                 Marie.

[_Triumphantly_.] He cried? George cried? Have you ever seen him do
that before?

                               Gertrude.

No, never!

                                 Marie.

[_To herself_.] He cried----

                               Gertrude.

And then he said: "What if we should be parted, after all?"

                                 Marie.

If who should be parted--you and he?

                               Gertrude.

Yes--if he should die----

                                 Marie.

If he--oh, that is what he meant! Oh, well, he just wanted to say
something. [_With forced lightness_.]

                               Gertrude.

Of course he did. But what about the other woman? Oh, I didn't let him
see that I cared--and for the time I didn't care, really; but now, when
I think of it! My God!--if it were really so! If I only knew!!!!!!!

                                 Marie.

Of course, he would not tell you!

                               Gertrude.

Do you think he would tell any one else?

                                 Marie.

Yes, sooner than tell you.

                               Gertrude.

Yes! I suppose so!

                                 Marie.

Shall I ask him?

                               Gertrude.

Oh, if you would do that for me----

                                 Marie.

There now, it is done. Here is the comb and the rest of the hairpins.
Now go!

                               Gertrude.

And do you really think he would tell you?

                                 Marie.

I am sure he will.

                               Gertrude.

Oh, Marie, how grateful I shall be to you----

                                 Marie.

[_Pushes her out of the door_.] Go now, go! [_Stretches herself_.]
Ah--ah--ah---- [_Calls softly_.] George! [_There is a knock at the
door_.] Come in!

                                 Paul.

[_Enters_.] Pardon me, Miss Marie; is Mr. Brauer in?

                                 Marie.

No, Mr. Paul!

                                 Paul.

The assistant pastor would like to speak to him--but here he is,
himself.

                                Pastor.

[_Enters_.] Good-morning, Miss Marie!

                                 Marie.

[_Offers her hand hesitatingly_.] Good-morning!

                                Pastor.

I will wait here, Mr. Paul!

                                 Paul.

Then, Miss Marie, will you please give me the key to the cellar? I want
to put the beer on the ice.

                                 Marie.

[_Gets key from keyboard_.] Here it is.

                                 Paul.

Thank you!

                                                         [_Exit_.]

                                                        [_Pause_.]

                                Pastor.

And have you nothing to say to me?

                                 Marie.

What shall I say, Pastor?

                                Pastor.

Are you not happy this day?

                                 Marie.

[_Hard_.] No!

                                Pastor.

Not even on account of our betrothal?

                                 Marie.

We will have no betrothal, Pastor!

                                Pastor.

What are you saying?

                                 Marie.

I shall leave this place----

                                Pastor.

_You_----

                                 Marie.

To-day, I leave this house!

                                Pastor.

Pardon me, if I have forced my attentions upon you----

                                 Marie.

No! You have not!

                                Pastor.

My attentions were honorable, I assure you----

                                 Marie.

Thank you, Pastor, I know that; but----

                                Pastor.

Then it is not on my account you are leaving?

                                 Marie.

Certainly not!

                                Pastor.

Does any one here know of your intention?

                                 Marie.

No one!

                                Pastor.

Miss Marie, I am still a young man; if I should mention such a word as
"life's happiness," it would, perhaps, sound absurd. Therefore, I will
not speak of myself. My fate is in my own hands. But if you realize
this moment what you owe to this house--and I say this not for mine,
nor for their sake, I say it for yours and yours alone; though I am but
a poor mortal--it pains me--but be that as it may--Marie, if you cause
a discord in this house, the blame will rest upon yourself.

                                 Marie.

Perhaps!

                                Pastor.

Pardon me--I will not question you. I wish to know nothing; that, in
the end, is always the best. Did I not love you as well as myself, I
would not speak another word; but as matters stand now, I will say
one--aye, one more word--I would not have dared to say otherwise. The
greatest, the highest thing one possesses in this world, is his life's
_melody_--a certain strain that ever vibrates, that his soul forever
sings--waking or dreaming, loudly or softly, internally or externally.
Others may say: "His temperament or his character is so, or so." He
only smiles, for he knows his melody and he knows it alone. You see,
Miss Marie, my life's happiness you have destroyed, but my life's
melody you can not take from me. That is pure and will always remain
so. And now I say to you, Miss Marie, if you fill this house, where you
have obtained everything you possess--honor, bread, and love--if you
fill this house with sorrow--if you dare to sin against your father and
your mother----

                                 Marie.

One moment, Pastor. My father and my mother--what do you know about
them? My father I don't know myself, but my mother? Ah yes, I know her
well; and from her I have inherited my life's melody. This melody has a
beautiful text. Do you want to know what it is, Pastor? It is, "_Thou
shalt steal_. Steal everything for thyself--thy life's happiness--thy
love--all--all. Only others will enjoy it in the end." Yes, Pastor, my
mother is a thief. On St. John's eve she came stealthily over yonder
garden hedge; and as my mother, so am I! And now, Pastor, ask me no
more; I need all my senses, for to-day my entire happiness is at stake!
There--now you know all!

                                Pastor.

Yes, now I know! Farewell, Miss Marie. I will forget this day, perhaps;
_you_--never----

                                                         [_Exit_.]

                                Gertrude.

[_Enters door L._] Was that George, who just now left?

                                 Marie.

Were you at that door, listening?

                               Gertrude.

_Marie_!--For shame!!!!!

                                 Marie.

Now go and dress yourself; I will call George. Go now, go!

                               Gertrude.

And will you come and tell me at once?

                                 Marie.

At once! Yes!! [Gertrude _exits_.] [Marie _calling softly_.] George!
George!

                                George.

[_Enters from veranda_.] Are you alone?

                                 Marie.

[_Nods_.]

                                George.

Have you arranged it so?

                                 Marie.

You wished to speak to me, so I have arranged it!

                                George.

Marie, I wished to tell you. One hour more I am a free man--and my mind
is made up. It is yet time to change our fates. What will you answer
me?

                                 Marie.

Answer you? Why, I don't know what you want.

                                George.

You know it well enough. I want _you_! Do you hear me? _You_, who
belong to me for life--I want you!

                                 Marie.

[_Softly--happily_.] I thought the fires were out--and you had
forgotten me--and now you want me?

                                George.

[_Softly_.] Are you not mine? Are you not my wife in the eyes of
heaven?

                                 Marie.

Yes, but in the eyes of the world it is _Gertrude_!

                                George.

Must it, then, be so?

                                 Marie.

[_Doubtingly_.] Go--go--you love her----

                                George.

Yes, I do love her. How could I help that? Do you not also love her?

                                 Marie.

[_Bitterly_.] Ah, I don't know. A few moments ago, when I saw her in
your arms--and you wept, too--only, because you love her!! Oh, but I
can bear it!! I will bear it like--like--ah!---- But there--that is no
one's affair but mine----

                                George.

So, so, that is no one's affair but yours, eh? You might have invented
a sweeter torture. I meant to remain an honorable man all my life; if
unable--well, there are plenty of bullets left.

                                 Marie.

And do you wish to die?

                                George.

I do not want to, I must!

                                 Marie.

_George_, then take me with you? [_He shakes his head_.] For years I
have carried the wish in my heart--to kill you! Then I would kiss and
love you like mad--and then follow you into eternity----

                                George.

Nonsense, girl, nonsense! Can't you see, how one turns round and round
and round in a circle, till at last to find no other escape than death?

                                 Marie.

I am not afraid to die; though with you, I'd rather live----

                                George.

To live, dear, will require more courage for both of us.

                                 Marie.

How so?

                                George.

Can you ask? Here in this house, to which we owe everything--both you
and I? Where they gave us food, shelter and love? After all that, would
you have the courage to destroy their happiness?

                                 Marie.

The good old pastor used to say: "You must have the courage to do
everything, except to do wrong." I would even have the courage to do
wrong.

                                George.

Shall I put you to the test?

                                 Marie.

If you will give me your hand now and say to me: "Come, we will run
away, through yonder garden gate--just as we are--now, this very
moment"--you shall see how I will run!

                                George.

What?--Secretly--without telling any one? Is that what you mean?

                                 Marie.

Don't you?

                                George.

[_Laughs bitterly_.] No, no!

                                 Marie.

Well, what then?

                                George.

Face to face, like a man. There he stands--I here. If he will give me
back my word, 'tis well. If he refuses [_determined_], 'tis also well.

                                 Marie.

My God! You know his temper! He will kill us--he will kill us both!

                                George.

'Tis death either way----

                                 Marie.

George--think----

                                George.

Oh, I have thought of it for two days and two nights. One is madness
and the other insanity. There is no other way. [_Pained_.] Only the
thought of the child gives me pain----

                                 Marie.


Of course, if your feelings for Gertrude----

                                George.

Then it is your desire? [_She nods assent_.] Very well! So be it! But
remember, it is a question of life and death!--And, therefore, you
yourself must be present.

                                 Marie.

[_In terror_.] I?--I be present when you ask him?

                                George.

What?--You, who wish to become my helpmate and partner in life, and
share all my life's troubles--you would desert me now--desert me in
this hour?--and I very much fear, not the worst in store for us?

                                 Marie.

No, no, George; it's not that--not that! But you know how we have
feared him and have trembled for years--and now I should----

                                George.

If you can't even do that----

                                 Marie.

If necessary--yes I--I will do it.

                                George.

Then--as soon as he returns. [Brauer _is heard breathing heavily_.] Ah,
here he is!

                                Brauer.

[_Enters_.] Why, that is almost an old-time Biblical miracle. Just
think, children, think of it---- But where is Gertrude? Well? Can't you
speak?

                                 Marie.

[_Trembling_.] I think she is dressing!

                                Brauer.

Well, it will interest you also, so listen: I met the assistant pastor
as he came from the house here, and he told me, rather piqued, that our
good old pastor had suddenly risen from his bed and limpingly insisted
upon delivering the wedding discourse himself. Well--what's the matter?
Aren't you glad?

                                George.

H'm----

                                Brauer.

Of course, you are a perfect heathen! But I say, our assistant pastor
must have been terribly put out. He had been preparing for that same
address for days. He looked rather crestfallen; but then, there is no
help for it.

                                George.

Pardon me, uncle; in order to save time, I must ask you for an
interview.

                                Brauer.

What, again? Can't you wait till afternoon?

                                George.

No! Before the ceremony, if you please.

                                Brauer.

[_Startled_.] Wha--oh, I see. I suppose now you will demand more than I
am willing to give? Marie, leave us [Paul _enters_.] Well, what now?

                                 Paul.

[_Gives him a sign_.]

                                Brauer.

There, look at him! Well, have you lost your tongue, man? Why don't you
speak?

                                 Paul.

No, no, Mr. Brauer, I have something to say to you--alone.

                                Brauer.

Then why don't you come nearer?

                                 Paul.

[_Whispering_.] We have just now caught the old woman.

                                Brauer.

[_With a glance at_ Marie.] What? Marie, you may remain and chat with
George for awhile; he is a very interesting young man. [_Softly, to_
Paul.] Where?

                                 Paul.

Down in the cellar; just as I wanted to put the beer on the ice, I
found her there in a dark corner, loaded down with plunder!

                                Brauer.

Is she there now?

                                 Paul.

Yes, struggling like a demon.

                                Brauer.

Undoubtedly this offense will earn her a good long term in prison and
we will be rid of her for a long time! But how to get her out of the
house?

                                 Paul.

Leave that to me Mr. Brauer; I know a way to keep her quiet.

                                Brauer.

Yes, yes, and in the meantime I will make out the papers and we will
hand her over to the Gendarme; that will be the best. Children, I will
be busy for a moment! Wait here until I return.

                                George.

Don't forget, uncle!

                                Brauer.

No, no. I'll be back in a moment. Come, Mr. Paul!

                                                    [_Both exit_.]

                                George.

You are trembling----

                                 Marie.

Am I?

                                George.

Marie dear, I am with you. No one shall harm you!

                                 Marie.

Oh, it is not that.

                                George.

What, then?

                                 Marie.

Oh, I don't know. It has suddenly come over me so---- [_Starts_.] Sh!
He's coming!

      [_Noise. Scuffling of feet and smothered cries are heard_.]

                                George.

What is it?

                                 Marie.

In God's name, be still!

                                 Gypsy.

[_Calling for help_.] Mine daughter! Mine Mamie! My Mamie!!

                                 Marie.

Hear? Hear? _My mother_! They are taking her away--to prison! Sh! Be
still! No, no; don't open the door! Be quiet! Be quiet!

                                 Gypsy.

[_Not as loud as before_.] Oh, mine daughter! My Mamie--my Mamie----!
[_Dying out_.]

                                George.

Will you not go out to her, no matter what she has done?

                                 Marie.

How can I? How can I? I am afraid--afraid----

                                George.

Then shall I go?

                                 Marie.

[_Frightened_.] No, no; don't leave me!! Sh! Be quiet! So, quiet! Now
they have gone! Thank heaven! [_Again wailing, but very distant_.]
Hear? Hear? Let her shriek! Let her call! I cannot help her! I am a
thief, the same as she. I, too, have come to this house, and I have
stolen. But oh, my God, what have I stolen? What have I stolen?

                                George.

Come, Marie, control yourself! Think of what we have before us!

                                 Marie.

Yes, yes--I'll be quiet! What have we before us? No, no; I will not--I
cannot--I----

                                George.

Do you mean to----

                                Brauer.

[_In door_.] Did you hear anything, children? Any noise?

                                George.

We heard screams and a scuffle. What was the matter?

                                Brauer.

Oh, nothing of any consequence. Don't mind it. An old vagabond of a
woman, that's all. I have only to sign the papers now, then I'll be
back. [_Exit_.]

                                George.

_Marie_!

                                 Marie.

Hush, not a word, not a word! She out there must go her way, and I must
go mine!

                                George.

What do you mean?

                                 Marie.

You said it yourself. 'Tis madness! Yes, yes; 'tis madness!
_All_--_all_! What we do--what we desire--all--all!

                                George.

Marie!

                                 Marie.

Or do you imagine for one moment we could be happy together? No, I know
you too well. I know the certain result. You would never forgive
yourself nor me, and in the end life would become a burden to me, if
only because I was in your way. Yes, yes, that would be the end of it
all----

                                George.

_Marie_, I will be faithful to you forever, let come what may, be it
good or bad; you know that!

                                 Marie.

Yes, thank God!--yes!

                                George.

If there was only the slightest possibility of a chance to escape from
all this whirl--then we might be free, we might---- But no matter what
we begin, we cannot shake off nor disregard our obligations to this
house; never, as long as we live!

                                 Marie.

Therefore, what more can you desire? Everything on earth we possess,
all that was beautiful, all the love, all--all, we gave to each other.
There is nothing more to give, for either one of us. St. John's night
is past, the fires are out, are dead----

                                George.

And what shall become of us?

                                 Marie.

Of you? That I can't tell. Perhaps you will be happy, perhaps not; that
must all rest with yourself. And I? Oh, be content. I will take care of
myself. As soon as possible I shall leave this house. Not to-day, as I
would like--it might create suspicion----

                                George.

And where will you go?

                                 Marie.

Ah, the world is large. I shall go far, far away, where no one will
ever find me. No, no, not even you, George.

                                George.

And if you should go to ruin out there?

                                 Marie.

Do not fear. I am the calamity child, the foundling. My hands are hard
and callous--see, see! Just like my heart is, now. I will work and
work, and toil, until I fall exhausted--then I will sleep and rest,
until it is time for work again; and thus I will perhaps maintain a
miserable existence.

                                George.

You say you are a calamity child! Well, so am I. But our accounts do
not harmonize. You are going out into the world and misery, and it was
I who drove you to it. Even did I not love you as I do, that thought
would follow me forever and embitter my entire life. But, be it so. We
are both children of misery! Therefore let us grit our teeth, shake
each other by the hand--and say farewell!

                                 Marie.

[_Softly_.] Good-bye, Georgie dear--and--don't be afraid--he is not yet
coming--and forgive me--do you hear? From to-day--you understand? Did I
not love you as much as I do, this would not have been quite so hard;
but there--there--'tis all right now--I know; I can never be entirely
poor now; for once, at least, the fires of St. John have burned for
me--once--just once----

                                George.

Marie----

                                 Marie.

[_Glancing around_.] Don't--don't----

                              Mrs. Brauer.

[_Enters, followed by_ Gertrude.] Hasn't the carriage arrived yet,
children? And where is papa? It is time to go.

                                 Marie.

He is coming now, I believe.

                                Brauer.

[_Enters_.] So there, I am ready to go! But, that is, you wanted to
speak to me first?

                                George.

[_With a glance at_ Marie.] It is all settled now, thank you.

                                Brauer.

Then come, wife, my coat, quick!

      [_She helps him with frocks after he has divested himself of
        jacket_.]

                               Gertrude.

[_Aside to_ Marie.] Did you ask him?

                                 Marie.

[_Nods_.]

                               Gertrude.

And what did he say?

                                 Marie.

It was all nonsense, my pet. He loves you and only you. He never has
loved any one else--he says--and he will be very happy--so he says----

                               Gertrude.

[_Embraces him joyfully_.] My darling George----

                                Brauer.

Come, come, my child--time enough for that after the ceremony. Come!

      [_All follow him to the door. When_ George _reaches door he turns,
        and as he takes one parting glance at_ Marie, Brauer _pushes
        him off_. Marie _stands motionless, looking after them,
        handkerchief in mouth, nervously forcing it between her
        teeth_.]

                                                      [_Curtain_.]



                              END OF PLAY.
﻿JOHN THE BAPTIST

                          PERSONS IN THE PLAY

Herod Antipas.                            _Tetrarch of Galilee_.
Herodias.
Salome.                                   _Her daughter_.
Vitellius.                                _Legate of Syria_.
Marcellus.                                _His companion_.

Merokles, _the rhetorician_.  \
Gabalos, _the Syrian_.         >          _At the Court of Herod_.
Jabad, _the Levite_.          /

John.                                     _Called "The Baptist."_

Josaphat.                    \
Matthias.                     }
                               >          _His disciples_.
Amarja.                       |
Manassa.                     /

Jael.                                     _Josaphat's wife_.
Their two Children.
Hadidja.                                  _Maid in the Palace_.

Miriam.                       \
Abi.                           >          _Playfellows of Salome_.
Maecha.                       /

Mesulemeth.                               _A beggar-woman_.

Amasai.                       \
                               >          _Pharisees_.
Jorab.                        /

Eliakim.                      \
Pasur.                         >          _Citizens of Jerusalem_.
Hachmoni.                     /

Simon.                                    _The Galilean_.
First Galilean.
Second Galilean.
A Paralytic.
First Priest.
Second Priest.
A Citizen of Jerusalem.
The Commander of the Roman Soldiers.

First                         \
Second                         > Roman Soldier.
Third                         /

The Captain of the Palace Guard.
The Gaoler.
Men and Women from Jerusalem, Pilgrims, Roman Legionaries, Men and
Maidservants in the Palace.

              Time of Action. _The Year 29 after Christ_.

   Scene of Action. _During the Prelude a rocky wilderness near
                              Jerusalem_.

      In the First, Second, and Third Acts. _Jerusalem_.
      In the Fourth and Fifth Acts. _A town of Galilee_.





                                PRELUDE




                                PRELUDE

_Wild, rocky scenery in the neighbourhood of Jerusalem.... Night--The
moon shining dimly through jagged clouds.... In the distance is seen
the fire of the great sacrificial altar, burning on the horizon._


                                SCENE I

_Dark shadows flit in groups across the background from right to left._

MIRIAM

Hadidja, I am afraid!

HADIDJA

Come!

MIRIAM

I am afraid. Seest thou not those gliding shadows? Their feet scarce
touch the stones, and their flesh is like the shadow of the night-wind.

HADIDJA

Fool that thou art! Thou art afraid of thy companions in misery and
suffering. The same need as thine brings them hither; the same hope
leads them on to the heights.

MIRIAM

Do they also wish to go to him?

HADIDJA

Every one wishes to go to him. Is there a light in Israel which doth
not irradiate from his hand? Is there water for the thirsty which doth
not flow from him? Streams of sweet water gush forth from these dead
stones, and his voice is born out of silence.

MIRIAM

But I am afraid of him. Why dwelleth he among the terrors of the
desert? Why flieth he from the paths of the joyous, and shunneth the
suffering?

HADIDJA

The joyous need him not. The suffering will find their way to him.

MIRIAM

Look, Hadidja! There is the glow of fire yonder above Jerusalem. The
Romans are burning down our houses, and yet we tarry here!

HADIDJA

What! Dost thou not know that is the great altar on which, day and
night, the priests offer up a tenth part of the sweat of our brows?

MIRIAM

[_In horrified amazement._] And would he let the great altar fall too?

HADIDJA

I know not. But what he willeth is best. See--who is coming?


                                SCENE II

_The same; two men, half carrying, half dragging a paralytic who
moans._

FIRST MAN

Women, say, have ye met the great Rabbi whom men call the Baptist?

HADIDJA

We also are seeking the Baptist.

[_The Paralytic, moaning._] Put me down; let me die!

FIRST MAN

We have carried this palsied man here in our arms, and they are weary,
and he whom we hoped to find is not here.

THE PARALYTIC

[_With a groan._] I shall die!

MANASSA'S VOICE

[_Crying aloud from the right._] John! John!

MANASSA

[_Rushing on the scene._] John, where art thou, John? I cry unto thee
in my distress. Have mercy; let me behold thee, John!

MIRIAM

[_Pointing to the left._] Look! A crowd of people are drawing near. They
go before him.

HADIDJA

Kneel; for it is he.


                               SCENE III

_The same. John, behind him a number of men and women, among them
Amarja._

JOHN

Whose wretchedness is so great that he wails aloud, and forgets that
grief should be silent?

MANASSA

[_Kneeling before him._] Rabbi, mighty Rabbi. If thou art he of whom
men are talking in the streets of Jerusalem, help me, save me!

JOHN

Stand up and speak.

MANASSA

I am Manassa, the son of Jeruel, and my father was sick and blind; and
I lived with him on the road to Gibeon, close by the well which is
never dry. And men came unto me who said, "It is the will of the Lord
our God that ye refuse to pay tribute to the Romans," and I refused to
pay the Romans tribute. Then have the soldiers fallen on me and burned
my house, and my young wife hath perished in the flames, and my father,
who was blind. And I am now left alone and desolate. Help me, Rabbi!
Help!

JOHN

Am I lord over Life and Death that I can make thy father, wife, and
child alive again? Can I build up thy house once more out of its ashes?
What dost thou ask of me?

MANASSA

Then cursed be those who----

JOHN

Stop! Cursings enough hang over us. Israel is loaded with them, like
the autumn boughs with ripe grapes. Wherefore dost thou lament? Look
before, instead of behind. If thou canst not withhold thy lamentations,
put a gag between thy teeth; for prayer should be silent, and longing
and patience without sound.

MANASSA

How shall that help me, Rabbi, in my loneliness and desolation?

JOHN

Thou speakest sinfully. Is He not with thee?

MANASSA

Rabbi! Who?

AMARJA

Hearken! He hath not heard the news of Him Who cometh!

JOHN

Know'st thou not that soon there will be rejoicing in Israel? Bridal
garments and music of cymbals! Know'st thou not that there will be no
more sorrow in Israel? Therefore wipe the foam from thy lips and
sanctify thyself.

ALL

Sanctify thyself!

MANASSA

No more sorrow. No more suffering! Rabbi, say that I may stay with
thee?

JOHN

Mix with thy fellows over there and learn silence.

MANASSA

[_Stammering._] Rabbi! [_He withdraws._]

JOHN

I see not Josaphat among ye. Neither is Matthias here. Who hath tidings
of them?

AMARJA

Rabbi, none hath seen them.

JOHN

Who is that lying on the ground groaning?

THE PARALYTIC

Master, I am a poor man, sick of a palsy and in great agony. If Thou
canst not cure me, I must die!

JOHN

Die _now_! Now, when One is at hand Who bringeth relief for thy tumours
and balm for thy sores? I say unto Thee thou wilt thank the Lord thy
God with shouts of joy for every hour of thy pain, for every inch of
the road thou hast crawled along on inflamed knees, when thou beholdest
Him for Whom our soul longeth and hopeth, for Whose coming we wait and
watch by the roadside, looking towards the East. Therefore endure
sevenfold suffering and groan no more.

THE PARALYTIC

Rabbi, thou hast done wonders for me. I feel no longer--I----[_He makes
an effort to rise, but sinks back. His companions lead him away. He
breathes more easily, laughing as he goes._]

MURMUR OF PEOPLE

See! a miracle. He works miracles!

ONE OF THE PEOPLE

Truly the word is fulfilled--Elias is risen. The Great Prophet is risen
from the dead!

ANOTHER

No, not Elias, not the Prophet! See ye not, ye blind? It is He Himself!
He is the promised One. Worship Him! worship Him!

ALL

[_Falling on their knees._] Worship Him!

JOHN

A man sick of a fever crawled along the road looking for the physician,
and when a beggar or a slave came by, carrying water, he fell on his
knees before him and cried, "Hail to thee, great physician! Thank God,
thou art come!" And so he went on till evening, and the children mocked
him. [_The people rise slowly._] What have I, the beggar, to give you?
The water I carry is to baptize you in; it is the pure water of
repentance. But He Who cometh after me will baptize with fire and the
Spirit, and I am not worthy to unlatch His shoes, ... so little am I
compared with Him.

SEVERAL

Rabbi, tell us, when will He come of Whom thou speakest?

OTHERS

Who is it, Rabbi? Be merciful and strengthen our souls. Speak to us of
Him.

JOHN

Then sit ye down in a circle and hear the oft-told tidings, ye
insatiable ones. [_The people crouch on the ground._]

MIRIAM

Hadidja, what is he going to tell us?

HADIDJA

Be silent.

MIRIAM

Let me take thy hand, Hadidja.

JOHN

It was on the banks of Jordan that I baptized all, according to the
command of the Lord. Many people were gathered round me and hearkened
to what I preached, but my soul was consumed with doubt and misgiving.
Then, lo, a youth came down from the cliffs above, and he was alone,
and all the people drew back. And as I raised my eyes to his face, I
knew that this was He, for the glory of eternity shone round about Him.
And when He spake with me, and prayed me to baptize Him as if He were a
sinner, I trembled and refused, saying, "I would be baptized by Thee,
but _Thou_ comest to me?" And He made answer, "So be it, for thus shall
the law be fulfilled." Then I yielded, and let it be as He desired. And
when He had received Baptism from my trembling hand, He rose from the
water, and behold, the Heavens opened above Him and I saw the Holy
Ghost descending like a white dove, and He was bathed in the Heavenly
light. And a voice out of Heaven spake, "Behold, this is My Beloved
Son, in Whom I am well pleased." Then I fell on my face and prayed. And
I was no longer afraid.

ONE OF THE CROWD

[_After a pause._] And whence came He, He Who was thus illumined by the
radiance of the Lord?

ALL

Yes, whence came He, and whither did He go? Didst thou not hold Him?

JOHN

Plague me not with questions. He cometh and goeth, and no man holdeth
Him. At this very hour He may be sitting in our midst.

ALL

[_Turn on each other a scared and inquiring gaze._]

AMARJA

Rabbi, we are all poor workpeople from Jerusalem, and every one knoweth
his fellow.

ONE OF THE CROWD

[_Pointing to Miriam._] Yes, we men! But here is a woman whom I never
saw before.

HADIDJA

Her name is Miriam, and she serves as maid in the Palace, as I do.

JOHN

Leave her in peace.

ANOTHER

But if He of Whom thou speakest dwells among the living, He must bear a
name, and His Father's name.

ALL

Yea; tell us His name. His name?

JOHN

Ye would hear his name? Listen to the wind whispering among the rocks,
mark well what it saith ere it vanisheth. So His name, heard first here
and then there, passed by my ear. I am waiting with prayer and anxiety
to hear it again. Therefore I say unto you, Question me not further,
lest it melt away like a dream when the cock croweth.

AMARJA

Yet give us withal some guidance. Whence came He to thee--He----

JOHN

The wind which wafted Him to me blew from Galilee.

ALL

From Galilee!

ONE

Is then the Messiah the Galileans', the fisheaters'?

ANOTHER

He shall come to us Judæans! Up, and let us seek Him!

ALL

Aye, let us seek Him!

JOHN

Think ye that He will permit Himself to be found by you? Ye miserable
creatures full of mutiny and revolt! Who are ye that ye should alter
the course of the world's history by a hair's breadth? When the time
for His harvest is ripe, then He shall appear to you of His own free
will in glory as the Lord of Hosts. The four cherubim shall ride before
Him on caparisoned horses, with flaming sickles in their hands....
Whatsoever hath been planted in sin and hath grown up rankly, that
shall be mown down, root and branch; whatsoever hath reared itself
against Him shall be trampled upon. Therefore, ye men of Israel, root
up the weeds that flourish and encumber your bodies, so that ye do not
rot, and in your corruption are not swept away with your polluters when
_He_ draweth near with the seven-coloured rainbow about His head. He
Who shall come must come [_reflectively_], must come!

ONE OF THE CROWD

Rabbi, we have repented of our sins. We pray day and night, and our
bodies are emaciated from fasting. Say, what more can we do?


                                SCENE IV

                 _The same. Josaphat. Matthias._

JOHN

Josaphat, so thou art here. And thou, Matthias.

JOSAPHAT

Master, chide us not for having lingered. We paused by Herod's Palace,
which, as a rule, is dark and deserted. We saw rosy lights kindled, and
the pillars garlanded with flowers. Fresh ignominy shall befall Israel,
more deadly sin weigh upon her, if thou, Rabbi, comest not to the
rescue.

JOHN

Speak out!

JOSAPHAT

Herod hath not come out of Galilee, as every year before, for the
Passover. He is not expected till to-morrow. Another guest hath
arrived. The wife of Philip, Herod's brother, hath deserted him, and
taken with her Salome, Philip's daughter.

The guest at the Palace is called Herodias, and to-morrow the marriage
feast is to be celebrated.

JOHN

Between Herod and the wife of his own brother?

JOSAPHAT

Thou sayest right, Rabbi.

JOHN

No! No! Whoever hath told thee this informed thee falsely. His lips
were shameless, and his soul lied.

AMARJA

Pardon, Rabbi; there are maids here belonging to the Palace....
Question them.

JOHN

Hadidja, I know thee. Speak!

HADIDJA

Rabbi, my place is menial. I only hear what the idle gossips say. But
here is Miriam. She has been chosen as the playmate of the young maiden
Salome since she came yesterday. She waits on her at the bath. Question
her!

JOHN

Miriam, why art thou silent?

HADIDJA

Rabbi, she hath never yet conversed with strangers.

MIRIAM

[_In a low, stuttering tone._] Master, it is true what that man saith.
And----[_Emotion._]

JOHN

Continue!

MIRIAM

And after the wedding, on the first day of the Passover, Herodias is to
enter the Temple, as far as the women's outer court, her new consort
leading her by the hand. They will show themselves to the people.

JOHN

That the people may stone them? But what am I saying? They dare not!
Those priests, lustful as they are, cowards cringing in the dust at the
feet of the Romans, dare not permit this! The iron gates will close
upon the scandal, and the High Priest will stretch forth his arm to
curse them!

HADIDJA

Speak, Miriam!

JOHN

What else hast thou to say, Miriam?

MIRIAM

Master, at this very hour, messengers are passing to and fro between
Herodias and the Temple. The Princess desireth that the High Priest
shall meet them at the second gate, where the men and women separate,
to bless her----

JOHN

Enough! Go home, all of you. I wish to be alone. To-morrow ye will see
me at Jerusalem. [_Horror amongst the people._]

ONE OF THE CROWD

Rabbi, wilt thou be responsible for thy enemies?

OTHERS

Reflect, Rabbi! The Pharisees will trap thee. The priests will condemn
thee.

JOHN

I am the son of a priest. I will speak priestly words to those who
countenance this infamous crime. I will speak to them in the name of
Him Who cometh, for Whom I prepare the way. Go! [_As they appear
unwilling and hesitate._] Go! [_The curtain falls._]




                               FIRST ACT




                               FIRST ACT

_Square in front of the Palace of Herod--The guardroom of the Roman
soldiers is to the right of the Palace in the foreground, with benches
before the door--To the right of centre is the chief entrance--Steps in
background, which lead to the top of a hill--Behind, separated by an
invisible valley, is a view of rising masses of house-tops belonging to
another part of the town--A narrow street to the left of centre, and
another street in foreground, which may be taken as a continuation of
the one that runs to right of guard-room--In it is the shop of the
woollen merchant_ Eliakim--_At its right corner the shop of the
fruit-seller_ Pasur, _with wares exhibited--A fountain with seats round
it, near the middle of the stage._


                                SCENE I

_Eliakim, Pasur. First, second, third common soldiers._

PASUR

[_As he comes forward glances anxiously at the soldiers, who sit in
front of guard-room._] Neighbour, neighbour, dost thou not hear me?

ELIAKIM

[_Sitting outside his shop reading a parchment_] It is written that
whosover disturbeth a man when he is reading the law shall forfeit his
life.

PASUR

Thou readest the law?

ELIAKIM

Knowest thou not that I read the law day and night?

PASUR

Forgive me, neighbour; accuse me not. I sinned out of ignorance.... I
was in fear of the soldiers who are quartered yonder ... but I am going
in. [_Slinks back to his shop._]

FIRST SOLDIER

[_To the second who sharpens his sword._] Marcus, wherefore handiest
thou thy blade with such terrific zeal? There is naught to hew down in
there. These damned Judeans have had enough. They'll rebel no more.

SECOND SOLDIER

Who can tell? Since that woman entered there yesterday, my nostrils
have scented bloodshed. Everything is upside down in Herod's house, and
your so-called princes are ticklish subjects.

FIRST SOLDIER

Here in Judea they have none; so we are masters.

SECOND SOLDIER

We are masters everywhere, with or without a Herod.

FIRST SOLDIER

What brings the Tetrarch of Galilee to Jerusalem?

SECOND SOLDIER

Yes, well mayest thou ask! Yet he cometh twice or thrice in the year to
rub his nose on the fleeces of the Temple, and then away he goes again.
God requires it of him, so they say. A crazy people!

FIRST SOLDIER

And we must stand by as guard of honour. A nice business for a Roman
citizen!


                                SCENE II

_The same, Hadidja and two other maids_ (_with jugs on their heads,
come out of the Palace and go to the well, where they draw water_).

SECOND SOLDIER

Idiot! We are bound to do it, so that we may appear to honour him. In
reality we guard him. He will soon be here now.

THIRD SOLDIER

[_Who has been squatting on a brick, without taking any part in
conversation, sings._] Sweet smiling Lalage, thee will I love for ever.
Thee, sweet smiling Lalage----

SECOND SOLDIER

[_Irritably._] Have done howling after thy Lalage! Before thou goest
back to Rome again, she will be a grandmother.

THIRD SOLDIER

[_Stretching out his arms._] Alack! Yes.

SECOND SOLDIER

[_Pointing to the maids._] Are not there women enough here?

THIRD SOLDIER

Ah! but they are Jew girls. They mean well enough, but the punishment
of death hangs over them.

SECOND SOLDIER

A crazy people.

THIRD SOLDIER

If only there were no foreigners! I, for my part, take not kindly to
these Asiatics. They wash all day long, and yet stink in spite of
it.... Ha! yesterday a Syrian sweetheart made me a present of a
necklace. There it is. Shall we dice for it?

SECOND SOLDIER

Show it to me. I say fifty denarii.

THIRD SOLDIER

Rogue! A hundred and fifty!

SECOND SOLDIER

Very well.

FIRST SOLDIER

I will join.

THIRD SOLDIER

Come along. [_All three disappear into the guard-room._]


                               SCENE III

_Eliakim, Pasur, Hadidja, and the two other maids. Two Priests_
[_descending the central steps_].

FIRST PRIEST

Damsels, you belong to the Palace?

HADIDJA

Yes, ye priests.

FIRST PRIEST

Announce us to your mistress.

HADIDJA

Our mistress, priests, is gone forth to meet the Tetrarch Herod, to
receive him at the gates.

FIRST PRIEST

When will she return?

HADIDJA

That we cannot say, priests; it depends on the coming of the Prince.

FIRST PRIEST

Do you desire our blessing?

HADIDJA

No! [_She vanishes with the other maids into the interior of the
Palace._]

BOTH PRIESTS

[_Look discomposed._]

FIRST PRIEST

[_Observing Eliakim and Pasur sitting in front of their doors, raises
his hands unctuously._] Blessed be ye who----

ELIAKIM

No one asked thy blessing!

BOTH PRIESTS

[_Regard each other in dismay._]

SECOND PRIEST

[_Furiously._] These again are of the school of the Pharisees!

FIRST PRIEST

We hold the Temple. They shall yet be our servants. Come! [_Exeunt both
priests._]


                                SCENE IV

PASUR

[_Drawing near humbly._] Forgive me, neighbour, but now thou no longer
readest in the law?

ELIAKIM

No.

PASUR

This will be a sorry Passover for us tradesmen. See all this fine stock
which I have laid in. There is the sacred pomegranate wood, whereon to
roast the lamb. Here are the sweet herbs, with which to prepare the
holy broth, and here are the bitter roots, the garlic, cresses, and bay
leaves, all according to the precept. In six, or at latest seven hours
the feast begins, and I shall be left stranded with my whole stock on
hand. Oh, woe is me! Woe is me!

ELIAKIM

Well, have I not also superior and holy wares for sale? There are
stuffs of the very finest quality. Beautiful tassels of white and
hyacinth-blue wool. And are not my Tephillims the most beautiful ever
worn by a son of Abraham at morning prayer? Nay, Abraham himself never
wore a finer Tephillim. I believe I have eighteen dozen or more. But
one should take no thought of bodily raiment, but read the Scriptures.
So it is written.

PASUR

But, neighbour, the man who deals in vegetables does not find it so
easy to be righteous in the sight of the Lord. Thy woollen goods will
keep till Herod is gone again with his new wife.

ELIAKIM

[_Shakes his fist at the Palace._] It's a shame, a crying shame!

PASUR

Yes; once this was always a good spot for business, but now grass
groweth in front of the Palace.

ELIAKIM

Only _priests_ go in and out.


                                SCENE V

_The same. A citizen of Jerusalem_ [_who comes to fill his pitcher at
the fountain_].

CITIZEN

[_Distressfully._] Neighbour, dear neighbour!

ELIAKIM

What is thy trouble?

CITIZEN

Thou art a righteous man and knowest the law. Give me advice, and thou
shalt have my thanks. My poor wife has hurt her foot while working in
the fields. It is burning and swollen, and I bathe it with cold water
from the fountain, which does it good. But in a short time beginneth
the feast. May I continue with the bathing then?

ELIAKIM

Sabbath breaking. Thou wilt be guilty, and deserve death.

THE CITIZEN

Oh, Lord eternal!

ELIAKIM

Yes. If it were her throat that ailed, then thou mightest pour the
remedy into her mouth. But foot! No!

CITIZEN

But suppose that it mortifies!

ELIAKIM

Yea, if it mortifies and is a danger to life, the law alloweth it.

THE CITIZEN

[_Crying out in despair._] But then it is too late!

[_Meanwhile a man wrapt in a cloak has come down the street, and looks
up calmly at the windows of Herod's Palace._]

ELIAKIM

[_Points to him, looking shocked._] Hush, if thou lovest thy life! The
man thou seest yonder is one David, belonging to the Zealots who dwell
in the desert. They come down to the towns with daggers hidden in the
folds of their cloaks. And when they find people committing a breach of
the law by word or deed, they strike at them from behind. [_Rising, as
the stranger approaches._] Greeting; thou holy man! Behold I know thee
well. Wilt thou not bless thy servant? [_The stranger passes, and
disappears in the street to the left._]

PASUR

I feel a shiver run through me. One can err and not know it.

THE CITIZEN

How many hours are there yet, ere the feast begins?

ELIAKIM

[_Regarding the sun._] Six.

THE CITIZEN

So long, then, I may use the cooling remedy, but I know not what to do
afterwards. [_Drags his pitcher away dejectedly._]

PASUR

Of a truth, we Hebrews are hunted like vermin. If the Romans leave us
alone, the law strikes at us.


                                SCENE VI

_The same. The stage has become half-filled with people, who
gesticulate in excitement, looking up at Herod's Palace. Among them
Hachmoni; later, the soldiers._

ELIAKIM

What is going on there? Hachmoni, thou shalt speak. What ails the
people?

HACHMONI

Hast thou not heard? John is in the town!

ELIAKIM

There are many Johns.

HACHMONI

The Baptist, man!

ELIAKIM

The Baptist; enemy of the Priests and of the Pharisees; to whom every
Rechabite hath sworn death. Is he caught at last?

HACHMONI

Thou speakest like one in his sleep! If there is a man in Jerusalem
safe and untouched by the curse of the Romans, it is he. He standeth in
the market-place and preacheth; he standeth at the gates and
preacheth.--Did I say _preach_? Firebrands issue from his lips;
scorpions leap out of his mouth.

ELIAKIM

Against whom doth he preach, then?

HACHMONI

Against Herod, naturally. And his paramour, and his paramour's whelp.

ALL

Down with Herod! Death to Herod!

[_The first and second Roman soldiers step out of the guard-room._]

FIRST SOLDIER

What are the blear-eyed scum crying?

SECOND SOLDIER

Death to Herod! Did not I say it would be so? I can trust my nose.
[_Draws his sword._]

PASUR

Protect yourselves! The soldiers! [_The people fall back._]

FIRST SOLDIER [_laughing._]

The dogs are affrighted already. Curs! [_They go in, laughing._]


                               SCENE VII

_The same. Amasai and Jorab_ [_from left centre, remain in the
street_].

AMASAI

Look at them! Must this not appear a mad mockery in the sight of the
Lord? Who that follows the straight path laid down by the law, after
the manner of God-fearing men, can have anything in common with these
sinners?

JORAB

They are infatuated with the Baptist's preaching, and yet too weak to
kick against the pricks. Speak to them, so that they come to
themselves.

AMASAI

After the Baptist? Rather would I grasp a mad bull by the horns. They
would go up to the Temple to make an offering of sow's blood, if he
bade them do it.

JORAB

Cannot we trap him?

AMASAI

And so stand before the people as the friends of Herod? Leave that kind
of fame to the Priests and the Sadducees. The disaffection which we
quelled, at a signal from him, screams aloud in the gutter. So what
good have we done? That is why the people flock to him. We have missed
our opportunity. But still; I know a way to entangle him. I will strike
at him through his folly about the Messiah. [_Shouts of applause arise
from the people._] Listen! so they once hailed us. [_They withdraw
further into the street to the left._]


                               SCENE VII

_The same, without Amasai and Jorab. John, accompanied by Josaphat,
Matthias, and Manassa and afresh crowd. People appear behind left._

JOHN

[_Throwing himself down on the edge of the fountain._]

JOSAPHAT

See, Rabbi, what power hath been given thee. They wag their tails like
pleased hounds. Jerusalem the Blessed lies at thy feet.

JOHN

Give me to drink!

MANASSA

[_Draws him water._]

HACHMONI

Behold! The great prophet drinks as if he were one of us----

PASUR

That is goat's hair wherewith he is clothed. It must prick his skin. It
shows what a holy man he is.

ELIAKIM

But he doth not favour the woollen trade. If all were so holy, we
should be beggared.

HACHMONI

And his food, people say, is nought but locusts and wild honey.

MATTHIAS

Get back. See ye not that ye plague him? [_They retire._]

JOSAPHAT

Rabbi, forgive. The people wait. What is thy command to them?

JOHN

Is this Herod's house?

JOSAPHAT

Yes, Rabbi [_silence_]. Rabbi, say, what shall they do?

JOHN

Am I the keeper of these people? The shepherd may drive his flock
through thorns or flowers. I pine for the wilderness, for my rocky
fastnesses.

JOSAPHAT

[_Dismayed._] Rabbi!

JOHN

I have awakened the slumbering conscience, scourged and roused the
idle, shown the erring the right road. One great burst of indignation
against Herod now flames towards heaven. So now they may let me go my
way, or send their spies after me. But no priest has yet dared to stand
in my path. It is well. My work in Jerusalem is at an end.

MATTHIAS

Not so, Rabbi. Thy work only beginneth. We have to face the Prince's
entry. The people want a leader.

JOHN

Whither will they be led?

MATTHIAS

That we know not, Rabbi.

JOHN

And do I know? Am I one to subject my will to the fetters of a plan, or
to spin a web of calculations for others? I am the voice of one crying
in the wilderness. That is my destiny. Come! [_He stands up._]

THE PEOPLE

Hail to thee, John! Hail! [_As he is going, Amasai and Jorab step in
his way._]


                               SCENE VIII

                       _The same. Amasai, Jorab._

AMASAI

Pardon us, great Prophet, that we have not yet been present at thy
baptisms.

JOHN

Who are ye?

JOSAPHAT

[_Whispering._] Be on your guard, Rabbi. They wear the wide hem of the
Pharisees. Their brethren are high in the Council.

AMASAI

We are diligent scribes, simple men, to whom the study of the law hath
brought more honour than we deserve.

JOHN

May be. But what do ye want with me?

AMASAI

Many reports of miracles worked by thee have come to our ears. Some say
thou art Elias; and others, even greater than he. We are willing to
believe this, even if thou performest not his miracles. Naturally
thou mayest have reasons in thy heart for keeping thy power of
miracle-working a secret from us.

PASUR

Hath he worked miracles?

ELIAKIM

Not for me.

PASUR

Ah!

AMASAI

We have heard, too, much of thy godliness; that thou fastest and
prayest as one to whom meat and drink and earthly intercourse are of no
account. We fast and pray also, and our desire for doing good cannot be
satisfied. But the law is harder and more zealous than we. Therefore we
beg thee to be so gracious as to bestow on us the benefit of thy
teaching, Rabbi, and to tell us how we can keep the law.

JOHN

So? Ye lay traps for me under the cloak of your glib words. Ye
generation of vipers! Who hath told you that ye shall escape the wrath
to come? Woe unto you, when He cometh Who is stronger than I! He hath
His sickle already in His hand. He will gather the grain into His barn,
but the chaff He will burn with everlasting fire.

PASUR

Of whom doth he speak?

HACHMONI

Hush! he speaks of the Messiah.

ELIAKIM

What Messiah?

JORAB

Come, Amasai. I am afraid of this man.

AMASAI

[_Shielding himself with his hand._] We approached thee as petitioners,
and thou hast abused us. We will let that pass, presuming that thou
hast a right thereto. The one of whom thou speakest as coming after
thee has given thee the right. Is it not so? [_Silence._] Behold, ye
people of Israel, your prophet is silent. If it be not the Messiah,
the Messiah of Whom he preaches in the wilderness, and even in the
market-place, who hath given him the right to chide us? Where else hath
he obtained his authority? Ye know what we are, God-fearing, upright
men, that strive to obey the law in everything.

ONE OF THE PEOPLE

Who is this?

ELIAKIM

Amasai, the wise and learned scribe.

PEOPLE

[_Murmuring._] Listen, it is Amasai.

ANOTHER

Rabbi, wilt thou not bless us?

AMASAI

Yea, we, in short, who are a piece of the law ourselves. And we have
never done this man any harm. If he is an enemy to us, it must be
because he is an enemy to the law.

JOHN

Thou liest.

AMASAI

Good. If I lie, so teach me, great prophet, how thou keepest the law.

JOSAPHAT

[_In a low voice._] Yes, Rabbi, explain! The people expect it.

JOHN

I have nothing to do with the law, of which ye and your like set up to
be guardians and students. [_Sensation among the people._]

JOSAPHAT

[_Sotto voce._] Rabbi, think what thou art saying. Injure not thyself.

JOHN

Nay, it is not your law, but ye yourselves that I hate. For your hand
lieth heavily on this people, and your well-being is its affliction.

AMASAI

That thou hast yet to prove, great prophet.

JOHN

Who are ye, ye men of worldly wisdom, that ye should look on the law as
your special inheritance and possession? Here is an enslaved people
crawling patiently on its belly beneath a scourge, oppressed by a heavy
burden, and ye desire to tell it _how_ it shall crawl.

AMASAI

Yea, because it must crawl somehow, great prophet.

JOHN

Ye think so. I say that it shall rise out of the dust.

AMASAI

Thus have rebels ever spoken, and the end hath always been the cross
and the gallows. Thou, whom men call the great prophet, listen to me!
When the Lord redeemed His people the first time, how did He do it?
Through the law. And when He redeemed them a second time, knowest thou
how He did it? Through the law. So if we guard and watch this law, and
let it expand by itself, swelling like an ear of corn, a thousand times
into a thousandfold blessings, what is our object? Redemption, the hope
which lives in all of us. Only we do not noise it abroad in the gutter
and on the housetops.

PEOPLE

[_Murmuring._] There he is right. Aye, he is right!


                                SCENE IX

_The same. A troop of pilgrims have come up by degrees and slake their
thirst at the fountain. Among them Simon the Galilean._

AMASAI

See! Look around thee. Behold these pilgrims! They come with their
knapsacks from far distant lands: from Egypt, from Euphrates, and
Syria, and from the accursed city of Rome itself. They are indifferent
to hunger and thirst, the heat of the sun, and the dust of the road.
And wherefore have they come? Because of this very law, which I and my
brethren guard and study. And if thou sayest thou hast nothing to do
with this law, and hatest it, tell us, then, what law thou lovest?
Where do the Commandments leave off which the Lord made for His people,
and where begin the vain works of men? Enlighten us, great prophet, and
scold us not.

JOHN

[_Is silent, and uncertain what to say._]

JOSAPHAT

I warned thee, Rabbi!

AMASAI

[_With a laugh of scorn._] Now see, all of you. See! Methinks the
great---- [_Breaks off as a woman, sickly and heavily loaded, comes
accidentally near to him. He turns round in anger._] Touch me not, lest
I become unclean! I am a Rechabite!

SIMON THE GALILEAN

[_To the woman._] No; touch _him_ not, lest _thou_ becomest unclean.

AMASAI

What?

SIMON THE GALILEAN

For the Pharisees who call themselves Rechabites are unclean from
within. Come! [_Leads her to the fountain._]

AMASAI

He denies God!

THE PEOPLE

[_Murmuring._] He denies God!

AMASAI

A Rechabite unclean? A man who doth nothing day and night but fulfil
the law; who performeth his sacred ablutions three times more than
necessary; who sitteth, on the Sabbath, like a monument; who speaketh a
blessing at meat twice, and over salt, bread er----er--[_half
choking._] A Rechabite unclean?

JOHN

If I could not answer thy questions with their double meaning, thou
thyself hast now answered them!

AMASAI

And may seven swine possess thee, thou great prophet, so that compared
with them thou appearest to me a saint. [_To the Galilean._] And what
evil spirit hath taken possession of thee, man? Art thou a Jew? Where
dost thou come from? What is thy name?

MATTHIAS

[_In a low voice._] Tell him not thy name. He will ruin thee.

SIMON THE GALILEAN

[_Calmly._] I am a Jew. My name is Simon, and I come from Galilee.

AMASAI

And as one that there knoweth Law and Sacrifice----

SIMON THE GALILEAN

[_Interrupting._] Greater than law, greater than sacrifice, is love!
[_Sensation and dismay among people_]

AMASAI

See ye not now that he is guilty against the law? [_He continues
speaking earnestly to the people_]

JOHN

[_Approaching the Galilean in great excitement._] Who taught thee that?
[_As Simon is silent, more urgently._] Who taught thee that?

MATTHIAS

[_In a quick, low tone to the Galilean._] Before they capture thee,
fly!

SIMON THE GALILEAN [_Shakes his head._]

JOHN

This knowledge, that comes straight from thy simple and timid heart,
awes me, for it cannot be thine own. [_The people, hounded on by
Amasai, jostle the Galilean_] Back! In the Name of Him Who cometh, keep
back. Leave him alone! [_People retreat._]

PASUR

Thou playest with us and our great longing as if we were toys.

AMASAI

Ah, now I have caught thee! Thou who poisonest a thirsty people with
foul water! Where is He Who shall come? Where is thy Messiah? Where is
the King of the Jews? Aye, show Him to us!

THE PEOPLE

[_Fiercely._] Yea, woe to thee if thou canst not show Him to us!

JOHN

[_Firmly._] Here cometh the King of the Jews whom ye acclaim!


                                 SCENE X

_The same. Herod, Herodias, Salome and their train appear above in the
background. The company of soldiers, with their officers, have posted
themselves at the Palace gates. In silence the procession descends._

ONE OF THE TRAIN

Hail to Herod! [_Still silence._] Now, ye dogs! Cry, Hail!

HEROD

At what are the people gaping? [_To the Commander of the Guard._] Ye,
who in obedience to Rome's command are here to protect me, cannot you
clear them out of my way?

THE SOLDIERS

[_At a sign from their Captain begin to charge the people with lowered
spears._]

AMASAI

[_Who is standing in the foremost row. Turns with a shrill cry._] Woe!
woe! [_Takes fight._]

[_Jorab follows him. The people retreat with a subdued exclamation of
fear. John alone stands his ground, his head held high, and measures
Herod with his glance._]

SALOME

[_Raising her veil._] Mother, look at that man. It is the same who
stood in the market-place and at the gates and everywhere where we have
passed.

HEROD

And everywhere caused dissension.

SALOME

Look! His eyes flash fire! Mother, look!

HEROD

Come along, ye women. And if the pious citizens of Jerusalem have
unlearnt the way to welcome with rejoicing the representative of the
great race of Herod [_with a glance at the Captain of the Guard_],
Rome, I hope, will teach it to them again. [_The Captain shrugs his
shoulders with a slight smile._]

HEROD

Come, I pray. [_Herod, Herodias, Salome, go with their train into the
Palace; the common soldiers into the guard-room._]


                               SCENE XII

_Johannes, Josaphat, Matthias, Manassa, Hachmoni, Pasur, the people._

HACHMONI

[_At the head of a group, pressing forward_] Pardon us, great prophet.
The Pharisees have fled like cowards. But, see, we cling to thee. So
now help us.

THE PEOPLE

Help us!

JOHN

[_As if in a dream._] Tell me, whither hath the man from Galilee gone?

MANASSA

Rabbi, we know not.

JOHN

Then seek him. Bring him to me.

MANASSA

Yes, Rabbi.

ALL THE PEOPLE

Tarry with us, great prophet. Help us! We flee to thee.

JOHN

[_Pondering in uncertainty._] Matthias, Josaphat, did he not say Love?
[_The curtain falls_].




                               SECOND ACT




                               SECOND ACT

_Hall in Roman style of architecture in Herod 's Palace--On the right
side, a balcony upheld by pillars, which extends the whole depth of the
stage, and to which a fight of steps leads--Off the balcony a door
opens into Salome's room--Underneath, on the ground floor, another
door--In the centre of the background is the chief entrance--On the
left, a window--Near it a couch and other furniture--To the right,
between the pillars of the balcony, is a divan--Carpets and tiger-skins
on the floor--A mixture of Roman and Oriental luxury._


                                SCENE I

_Maecha, Miriam, Abi_ [_on the balcony_]. _After them, Salome._

THE DAMSELS

[_Stepping cautiously and listening._]

SALOME

[_Through the door._] Is it safe? No one there?

MAECHA

Not a sound of anyone.

SALOME

Then, come! [_They skip down the stairs._]

SALOME

Ah, here it is light, and one can see oneself reflected in the walls.
Do you know why we have been suddenly mewed up in the apartments above?
Yesterday we were allowed to wander as we listed through all the
passages, to dance unveiled in the gardens, and peep through the
railings and mock the passers-by. But to-day, since my uncle came, we
have had to sit moping in sackcloth and ashes. Why? Do none of you know
why?

MAECHA

Mistress, the house is now filled with strangers who were not here
yesterday. And, it is said that the men who are in the Tetrarch's
following run after young maidens.

SALOME

Let them! I am not afraid of any men.... I take them as I find them....
I love them.

ABI

Thou knowest men, mistress?

SALOME

I mean not the men of our own people! They wear beards on their chins
like forests, and before one can look round, they stand there
barefooted, and then people say---- No; I mislike that. But once, when
I was with my father in Antioch, I met pale youths with golden brown
hair, and they wore red shoes and smelt of perfumes.... They were
Greeks, my father said, real Greeks from Hellas.... They smiled, and it
made me thrill.... Why dost thou stand there sulking, Miriam, and
listenest not to my converse? It doth not please thee? Laugh, or I'll
beat thee. If thou laughest not, I'll have thee whipped!

MIRIAM

Let me be whipped, mistress.

SALOME

Where wert thou last night? The palace guards said thou wouldst visit
thy sweetheart.... Thou hast a lover? [_Roguishly._] Whisper his name
in my ear and I'll give thee a gold pin.

MIRIAM

I have no one that loveth me, mistress.

SALOME

The language of you Judeans hath an insipid flavour, and your eyes
dissemble. Yet, I love Jerusalem. A purple haze hangs over its gables.
And it seemeth to me ever as if the sun in Jerusalem kissed one
secretly. But ye could not understand how that is ... ye have not the
blood of the great Herod in your veins. My mother hath it, and I have
it from her.... And whatever they may say in Jerusalem, my mother was
wise to run away from that other husband, for the one here is of more
account than he. And because she was so wise, and at the same time so
sadly foolish, I love her, and will share the consequences of her
folly. [_She flings herself on the couch._] I am not displeasing to my
uncle Herod.... I have remarked that he casts stolen glances at me....
Now when my mother scolds me I shall know how to tease her! [_Trills
forth._] I am the Rose of Sharon, a flower of the valley. Cometh not my
friend into his garden to eat of---- Miriam, where does that window
look out?

MIRIAM

I do not know, mistress. I have never been in this hall before.

SALOME

Go and see.

MIRIAM

[_Looks out of the window and starts._]

SALOME

Why dost thou start?

MIRIAM

Did I, mistress?

SALOME

Tell me what thou seest?

MIRIAM

There are many people standing round a fountain, and----

SALOME

And?

MIRIAM

I cannot----

SALOME

[_Stands up and goes to window._] Ah! [_Looking out for a moment in
silence._] Miriam, who is that?

MIRIAM

[_Confused._] Whom dost thou mean, mistress?

SALOME

Is there anyone else but him?... Miriam, thou gentle, brown Miriam
[_half threateningly_], deny him not!

MIRIAM

It is--John--the Baptist.

ABI, MAECHA

[_Hurrying up, all curiosity._] The Baptist?

SALOME

Let him be who he be. See how the people surge round him! Have ye ever
in your valley seen a rock bend? He doth not bend. Ha! ha! Not he! Only
if--perhaps---- [_She stretches out her arms._]


                                SCENE II

             _The same. Herodias_. [_Enters from centre._]

MAECHA

Mistress, thy mother!

THE THREE MAIDENS

[_Withdraw quickly from the window._]

HERODIAS

What are ye doing here, damsels? Salome thou! Shall we let it be said
that we have brought evil manners into Jerusalem?

SALOME

[_Intending to wound, but outwardly meek._] Methinks it is said
already.

HERODIAS

[_Enraged._] Go!

SALOME

Yes, mother. [_She crosses over, and lingers between the pillars of the
balcony._]

HERODIAS

Ye damsels, stay! Ye are Judeans?

MAECHA

Yes, mistress.

HERODIAS

Intelligence hath reached me of one they call the Baptist stirring up
rebellion in the streets. Which of you know the man?

MAECHA

She does.

ABI

She hath this moment confessed it.

HERODIAS

What dost thou know of him?

MIRIAM

That last night I sat at his feet praying.

SALOME

[_Coming forward_] Thou? Thou?

MAECHA

Pardon! A moment ago he was standing close to the Palace.

HERODIAS

Show him to me.

MAECHA

[_From the window_] Now is he gone.

HERODIAS

[_To Miriam_] So speed after him, and when thou hast found him, bring
him privately through yonder gate. [_Points below to the right_]

SALOME

She shall not.... I will not ... _Not_ her!

HERODIAS

Why not?

SALOME

[_Throwing her arms round Miriam_] She is dearest to me. I will not let
her go out of my sight. [_Comes over and supplicates Herodias_] Mother!

HERODIAS

Art thou still such a child? [_To Miriam._] Go!

SALOME

[_Angrily._] Miriam!

                                         [_Exit Miriam._

HERODIAS

Such a child, and already hast the tooth of a serpent in thy mouth!

SALOME

[_Kneels on the couch before her mother and encircles her knees with
her arms._] Forgive me, mother. We, thou and I, are not like others. We
sting those we love.

HERODIAS

[_Sotto voce._] And those we hate?

SALOME

[_Sotto voce._] We kiss!

HERODIAS

[_Laughing._] Child! [_She kisses her._]

SALOME

[_Laughing._] Thou kissest me!


                               SCENE III

                    _The same. The Palace Captain._

PALACE CAPTAIN

My master, the Tetrarch Herod, would see thee, mistress.

HERODIAS

[_In growing anxiety covers Salomes' face with her veil._] Go, make
haste; go!

SALOME

Mother, I am dull in the upstair chambers. May I not stay near thee?

HERODIAS

[_Looking towards the door._] Go, instantly!

SALOME

[_Slowly climbs the stairs with her companions._]

HERODIAS

Thou art Captain in the Palace?

THE PALACE CAPTAIN

[_Bows._]

HERODIAS

Go, set watches at every door. Who entereth goeth not out again.... And
keep silent.

THE PALACE CAPTAIN

One has but to see thee to know that thou art the mistress.... How
should I not be silent? [_Goes to the door._]


                                SCENE IV

_The same. Herod, Gabalos, Merokles, Jabad. The Palace Captain_ [_exit
when the others enter_].

HEROD

Princess, after waiting even the space of a moment, a man will enjoy
his favours to the full.... Therefore ... [_Kisses her on brow and
mouth._] Pardon!

HERODIAS

Thou hast rested; art refreshed?

HEROD

That question thou oughtst not to ask me. My father was one of those
men who never knew what weariness was. So his son, likewise, parts
company with his pillow betimes, and---- [_He observes Salome who, with
her veil slightly lifted, looks down from the balcony, and after she
sees that he has noticed her, vanishes._]

HERODIAS

Thou art silent.

HEROD

Thy daughter is not with thee?

HERODIAS

[_Dryly._] No.

HEROD

[_Bows his head, smiling._] Allow me, Princess ... to present these
friends.... I will not call them servants, for such they are not.

MEROKLES

Oh, mistress, they are servants whom thou mayest safely make thy
friends.

JABAD

And they are friends in order that they may serve thee.

GABALOS

And are amply rewarded for both, great mistress.

HEROD

[_Smiling._] This rascal, whose Syrian dialect thou art now acquainted
with for the first time, is Gabalos from Antioch. Thou seest, I
tolerate his jesting.

GABALOS

For Herod the Great also kept a Fool.

HERODIAS

And people say that he acquired a second Fool before he let the first
drown.

GABALOS

[_Bows, smiling, then turns aside with a grimace._]

HEROD

This is Merokles, the rhetorician. His voice carries far. It is heard
in Rome, when folks there would overhear my own.

MEROKLES

But I shall take no satisfaction in that voice till it may greet thee,
mistress, with the cry "Hail to thee, O Queen!"

HERODIAS

[_Winces, then smiles and exchanges a glance with Herod._]

MEROKLES

[_Sotto voce, joining Gabalos._] Thou madest a good hit; I a better.

HEROD

And in contrast to this cool flatterer, here is Jabad the Levite, my
guide and my conscience ever since I set foot on Jewish soil. For, by
Bacchus, he knows exactly what I have to do, every moment, in order to
be pious, after the manner of my pious people.

GABALOS

[_Sotto voce._] He acts as if he had forgotten the way.

MEROKLES

[_Sotto voce._] For by so doing he thinks he will the more resemble his
father.

HEROD

As an example, what ought I to be doing at this sacred moment?

JABAD

The sun is sinking, oh master. Thy Passover lamb, one year old and
flawless, hath been slaughtered in the Temple. It is now in the yard to
be blessed. Thou, as the lord and master of this house----

HEROD

Must do it myself?

JABAD

Thine illustrious father did not, and there was, on that account,
grumbling amongst the people.

HEROD

Blessing is cleaner work than slaughter. I will do it. See, ye wise
Greeks, that we must serve the gods in order to rule over men! And in
the end we serve to no purpose. [_He motions them away. To Jabad._] Go
and make ready, and I will follow thee. [_Exeunt Gabalos, Merokles, and
Jabad._]


                                SCENE V

_Herod, Herodias_ [_later Salome with Maecha, on the balcony. Herod and
Herodias stand together a few moments in silence._]

HERODIAS

Art thou content?

HEROD

Thy kindness oppresses me. Whether thou art content seemeth to me of
more importance.

HERODIAS

[_Feeling his tone of contempt._] I have had no roof over my head for
three nights. Like a tramp I have wandered in the dust of the roads. My
serving-women one by one deserted me. Only Salome hath not forsaken me.
I have robbed her of her father; the father I have robbed of his child.
And what I have robbed my husband of thou canst estimate better than it
beseemeth me. See, all this I have done for thee!

HEROD

I have abandoned my wife, who also said she loved me. She flew to her
father. He now maketh ready for war to avenge his child's wrong. Only a
trifle is lacking: I have no army. In Rome I am threatened with
disgrace; my brother curses me; Judea points the finger of scorn at
me.... So little have I done for thee----

HERODIAS

And thou repentest this little already?

HEROD

No! only forgive me if I blame thy coming too soon.

HERODIAS

Too soon! Was warmer welcome ever heard than this "too soon"?

HEROD

Take not my words amiss, I entreat thee!

HERODIAS

I dare not say that longing drove me here.

HEROD

[_With an embarrassed smile._] Say it ... by all means!

HERODIAS

Then thou hast not forgotten the days--of eloquent looks and silent
vows--when every breath was a longing desire and every word a feast?

HEROD

How should I forget? Love, how should I----?

HERODIAS

And thou rememberest no more the nights when wandering footsteps stole
their way to the fragrant gardens, where, in the feverish blossoming
around them, two sleepless ones mingled their sighs?

HEROD

How could I not remember; Love, how could I not?

HERODIAS

I have clothed myself in Indian draperies; I have put pomegranate
blossoms in my bosom, and gold dust in my hair ... but thou seest
nothing!... My converse is bridal, but thou hearest it not.

[_Salome has appeared on the balcony with Maecha. Herod notices her._]

SALOME

Wait; let me see whether he has already come. [_She looks over, and
after her eyes have met Herod's she vanishes._]

HERODIAS

[_Observing his absence of mind, with an exclamation._] No! thou
hearest nothing.

HEROD

[_Quickly recovering himself?_] Well; what if it is so? The language of
our soul, which thou art kind enough to call bridal, was fitting to the
delight of those fragrant gardens. To-day, methinks, we have another
task before us!

HERODIAS

Thinkest thou that I have been idle? Am I a woman who cometh to beg of
you a nightly dole of caresses? Look at me.... Not thy beloved.... She
exists no longer.... See in me thy ruling mistress!

HEROD

I am looking, and I see a woman who raves.

HERODIAS

As real as the ambition of thy mistress, as real as the secret
resentment which gnaws beneath thy own; despite thy ever-ready smiles.

HEROD

[_Horrified._] Who told thee ... whence ...?

HERODIAS

So real and positive is my hold over thee. Just now, when thou didst
say I raved, thou wast reflecting how thou couldst best get rid of
me.... Thou fool; then get rid of thy wakeful nights and all that which
thou thinkest great in thyself, the inheritance of that greater than
thou, whom thou wilt never equal....

HEROD

Woman ... what ... [_his words choke in his throat._]

HERODIAS

[_Laughing._] Speak out what thou hast to say. If thou no longer
needest me for love, thou mayest still require me as a listener and
adviser.

HEROD

[_After he has walked up and down several times in great excitement._]
Never resemble.... What is the man who smiles amiably in wrath? A
coward?... What is the man, who has two faces? Insincere?... Who fawns
on those in power. Servile? No; because the great Herod also did these
things. But sometimes, when the blood throbbed to bursting in his
veins, he snatched his sword from the sheath and slashed at friend and
enemy alike who stood in his way ... till the blood of his victim
washed him calm and cool again ... till the mighty at Rome experienced
a thrill at such a display of strength.... I, too, feel the blood
hammering in my veins.... I, too, would ... but I have no sword ... and
so I must continue to smile amiably ... continue showing two faces, and
licking the sandals of the priests.... I, the son of Herod; I, his ape!

HERODIAS

And suppose that the priests of the Temple adopted the attitude of
shield and barrier betwixt thee and the fury of the people, wouldst
thou doubt thyself less?

HEROD

I doubt myself not. And what thou sayest can never happen.

HERODIAS

[_Goes to the middle door and opens it._]

                        [_A Porteress enters._]

HERODIAS

What tidings hast thou?

THE PORTERESS

The two messengers to the Temple, mistress, have come back with word
from the High Priest.

HERODIAS

Show them into the outer hall.... They shall wait there.

                        [_Exit the Porteress._]

HEROD

[_With a laugh of rage and fear._] Are their trumpets already sounding
on the road? Hath the great curse already reached the door?

HERODIAS

Thou art wrong, my friend. Only a little blessing scratches at the
door.... If it pleaseth thee, let it come in.

HEROD

Thou dreamest.

HERODIAS

Listen to me! Why did I come before thee in haste to inhabit this empty
house?... Because every hour since I came I have been negotiating with
the priests----

HEROD

Thou?

HERODIAS

What if instead of hiding the sinning woman from the people, thou, with
head held aloft, repairest with her to the Temple? Would it not be an
ironical event if the High Priest, with the same air of patriarchal
servility with which he greeted the virtuous Mariamne, also smiled a
welcome to thy brother's runaway wife?

HEROD

With what sum hast thou purchased this?

HERODIAS

When it is given, it will be a present, not a purchase.

HEROD

Only one who knows not these butchers of the High Altar could believe
you.

HERODIAS

Well, these are the terms [_in a low voice_]. If we were to promise
never again to aspire in Rome to the sceptre of Judea [_scoffingly_],
then they might consider----

HEROD

And what answer didst thou make to such drastic, such----

HERODIAS

I promised.... What else should I do?... for thee, as well as myself.

HEROD

[_Pointing to himself._] Even before this booty was thine, thou hast
betrayed it?

HERODIAS

I fancied that I heard thee crying out just now for a sword.
[_Smiling._] When thou art king, thou wilt, of course, kill all whom
thou hast promised not to be king! That is the same thing as if thou
hadst never promised it.

HEROD

[_Staring at her._] Woman!

HERODIAS

Believest thou still that I hurried here only for the sake of a kiss?

HEROD

I shudder at thee. But even if the priests be won over, there remains
the people, the hydra-headed; thou knowest not the people. They once,
it is said, hurled sacrificial victims at the head of their king, they
slew Barachia's son between the Temple and the altar. And besides, dost
thou not know that John the Baptist is in the town?

HERODIAS

The Baptist! Leave the Baptist to me.

HEROD

I warn thee, approach him only with a weapon in thy hand!

HERODIAS

[_Laughs._]


                                SCENE VI

                _The same. Jabad and several servants._

JABAD

Pardon, oh master, the lamb is ready.

HEROD

First, we will hear what the priests have to say if your mistress,
_our_ mistress, so pleaseth.

HERODIAS

[_Assents, smiling._]                               [_Exeunt all._


                               SCENE VII

        _John, Miriam_ [_come through the lower door to right_].

MIRIAM

Await her here, Rabbi.... What are thy commands to thy handmaiden?

JOHN

[_Shakes his head._]

MIRIAM

[_Kisses the hem of his garment._]                         [_Exit._


                               SCENE VIII

_John_ [_left alone for a brief space_], _then Salome, and two of her
damsels._

SALOME

[_Steps softly to the balustrade and gazes down on John, seeks in her
breast for a flower, and not finding one turns back to Maecha._] Give
me those thou wearest in thy girdle. [_She takes the roses which Maecha
hands to her and throws them down._] He doth not see them. Bring more
flowers, and thy harp. Stay, Maecha, or I shall be afraid. [_Exeunt the
maids, except Maecha._] Thou fair savage, out of the wilderness of
Judah! The fire of hate that flashes from thy eye shall not devour me!
I will kindle another fire in it, lovely and languid like my dreams,
when at night the perfume of the narcissi is wafted to my pillow. [_The
maids come back._] Give them here.... Roses ... two arms' full. [_Hides
her face in the flowers._] Now if I had narcissi, too! Nay, but tarry
and sing the song which I taught you yesterday, the song which the
dancers sang at Antioch. But sing softly, so that he be not shy of us.
Where is Miriam?

ABI

She refuseth to come.

SALOME

[_Between her teeth._] She refuseth! He saw the rose. He is picking it
up ... as if he had never----There are more ... and more ... and more.
[_She scatters the roses down on him._]

SONG OF THE MAIDENS

[_The following is accompanied by the harp, which, after playing a
finale alone, dies away._]

   I have entertained thee with myrrh and honey.
   I bound sweet sandals on my feet.
   From my waist I have loosened the girdle,
   I have sung with the harp, thee to greet.
   Now come, let us quench
   The fire that consumes me ... Come!
   Or thou from fear shalt blench.
   For my soul will hate thee ... Come!

JOHN

[_Has looked up astonished. The hail of flowers strikes him in the
face. He shrinks back._] Who playeth with me?

SALOME

[_Who has slowly descended the steps._] Master, I----

JOHN

Who art thou?

SALOME

[_Coyly trifling._] I am a rose of Sharon and a flower of the valley.

JOHN

Then play with thy mates ... Leave me in peace ... or go and call her
who summoned me.

SALOME

My mother?

JOHN

Thou art Salome the----

SALOME

Yes; I am she.

JOHN

Let me look into thy eyes, maiden.

SALOME

Look, master ... No, but not like that.... If you compellest me to put
my hands before my face, I shall spread my fingers apart and laugh
between them; yes, I shall laugh.

JOHN

Maiden, knowst thou not how abhorred this house is? Keepest thou thy
soul innocent among the guilty?

SALOME

Look at me again, master.... Am I not young among the Daughters of
Israel? And I have heard say that youth knoweth nothing of the guilty
and of guilt. See, they keep me confined to the upper chambers. I drew
back the bolts and crept out here, because I knew thou wert here,
master.

JOHN

How can I say to the storm wind: "Pass by," and to the floods, "Swallow
her not"?

SALOME

Speak on, master, even if I understand nothing thou sayest. And knowest
thou that we are now sinning according to the Jewish "law"? Both of
us--yea, it is true. My companions are gone; and is it not forbidden
for a Jewish man to be alone with a virgin?

JOHN

I am not alone with thee. Behind us standeth the shadow of those who
have dragged thee with them through the foul refuse of their pleasures.

SALOME

I have my own pleasures, master. How shall the pleasures of others
concern me? I read once a saying that stolen fruits are sweet, and my
nurse used to tell me that undiscovered treasure was only found by
those who did not seek for it.... Is it not true thou hast not sought
me?

JOHN

Thy converse is confused.

SALOME

No matter. Chide me not. Think, are not our _dreams_ confused too? When
I flew hither with my mother, we came at night to a field of poppies.
And the dew shone on their petals.... They looked grey, and were all
closed up because it was night.... But now they are wide open, and I
think my cheeks must glow red in their reflection.

JOHN

Thou art lovely among the daughters of Jerusalem. They will weep for
thee.

SALOME

Why will they weep? Am I to be sacrificed? Not I, master. Protect me! I
have heard of a king, master, who made a compact with the sun. Hast
thou heard of him? [_John bows his head._]

SALOME

Well, I will make a compact with thee. Shall I be the sun, and thou my
king? Or wilt thou be the sun, and I thy queen?

JOHN

Maiden, I cannot be either sun or king.

SALOME

Why not? It is only a game.

JOHN

A King cometh after me, but I wander in the wilderness and seek a path
among thorns.

SALOME

And hast not found it?

JOHN

Not for myself.

SALOME

But for others?

JOHN

[_In torture, half to himself._] Who knoweth?

SALOME

Master, what harm shall wrath do one, who is a jubilation and a feast
day? And if thou camest to me in flames of fire, I would not mourn my
youth for the length of two moons.... I would stretch out my arms and
cry, "Destroy me, flame; take me up!"

JOHN

[_After a pause._] Go!

SALOME

I am going. [_She rushes into the arms of Herodias, who enters._]
Mother!


                                SCENE IX

                  _The same. Herodias and her women._

SALOME

Forgive me, mother, and let me stay with thee.

HERODIAS

Thou who lookest at me so imperiously, art thou the man who stirreth up
the people against me?

JOHN

I am he whom thou hast summoned.

HERODIAS

[_Seating herself._] Come hither to me!

JOHN

Send thy women away, and this child, so that she be not corrupted ere
she is ripe.

HERODIAS

But this child, companion of my fate, shall hear what thou hast to say
to me.

JOHN

She should be guarded from what I have to say to thee.

HERODIAS

Take care, prophet! At that door stand armed men, two deep. Consider
thy danger, so that thou courtest not death!

JOHN

I am a servant of life, and danger never standeth in my way.

HERODIAS

I respect thy faith, prophet, and so would speak to thee in a friendly
spirit.... People have told me of a man who keeps far away from human
dwellings, and only descends now and then to the banks of fresh waters
to bless, so it is said. That pleased me well.... The great willingly
bow to greatness ... and so I bow to thee.

SALOME

[_After cowering at her feet, springs up, and throws herself on her
neck._]

HERODIAS

I will not reproach thee for denouncing me in the market-place of
Jerusalem, for thou dost not know me.... Yet I was _not_ well pleased
that thou didst chew the cud of wormwood, which hath embittered these
Judean cattle against me. I should have thought thou wast too proud,
thy solitary nature too noble!

JOHN

I have not come here for thy praise or thy blame. I have but a simple
question to ask. Art thou going on the first day of the Passover to the
Temple, at the Tetrarch's side?

HERODIAS

[_Mastering her scorn with difficulty._] I perceive, thou great
prophet, that thy wrath strains on its chain.... Before thou lettest it
loose, permit me also to ask a question; for see, I am endeavouring to
approach thee, and would gladly win thee. Wert thou not a riddle to me,
I should not ask it. Yet truly no man is so curiously fashioned as not
to cherish secret wishes in his heart. Every one hath said to himself:
"This were my delight, and that my desire."

JOHN

I understand thee not.

HERODIAS

Look round thee. Doth not the gleaming snow of marble attract thy eyes,
nor the yellow glitter of gold?

JOHN

[_Is silent._]

HERODIAS

Or ... hast thou never dreamed of the power and splendour and riches of
this world?

JOHN

[_Still silent._]

Or [_pointing to Salome, who again cowers at her feet._] has thy heart
not trembled at the sight of this sweet, unveiled youth?

JOHN

[_After further silence._] Thou wouldst sell thyself to me! Dost thou
know thy own price? A grain of barley would be too dear ... for thy
name is courtezan, and adulteress is written on thy brow.

HERODIAS

[_Infuriated._] Thou--thou----

SALOME

[_Falling into her arms._] Mother!

HERODIAS

[_Controlling herself haughtily and contemptuously._] I should have thee
seized on the instant, only thou makest sport for me. And if not quite
intoxicated with thy own superiority, listen to me once more. He who
thinketh himself designed to be a judge over men should take part in
the life of men, should be human among human beings.

JOHN

[_Impressed._] What ... didst thou say?

HERODIAS

But thou seemest to me so isolated from thy fellow-men that the throb
of a human heart itself is nothing to thee.... Thou hast avoided,
cowardlike, all contact with sin and guilt in thy waste places, and now
creepest forth to condemn others as guilty. The scorching winds of thy
desert may perhaps have taught thee hate ... but what knowest thou of
love? of those who live and die for the sake of their love?

JOHN

Thou too speakest of love ... thou too?

HERODIAS

See! I am laughing at thee, great prophet. [_She laughs._]

SALOME

Mother, look at him ... be silent!

JOHN

Thy poisoned arrows are well aimed, and hit their mark! But ...
[_pointing to the window_] see there, the Lord's people ... they gnash
their teeth against thee, for thou hast taken their bitter bread out of
their mouths and dissipated their miserable joys.... Thou sayest that I
know them not.... Yet I know their heart's desire ... for I have
created it; I have put my life at the service of that desire, and I cry
to thee, "Woe! thou that hast contaminated it for them.... Thou
enervatest the strength of their young men, and exposest the shame of
their young women. Thou sowest scoffings where I thought to reap
faith.... And if thou bendest the High and Mighty to be the footstool
of thy lusts, I will fling the poor and humble in thy path, that they
may trample thee beneath their feet.... Woe to thee, and woe to him who
shareth thy adulterous couch!... Woe, too, to this youthful body that
cringes under the scourge of thy blood! Woe! Woe!"

HERODIAS

[_Springing up and going to the door on right._] The guards shall seize
him.... Guards!... [_She wrenches the door open._]


                                SCENE X

                        _The same. Two guards._

HERODIAS

Lead this man ... . [_She hesitates as she meets John's eyes._]

JOHN

[_Smiling._] Now, look to it, what thou dost with me!

HERODIAS

Lead this man ... out ... into the street.... [_She staggers to the
divan._]

SALOME

Thou camest in flames of fire!...

JOHN

[_Walks to the door._]

                         [_The Curtain falls._]




                               THIRD ACT




                               THIRD ACT

_A room in Josaphat's house. In the background a door, which leads into
the street. Near it a barred window. On the left side is a door to
another living room. A door also on the right. In the foreground to
left a cobbler's tools. Towards centre, a table and two or three
benches. To the right, a couch, a small table, and chair beside it. The
room is poor, but not bare; lighted by two clay lamps._


                                SCENE I

JAEL [_With a child at her breast._]

[_Two other children and several women standing near door on left
listening to a psalm sung by men's voices, which is heard in subdued
strains coming through the door._]

THE BOY

What are they singing now, mother?

JAEL

[_Pale and troubled._] They sing the great Hallelujah, my child.

THE BOY

Is the prophet singing with them, mother?

JAEL

That I cannot hear, my child. [_Two more women come through middle
door._]

FIRST WOMAN

Jael, we have heard that the Great Prophet eateth the passover in thy
house. Wilt thou permit us to see him?

JAEL

Come in!

ONE OF THE OTHER WOMEN

That is he, the last there on the left.

FIRST WOMAN

He that sitteth there looking so heavy of spirit?

THE SECOND WOMAN

I should be frightened of him. [_The singing has meanwhile ceased._]

FIRST WOMAN

They say that he hath come into the town to judge Herodias. Is that so,
Jael?

JAEL

I know not.

THE BOY

Mother, see, they are now drinking the fourth goblet. They will be here
directly.

FIRST WOMAN

Hath he spoken a blessing over the fourth goblet?

SECOND WOMAN

No; Josaphat spake it.

FIRST WOMAN

See, they are standing up!

ANOTHER

Are they coming hither, Jael?

JAEL

That is the couch on which he will rest.

SEVERAL

Then farewell, Jael.

JAEL

Farewell! [_They hurry out._]


                                SCENE II

           _Jael with her children. John, Josaphat, Amarja._

JOSAPHAT

Here thou wilt be alone, Rabbi. The others remain outside.

JOHN

Accept my thanks, Josaphat.

AMARJA

Mine, too, Josaphat.

JOSAPHAT

Thank him, Amarja, for eating with us. [_While John seats himself, he
says, sotto voce, to Amarja_] Come! [_Observes Jael, who has been
standing at the door unnoticed._] Jael, thou here, and the children?

JOHN

Is that thy wife, Josaphat?

JOSAPHAT

Yes, Rabbi.

JOHN

And thy children?

JOSAPHAT

Yes, Rabbi.

JOHN

Thou hast never told me of these.... Is thy name Jael? He called thee
so.

JAEL

Yes, Rabbi.

JOHN

Why comest thou not nearer?

THE BOY

We are afraid of thee, Rabbi.

JOHN

[_Smiling._] Why are you afraid?

THE BOY

I do not know.

JOSAPHAT

Forgive him, Rabbi ... he ...

JOHN

Josaphat, wilt thou entrust them to me for a few minutes?

JOSAPHAT

[_Bows his head, signs to Amarja, and goes away with him to the
right._]


                               SCENE III

                      _John, Jael, the children._

JOHN

Thy eyes have a sad look, Jael. Is thy heart troubled?

JAEL

Kneel down, Baruch, my son. Kneel down, both.

THE BOY

[_Half crying._] Mother!

JOHN

What is it, Jael?

JAEL

[_To the children._] Say: Prithee, Rabbi?

THE CHILDREN

Prithee, Rabbi.

JAEL

And this little one prayeth, too, though not old enough to pray....

JOHN

For what?

JAEL

That thou wouldest give them back their father; for see, they have no
bread.

JOHN

[_Lifting the children from their knees._] Just now we ate of the lamb
in thy house, and thou sayest "we have no bread"?

JAEL

I do not speak of to-day; to-day the poorest have something to eat.
Thou art truly a great prophet, Rabbi, and thou givest much to the
people; but from us--from me and these little children--thou takest
away all that we have.

JOHN

How could I do that, Jael?

JAEL

See; for a long time my husband goeth out every night to thee in the
wilderness, and then the tools lie there idle, and we starve. But
willingly would we starve and die of hunger for him, if thou hadst not
estranged his heart from us, and stolen his love for thyself.

JOHN

Art thou, too, one of those who say, Greater than the law and sacrifice
is love?

JAEL

[_Anxiously._] I did not say that, Rabbi.... Thou wouldst not get me
into trouble with the priests?

JOHN

But thou thinkst so in thy heart!

JAEL

Rabbi!

JOHN

Hadst thou come to me in my wilderness, I would have shown thee the way
to One Who shall bring food to the hungry. Here, I am powerless. Go; I
have nothing to do with thee!

JAEL

[_Goes with the children to the door,_]

JOHN

[_Makes a movement as if he would call her back._]

JAEL

Rabbi!

JOHN

[_Shakes his head._]

                   [_Exit Jael, with the children._]


                                SCENE IV

                       _John, Josaphat, Amarja._

JOHN

Josaphat, how long have I known thee?

JOSAPHAT

It is two years since I came to thy baptism.

JOHN

And since, thou hast been often?

JOSAPHAT

Have I not always been with thee, Rabbi?

JOHN

I never knew that thou wast a cobbler ... and that thy children cried
for bread! It seems to me that I do not know thee even yet, Josaphat.

JOSAPHAT

Thou knowest what is best in me, for thou hast given it to me!

JOHN

So, then, I know myself alone. And of thee, too, Amarja, I know no
more.... Only this I know. [_Gazing into vacancy._] I am sent----
[_Breaks off._]

JOSAPHAT

Rabbi!

JOHN

Some one hath said to me that I knew ye not; one of those who have the
word "love" on their tongues.... And I am inclined to believe her....
But even if I have known you, I have not desired to love you, but
rather to judge you in the name of---- In whose name? Know ye the rest?

JOSAPHAT

In the name of Him Who shall come. So thou hast taught us, master.

JOHN

Sooner would I talk to these black walls, that they might perhaps fall;
sooner to thy hungry children, that my words might fill them. But the
belief that looketh up to me, transfigured because it believeth....
That hurts me.

AMARJA

[_Low to Josaphat._] It is now the second hour. Wilt thou not mention
Herod to him?

JOHN

[_As Josaphat comes nearer to him._] I sent the youngest of you to
search for the Galilean. Where is he?

JOSAPHAT

He has not yet come back, master.

JOHN

May be he has lost the way.

JOSAPHAT

I told him where to come to, master.

JOHN

I want the Galilean.... Ye shall procure me the Galilean.... See ye not
that my strength rests in my King ... Even if I serve Him like an
unworthy vessel ... I serve Him according to my measure.... I have
borne witness to Him.... Is that not true?

JOSAPHAT

Thou hast borne witness, indeed, Rabbi.

JOHN

But the testimony hath grown up in my soul. When He comes, will He bear
it out?

JOSAPHAT

He will, master; for God sendeth Him.

JOHN

Else my soul hath not known Him, even as it hath not known you. Have ye
no news of Manassa? Go and keep watch outside, that he doth not miss
the house.

JOSAPHAT

That will be he! [_Goes to open the door._]


                                SCENE V

                         _The same. Matthias._

JOSAPHAT

Thou, Matthias? Hast thou not seen Manassa?

MATTHIAS

No. Rabbi, I come to thee in the night because of Herod.

JOHN

Because of Herod? [_Seats himself with head turned away._]

MATTHIAS

I sent spies to the Palace up till the time of the Passover Feast. The
priests were coming to and fro. What their business was no one knows.
And if he cometh now to the morning sacrifice at eight of the clock, as
is his custom on high festivals ... and comes with that woman ...
flaunting his sin in the face of the people.... Rabbi, speak! What
then?

JOHN

[_Does not answer,_]

AMARJA

He hears thee not.

JOSAPHAT.

He is thinking of the Galilean.

JOHN

I heard some one here speak of sin. Know ye in what raiment sin clothes
itself gorgeously when it goeth abroad among the people? Say
courtliness, say hate, say what ye will, and I shall laugh at you.
Hear, and mark well. They call it love. Everything that is small, and
stoops because it is small, that throws crumbs from its table in order
not to throw bread; that covers up graves that they may stink secretly;
that hews off the thumb of the left hand that it may have nothing to
say to the thumb of the right; take care; all that is called love. And
they call it love when in spring the ass brays and the dogs whine; when
a woman herself gathers together the stones whereon to rest with her
lover in the evening, stones which in the morning the people will hurl
at her, and the woman speaketh: "See beloved, how sweet is our couch."
... They call this love.

MATTHIAS

[_After exchanging a look with Josaphat._] Rabbi, forgive us, but the
people are waiting for thee. The many who desert their beds, expectant
of the morrow, think only of one thing--judgment! The judgment of
Herod.

JOHN

Judgment of Herod--well.

JOSAPHAT

And thou shalt judge him. No one else but thou?

JOHN

I shall judge him.

MATTHIAS.

Him and the woman?

JOHN

Him and the woman. Did ye doubt?

MATTHIAS

If we did, forgive.

AMARJA

But suppose he comes without the woman. What would happen then?

JOHN

Ye ask so much. Ye and your questions become wearisome. Hark! There is
Manassa. [_Josaphat opens._]


                                SCENE VI

                         _The former. Miriam._

JOHN

Miriam, thou? What desirest thou of me?

MIRIAM

[_Breathless._] I flew from the Palace.... The guards have chased
me.... Perhaps what I know ... may be of use to thee.

JOSAPHAT

Speak, Miriam!

MIRIAM

If the master will hear. With ye others I have nothing to do.

JOHN

I will listen, Miriam.

MIRIAM

A rumour has reached the Tetrarch that the people are plotting evil
against him. He would on that account hide the woman, but she will not
be hid. She will defy the master, because he hath offended her. An
order is just gone forth for all the servants of the house to arm
themselves and line the road. Even during the night, so that the
procession shall pass to the Temple ere the great crowd assembleth.
Thus they think to escape the people's wrath and thine, master.

THE DISCIPLES

That shall not come to pass; verily it shall not.

JOSAPHAT

Hast thou learned, Miriam, by which of the outer gates they go to the
Temple?

MIRIAM

By the Susan Gate. I heard the servants say, as I crept by.

JOSAPHAT

And will the Roman soldiers be amongst them?

MIRIAM

That I did not hear.

JOSAPHAT

For if the Romans accompany them, we must wait behind the second gate;
there where no heathen may penetrate at the cost of his head.

MATTHIAS

On the other hand, they can there be saved by the priests.

JOSAPHAT

Certainly, there the priests---- Master, what is thy counsel?

JOHN

I counsel you to go forth into the streets, and to seek right and left.
I would learn from that Galilean what counsel I ought to give you.

MATTHIAS

Canst thou understand him?

JOSAPHAT

I would liefer not understand him.

               [_Exeunt Josaphat, Matthias, and Amarja._]


                               SCENE VII

                            _John, Miriam._

MIRIAM

[_Shrinks against the wall near the door and looks shyly across at
John, who broods with his back turned to her._]

JOHN

[_Suddenly noticing her._] Thou, Miriam, art still here?

MIRIAM

Forgive me, master. I am a little afraid; for if I go homewards the
guards at the gate will seize me.

JOHN

But thou camest to me in the wilderness at night?

MIRIAM

Then no one knew with whom I associated, master.

JOHN

Who art thou? Tell me about thyself. Who is thy father?

MIRIAM

I have no father--and no mother. The country is full of orphans like
me. There are far too many. I have never asked anyone why.

JOHN

And why didst thou go to the Palace as serving maid?

MIRIAM

They say that I once sat and played with pebbles on the threshold. And
when evening came, they took me in. Since then I have belonged to the
Palace, and know no better.

JOHN

Thou servest me with zeal, Miriam. Why dost thou serve me?

MIRIAM

I know not why.

JOHN

And thou servest me to no purpose--knowest thou that?

MIRIAM

[_Bows her head._]

JOHN

Will they not punish thee?

MIRIAM

[_With a shudder._] They will ... I....

JOHN

Speak!

MIRIAM

Master, what does it matter?

JOHN

Miriam, is it also He Who shall come that thou servest?

MIRIAM

I cannot tell, master. When I see thee, I feel a longing for Him....
But if thou speakest to me of Him, I see only thee.

JOHN

Ye children of men ... there is a rushing as of many waters in your
souls.... Clear and muddy ... I shall gather all together in one great
river, and I feel as if I should drown therein.

MIRIAM

Master, now I must go. Whether or no I served thee to no purpose, be
gracious. Praise me, master.

JOHN

I see thee sitting on the threshold again ... playing with thy life,
and thou excitest my pity. ... Go, maid! Go, child! and [_He listens._]

MIRIAM

Master!


                               SCENE VIII

           _The former. Josaphat, Matthias, Amarja, Manassa._

JOHN

[_Going forward to him._] Where is the Galilean?

MANASSA

I have sought Him, master, from the hour thou sentest me till past
midnight. I have not rested nor tasted a crumb.

JOHN

The Galilean? Hast thou found Him?

MANASSA

I found him. He lay stretched out on the stones in charge of the
soldiers, and near him, in chains, was his murderer.

AMARJA

Who, on the holy eve of the Passover----?

MANASSA

They called him David the Zealot. The Galileans blaspheme God, he hath
said, and therefore must this one die.

JOSAPHAT

It is true; he did blaspheme God.

MATTHIAS

He blasphemed God!

JOHN

But I say unto you ... To him it was not blasphemy. To him it was
worship. Methinks more such men will come out of Galilee. For there is
an uprising there.... Tell me, Josaphat, do not many pilgrims sleep on
the stones at night, nigh the doors of the Temple?

JOSAPHAT

Yes, Rabbi. On starry nights, like these, many a one wraps himself in
his blanket and tarries by the House of the Lord.

JOHN

[_In sudden decision._] It is well.                        [_Exit._

MATTHIAS

Rabbi!

AMARJA

Hath he deserted us?

JOSAPHAT

Be not troubled! Thou, Amarja, wake our friends. Thou, Manassa, bring
us tidings from the Palace. We two will follow the master. Meet us at
the Susan Gate, at the place where the old beggar-woman sits. Come!
[_Exeunt the men._]

MIRIAM

[_Who has stood unheeded, goes out with bowed head._]


                            CHANGE OF SCENE

_A stone square before the open gate of the Temple called the Susan
Gate. The front of the stage is enclosed by the circuit of the outer
wall. In the centre more than half the breadth of the stage is taken up
by the massive doors of the gate, to which steps lead. It is night. The
fire of the great sacrificial altar is reflected from the background on
the walls, and fills the foreground with red, uncertain flickering
glow._


                                SCENE X

_Pilgrims_ (_men and women_) _lie in their blankets, scattered about
the steps and on the stones which fill the space on left side. Among
them the First Galilean and Second Galilean. To the right of the path
which leads outside the wall of the Temple, across the stage, lies
Mesulemeth_. (_In a little while enter John from left._)

JOHN

[_Looks round searchingly, and pauses before a pilgrim who is sleeping
on the steps._] Pilgrim, awake!

PILGRIM

It is not yet day. Why dost thou wake me?

JOHN

Whence comest thou? Art thou a Galilean?

PILGRIM

I come from Gaza on the south-east coast. Let me sleep.

SECOND GALILEAN

[_To first._] Didst hear? Some one there is talking of Galileans.

FIRST GALILEAN

Sleep, and let them talk.

JOHN

[_Walks on, and then pauses in front of Mesulemeth._] Thou who liest
here by the way, be thou man or woman, wake up!

MESULEMETH

Why dost thou not step over me, as every one does in Jerusalem?

JOHN

Dost thou lie here always in the road?

MESULEMETH

I lie here always. For I must be at the Temple. Day and night I must be
at the Temple.

JOHN

Art thou not greedy for alms?

MESULEMETH

[_Shaking her head._] The little I want, the pilgrims give me. But hast
thou never heard of Hannah, the prophetess?

JOHN

I have heard speak of her, when I was a child.

MESULEMETH

Well, this is her place. Here she sat and waited for the Messiah, forty
years long. When she died she left the place to me ... And now I sit
and wait till He comes again.

JOHN

Comes again? Hath He then been already?

MESULEMETH

Certainly He hath.

JOHN

[_In deep emotion._] He came? Came even to thee?

MESULEMETH

To me? No. If He had come to me, I should have been at rest long ago.
But Hannah ... She saw Him when He came.

JOHN

Woman! I implore thee ... Speak, tell me, how did He come?

MESULEMETH

Then sit down here beside me, so that I may speak low.... Once a little
lad was brought to the Temple by his mother, to be circumcised. And
there was one called Simeon who, when he saw this boy-babe, was filled
with the Holy Ghost, and said, "Lord, now lettest thou Thy servant
depart in peace, for his eyes have seen Thy salvation, which Thou hast
prepared for all nations." ... And Hannah heard this, and she came up
to them and recognised Him?

JOHN

How did she recognise Him?

MESULEMETH

Did I not tell thee that she was a prophetess? Otherwise she might not
have recognised Him. But as it was, she praised the Lord, and laid
herself down and died. So now I sit where she sat, and wait for Him to
come again.

JOHN

Verily, He must come again; and dost thou know, woman, how He will
come? As the Lord of Hosts, arrayed in golden armour, with His sword
drawn above His head, so He will come to save His people Israel. He
will trample His enemies under His horse's hoofs, but the youth of
Israel shall greet Him with hosannas and jubilation. See, woman, that
is how He will come!

MESULEMETH

[_Anxiously._] Who art thou, stranger? Dost thou imagine thyself to be
the prophet of anyone?

JOHN

It matters not who I am, if thou art prepared for my message.

MESULEMETH

Thou canst take thy message further. I will not have it.

JOHN

What! Thou wilt not have the Messiah?

MESULEMETH

Not that one. I will not have that one. For many have come in golden
armour, and have drawn their sword, and then Israel hath bled after,
like a sacrificial ox. _He_ shall be no king! No! When kings come, they
come to kings! No one hath come, as yet to us, the poor---- Go away,
stranger, lest thou snatch from me my crumb of hope. Begone, thou art a
false prophet!... Go, let me lie on the road! [_She sinks back._]

JOHN

[_To himself._] False prophet!


                                SCENE XI

           _The same. Josaphat, Matthias_. [_From the left._]

MATTHIAS

See, he is there!

JOSAPHAT

Rabbi, forgive us for following thee hither----

JOHN

It is not yet dawn.... At this hour ye have nothing to claim from
me----

MATTHIAS

But, remember Herod----

JOHN

Why stir ye up so much dust? This puny Herod, who runs after women, is
not my business.

JOSAPHAT AND MATTHIAS

[_Exchange dismayed glances._]

JOHN

Go, find me Galileans! Wake those who sleep on the steps, ransack the
houses if necessary. Only bring me Galileans, that I may question them.

SECOND GALILEAN

Hearest thou? Some one standeth there, clamouring for Galileans!

FIRST GALILEAN

I thought I dreamt it. Thou, who wilt not let us sleep, what dost thou
want with us Galileans?

JOHN

Stand up and come to me!

SECOND GALILEAN

Goest thou?

FIRST GALILEAN

He must be great in Israel, otherwise he would not command.

SECOND GALILEAN

Yes, yes; thou art right. [_They both stand up._]

JOSAPHAT

Rabbi----[_John signs to him with his hand to be silent._]

FIRST GALILEAN

Now, here we are.

JOHN

Who are ye? Whence do ye come?

FIRST GALILEAN

We are fishermen from the Sea of Galilee. My name is Ram, and that is
my brother-in-law, and he is called Abia. And we both fish with the
same net. Is it not so?

SECOND GALILEAN

Yes; we both fish with the same net.

JOHN

And tell me, ye two men, have ye ever heard of a prophet that teacheth
in Galilee?

FIRST GALILEAN

A prophet! Hast thou heard of a prophet, Abia?

SECOND GALILEAN

I have heard of no prophet.

JOHN

Not ... of one who saith ... He is the Son of God?

FIRST GALILEAN

Ah, thou meanest Jesus of Nazareth?

JOHN

[_In great agitation, scarcely audible._] Jesus of Nazareth!

JOSAPHAT AND MATTHIAS.

[_Awed._] Jesus of Nazareth!

JOHN

Thou spakest His name first. Fear sealed my lips. But now thou hast
said it. Yes, I mean Him.

FIRST GALILEAN

Yes ... I know His father well. He is an honest carpenter, and very
pious too. He well deserves that his son should be a joy to him.

JOHN

Tell me more of Him.

FIRST GALILEAN

He put up a bedstead for a friend of mine.

JOHN

Tell me of the son.

FIRST GALILEAN

Ah, the son. Well, Abia, what shall we say of the son?

SECOND GALILEAN

Aye, what shall we say of the son?

JOHN

Hast thou ever seen Him?

FIRST GALILEAN

Oh, yes.

JOHN

Thou hast seen Him?

FIRST GALILEAN

Many a time ... from my ship. For He carries on His work on the shore.
And there is always a great gathering along the banks, is there not,
Abia?

SECOND GALILEAN

Yes, the banks are always quite black with people. And the fish take
notice of it. That is not good for our trade.

FIRST GALILEAN

They say that He works miracles. I once met a man myself who had
been blind till his--I forget what year--and he maintained that
he was made to see again by spittle from His mouth ... It may be
possible--but----[_Laughs stupidly._]

JOHN

[_To Josaphat._] Have not many said of me, that I work miracles?

JOSAPHAT

Many say it, but we know it, Rabbi.

JOHN

Indeed? I have seen no miracle but the power ... and no one to whom it
hath happened, save the weak. But speak on, man.

FIRST GALILEAN

It may be all very well for Him to heal the sick, but the worst of it
is He doeth it on the Sabbath. That is bad, bad! And then, His friends
are not well chosen. Circumspect people, naturally, are not disposed to
mix with Him. For how can one trust a man who sitteth at meat with
publicans and sinners? And, then, He is always at weddings and feasts.
Ah! No, no.

JOHN

At feasts?

JOSAPHAT

Master, these are little people. They understand not the wisdom of
cunning speech.

JOHN

The great should carry the little with them, the wise should master
these simple intellects. That he hath not done.... And what is it He
teacheth?

FIRST GALILEAN

Ah, what does He teach? All sorts of folly. For instance, that we
should love our enemies.

JOHN

Love our enemies?

FIRST GALILEAN

And bless them that curse us ... and pray for them that persecute us.

JOHN

Pray for them that persecute us?

FIRST GALILEAN

Yes; and more nonsense of the kind. Also that----

CALL

[_From the roof of the Temple._] It groweth light towards Hebron.

JOHN

[_Eagerly._] Why dost thou not proceed?

FIRST GALILEAN

[_Rising._] It is now time for morning prayer.

CALL

[_More distant._] It groweth light towards Hebron. [_All stand up and
begin to pray, their faces turned towards the Temple._]

CALL

[_Quite distant._] It groweth light towards Hebron.

JOHN

[_Baffled and tormented._] Towards Hebron it groweth light.


                               SCENE XII

[_The great gates are slowly opened, displaying marble walls, mounting
in terraces, behind which are two more gates. The Temple-building
itself is almost completely hidden by smoke from the great lighted
sacrificial altar, which bounds the perspective. From the mountains
behind the Temple are heard the long-drawn notes of the silver
trumpets. People begin to stream up._]

MATTHIAS

[_Has gone to Josaphat's side and speaks to him privately, then turns
to John, who stands alone on the left._] Master, the people are
flocking to the Temple.... In a few moments the Tetrarch will certainly
be there too, with the woman. Wilt thou not step among them, that they
may know their leader?

JOHN

The image of my King shining in the radiance of the cherubim. Where is
it? Where is the rainbow of seven colours that was round His head?
Seven torches burned by His throne. I see them no more!


                               SCENE XIII

                          _The same. Manassa._

MANASSA

[_Hurrying up from left._] Matthias, Josaphat, where is the master?

JOSAPHAT

Herod has come forth from his door?

MANASSA

[_Assents._]

JOSAPHAT

With the woman?

MANASSA

With the woman.

JOSAPHAT

Master [_as he heeds not_], Master----

JOHN

What is it?

JOSAPHAT

Herod is on the way.

JOHN

Who is Herod?

JOSAPHAT

[_Buries his face in his hands._]

MATTHIAS

[_To Manassa._] Had he the Roman soldiers with him?

MANASSA

Only his servants are with him.

MATTHIAS

Hearest thou, master? He is delivered into our hands.


                               SCENE XIV

           _The same. Amarja; with a fresh crowd of people._

AMARJA

[_Calling._] John, where is John?

JOSAPHAT

[_With resolution._] Here is John.

THE PEOPLE

[_Hear and murmur, joyously._] See, there is John!

JOSAPHAT

Hear all of you! Go not past; and thou over there mayest speak. The
master will listen unto thee.

AMARJA

Herod is coming to the Temple, wearing princely robes. At his side,
sparkling with precious stones, walks the courtezan.

THE PEOPLE

[_Break out into cries of anger._]

JOSAPHAT

Master, thy hour is come; mount the steps and speak to them!

THE PEOPLE

[_Pressing round._] John, speak--Rabbi, speak--What shall we do?

JOSAPHAT

Keep back! He will speak to you. [_Sotto voce._] Mount the steps!

JOHN

[_Walks as if in a dream towards the steps._]

THE PEOPLE

[_Murmuring._] See! He sways. What aileth him?

JOSAPHAT

Make haste. Speak!

CALL

Here is Herod. Here cometh Herod!

THE PEOPLE

Stone him! Stone the courtezan!

OTHERS

Look at John! Do what John does, else are ye lost.


                                SCENE XV

          _The same. Herod, Herodias, with train from right._

JOHN

[_John has mounted the steps and stands in the middle of the
threshold._]

HEROD

[_Pale, but smiling._] Hearest thou what they cry?

HERODIAS

Have him seized, else it means death to you and to me.

THE PEOPLE

[_Are silent and tense in expectation. Most of them have picked up
stones._]

JOSAPHAT

[_Who stands to the left of John on a lower step, hands him a stone,
and says in a low voice._] Take this stone! [_More urgently._] Take
this stone!

JOHN

[_Takes the stone._]

HEROD

Thou on the steps. Knowest thou me not?

JOSAPHAT

[_Whispers._] Hurl the stone!

JOHN

[_Firmly._] In the name of Him [_He is about to throw the stone, then
pauses, half-questioning, half-swooning._] ... Who ... commands me ...
to love thee----[_A low moaning runs through the people._]

TWO SERVANTS

[_Have approached John. They seize him and push him down from the
Temple steps._]

HEROD AND HERODIAS

[_Walk up._]

THE PEOPLE

Woe to us! He too hath forsaken us. Woe, woe!

JOSAPHAT

[_To John, who is pinioned by the servants._] Master, what hast thou
done to us?

THE PEOPLE

Woe! Woe!

                         [_The curtain falls._]




                               FOURTH ACT




                               FOURTH ACT

_A town in Galilee.... The stage represents a grass-grown prison-yard
which, on the right side, is adjacent to the gardens of a Herodian
Palace, divided from them by a low wall, which continues in a
right-hand direction to the centre of background. On the left side of
background a higher wall, and entrance with heavy doors. To the left,
the clumsy pile of the prison buildings and a door. In the garden wall
is a gate, over which hangs the green foliage of the garden beyond,
which bounds the right side of background. On the right is a
semi-circular shaped marble seat with back; on left, stones covered
with moss._


                                SCENE I

                             _Gaoler, Abi._

ABI

[_With head thrust over the garden wall._] Master Gaoler, dost thou not
hear?

GAOLER

What wilt thou?

ABI

A ball went over the wall. Hast thou seen it?

GAOLER

No.

ABI

Please look for it, and throw it back.

GAOLER

Look for it thyself.

ABI

How can I, unless thou openest the gate.

GAOLER

I may not open it. Let me be.

ABI

Listen, Gaoler. The ball belongs to Salome, our young Princess. If thou
art not obliging, beware!

GAOLER

Oh, if it belongs to the young Princess----[_Opens the gate._]


                                SCENE II

             _The Gaoler, Abi, Maecha, and later, Salome._

ABI

[_Calls back, laughing._] Mistress, the door is open.

GAOLER

Is that the young Princess, who is daughter of his new wife?

ABI

[_Nods._]

SALOME

[_Appears in the gateway._]

GAOLER

Princess, if ever thou comest through again, be sure to laugh, as
to-day. For this gate is full of danger for Herod's children.

SALOME

What does it do to Herod's children, thy gate?

GAOLER

The two sons of Herod the Great came through this gate before they were
sentenced, and through this gate----

MAECHA

Stop!...

SALOME

Let him alone, Maecha! His wisdom has taken a holiday. Hast thou no
livelier stories, old man?

GAOLER

What sort dost thou mean, young Princess?

SALOME

Stories of yesterday. Stories that have not yet come to an end--stories
that are as young [_stretches herself_] as we are.

GAOLER

Ah, I knew; but----

SALOME

But? Tell me, hast thou a new prisoner?

GAOLER

Yes.

SALOME

What has he done?

GAOLER

[_Maliciously._] He stole hens, young Princess.

SALOME

See to it that thou dost not steal my time!

ABI

[_Softly to him._] With her there is no jesting.

GAOLER

Princess, forgive.... I did not know.... Thou meanest, perhaps, John?

SALOME

Which John?

GAOLER

The one they call the Baptist--the Prophet from Judea, who----

SALOME

So he is here?

GAOLER

Yes; he has been here the last three days, Princess. They brought him
at the end of the same cavalcade which brought thee. He lieth now safe
with the salamanders and scorpions. They say he stirred up rebellion in
Jerusalem, and therefore----

SALOME

I wish to see John. Bring him here!

GAOLER

[_Horrified._] Princess, that cannot be.

SALOME

I wish it! Hast thou not heard? I wish it!

GAOLER

Princess, I opened this gate for thee because thou hadst lost a
plaything. Shall I now, instead of thy plaything, lose this old head?

MAECHA

Mistress, the Tetrarch is coming.

SALOME

[_Veiling herself._] Hide yourselves! [_She stoops behind the seat;
the maidens slip into the bushes._]

              [_In the gateway Herod and his attendants._]


                               SCENE III

           _The same. Herod, Merokles, Jabad, Gabalos._

HEROD

Gaoler!

GAOLER

Sire.

HEROD

Who are the three men who linger about the door? They look morose, and
did not salute me.

GAOLER

Sire, those are the remnant of the crew which followed John, they say,
from Jerusalem. For eight days and eight nights they followed him.

HEROD

The remnant, sayest thou? Where are the rest?

GAOLER

They lie somewhere by the wayside, Sire, and die of thirst, unless the
ravens give them to drink.

HEROD

Drive them away!

GAOLER

Sire, we have hunted them off several times; but they always come back.

HEROD

So, let them be.

MEROKLES

See, how mild is our ruler! He doth not order them to be cut in pieces.

JABAD

Hail to our Ruler! [_The two others join in._]

HEROD

To speak candidly, friends, I do not lay hands on sages and fools
willingly; for one can never know whether the executioner holds up the
head of a sage or a fool.

GABALOS

Thou canst do no wrong, Sire; for thou art wise, all-wise!

HEROD

When I order thee to be beheaded, I shall not be wrong; for thou art a
fool, a complete fool. [_Nearing the seat._] Bring me----[_Observes
Salome, who, listening, has raised her head a little above the edge of
the seat, then quickly dives down again._] I beg you to retire, and
await me without the gate.

                              [_Exeunt Gabalos, Merokles, Jabad._]


                                SCENE IV

             _Herod, Salome. Also Abi and Maecha, hidden._

HEROD

Tell me, thou veiled one, art thou not Salome, my wife's daughter?

SALOME

Sire, so true as 'tis that thou art my protector I am Salome.

HEROD

How camest thou into this prison-yard?

SALOME

Ask me not, Sire. My soul else will blush before thee. It was
curiosity, because I heard thee coming.

HEROD

And where are thy playmates?

SALOME

They are afraid of thee, so they have crept away. Abi, Maecha, come
forth; our master commands it. [_Abi and Maecha come out hesitatingly,
and curtsey profoundly._]

HEROD

Thy eyes plead for them, therefore they shall not be scolded.

SALOME

And my lips thank thee on their behalf.

HEROD

They thank like conquerors. There is music in them. How is it, Salome,
that I have never heard thy voice?

SALOME

Thou shouldst ask my mother, Sire.

HEROD

[_Fiercely._] Thy mother! Still, I know that thou art well disposed
towards me. Thou didst deliver into my hand that maid who carried on
treason at night outside the Palace.

SALOME

Could I do less, Sire? And him to whom she betrayed thy secrets, wilt
thou not punish him too?

HEROD

I do not know. But how?

SALOME

Sire, it seemeth to me that he hath a great following among the people.
If thou sparest him, the people will like thee.

HEROD

Words of wisdom fall from thy lips, Salome.

SALOME

See how his disciples tarry at the entrance. If thou treatest him well,
they will carry praises of thee to Jerusalem.

HERODIAS

How unlike thou art to thy mother, Salome!

SALOME

And how like, too!

HEROD

I would rather think that thou wert unlike. My sweet, unveil thyself.

SALOME

Sire, if thou wert my father! But thou art not. Directly thou comest
near, my mother herself draweth my veil down deep over my breast.

HEROD

Unveil to me.

SALOME

Sire, not when I am alone with thee.

HEROD

Then if I was with others, thou wouldst?

SALOME

Perhaps. Ask my mother.

HEROD

A little now. Just a finger's length.

SALOME

No, really ... it is not seemly, Sire.

HEROD

But if I were sitting with other men ... at meat ... or over wine ...
and thou camest and unveiled, that would be more seemly?

SALOME

May be!... I can dance, Sire.

HEROD

Wouldst thou do that for me also?

SALOME

And what wouldst thou do for me?

HEROD

Salome!

SALOME

[_Rising._] No, but thou must indeed ask my mother, Sire. I am still
far too ignorant; I know not what a maiden ought to do. Only what I
would like to do. I know that well enough.

HEROD

What wouldst thou _like_ to do?

SALOME

Thy pleasure, Sire. Nothing else, nothing. Seest thou, if thou treatest
this prisoner humanely, they will sing thy praises, and I shall be so
proud, I shall say in my heart, He acted on my advice.

HEROD

[_To the gaoler._] Bring the Baptist here.... I will consider it,
Salome.

                                                   [_Exit Gaoler._

SALOME

[_From the gate, with a slight fluttering of her veil._] And I will
thank thee, Sire!

HEROD

Salome!

SALOME

[_Vanishes, with a burst of laughter. Abi and Maecha have preceded
her._]

HEROD

[_Looks after her, and then sits down on the seat._]


                                SCENE V

                  _Herod, John. The Gaoler. A Guard._

HEROD

Tell me, how should one address thee when one would show thee respect?
Thou thinkest that I mock thee? But knowest thou that in reality I am
indebted to thee? The people's meditated attack was not hidden from me,
and yet I came without the escort of warriors which Rome sent for my
protection. Thou heldest me in the hollow of thy hand, as thou heldest
the stone. Say, why didst thou let it fall? Why hast thou spared me?

JOHN

Sire, even if I spoke thou wouldst not understand me.

HEROD

That is defiance, which I cannot praise. In chains it is easy to be
defiant. Take off his chains and go. [_The Gaoler obeys. Exit with the
guard._] Now, as a free man, revile me. Art thou a preacher of
repentance? If so, preach to me!

JOHN

Sire, thou wouldst not understand me.

HEROD

So thou saidst before. Think of something new. Here in Galilee I am
inclined to be mild and tolerant of goodness. I am told that thou
hatest the Pharisees. I hate them too. I am told that thou hatest the
priests. I love them not. I am told that thou hatest the Romans.
I---- Say, why didst thou spare me?

JOHN

Sire, my heart failed me.

HEROD

Failed thee! Before me, whom thou callest "the little"! Art thou
flattering me because I have loosened thee from thy chains?

JOHN

Thou hast not laid me in chains, and canst not loosen me from them.

HEROD

What ... and yet I made thee falter?

JOHN

It was Another who threw thee in my way.... And so my heart failed me.

HEROD

Tell me, Baptist--I call thee by the name I have heard people speak of
thee by, and I hope thou wilt not be angry--tell me, Who is that King
of the Jews whose image thou danglest before the people?... See, the
guards are gone, and thy confidence shall be rewarded. Tell me, who is
it?

JOHN

Sire, I know not.

HEROD

And so thou deniest thy own creature?

JOHN

What is my own I deny.

HEROD

Ha, ha, ha! I have half a mind to summon my little Greek that he may go
to school under thee. Listen [_in a low voice_], I too have heard of a
King of the Jews who will come with a sword drawn above his head, and
he will spare no one who doth not serve him at the right moment.

JOHN

[_Eagerly._] Who is it, of whom thou speakest?

HEROD

Master, I do not know. Thou seest thus that I too have a burden of
secret anxiety oppressing me, and await the sunrise.... But let me
speak with thee seriously, Baptist. Thou hurlest thy arrows of reproach
at me on account of the woman I stole.... I could almost pity thee for
that. Thou, a great man, mightst have chosen a greater subject than a
woman. And knowest thou every day she sharpens those arrows herself for
me?... But enough of that. The smiths say that good metal rings true
even when it is cracked, and thou ringest true. How dost thou manage
it?... I pray thee teach me the way.... What, silent again?

JOHN

Methinks I know you now, ye smiling scoffers. Ye grow fat on the wit of
the market-places; but hunger seizes you, and ye then lift your eyes to
the earnest ones, walking on the mountain-tops.

HEROD

By Bacchus, there lurks some truth in that. But it's not good walking
on the mountain-tops. We wait to see you fall; then we shall not smile,
but laugh.

JOHN

But I say unto thee, Sire, thou wilt not laugh. He Who cometh requireth
me not. That is why He cast me down.... Gaze into His eyes when He
comes, and thou wilt not laugh, even at me.

HEROD

It seems to me thy reasoning is poor, and revolves in a circle.... And
yet there is something that attracts me to thee. Baptist, thou hast so
long been my enemy, couldst thou not possibly be my friend?

JOHN

Sire, meseemeth that to be nobody's enemy and nobody's friend is the
right of the lonely. It is their all. Let me keep it.

HEROD

Yet I do not give thee up as lost. If thou wert so minded we might
pursue the same paths for a spell.

JOHN

Whither, Sire?

HEROD

Whither? Upwards!

JOHN

For thee there is no upwards. Thou bearest the times that are and
were before thee, like an ulcerous evil, on thy body. Burnest thou
not from all their poisonous lusts? Art thou not weighted by their
unholy desires? And thou wouldst mount to the heights. Stay in the
market-place and smile.

HEROD

Baptist, take care. Thy chains lie not far off.

JOHN

Let me be chained, Sire; I ask for nothing better.

HEROD

[_Gnashing his teeth._] Truly thou art ruled by a broken spirit.
[_After a little reflection._] Yet tell me, Baptist, when that other
cometh, that other----Say, was it in His Name that thou didst not throw
the stone at me?

JOHN

[_Confused._] Sire, what dost thou ask?

HEROD

Was it in His Name? For if so, thy Jewish king shall not rob my nights
of sleep. Ha! ha! Here, gaoler! [_The gaoler comes._] The prisoner
shall go in and out as he pleaseth, for he is not dangerous.

GAOLER

[_Dumfounded, then in a low voice._] Sire, how shall my life be safe,
if----

HEROD

And his disciples, who loiter about the gates. Let them in and out as
often as he wishes.... Now, did this God's people ever know a more
clement master than I? [_Laughing, walks away._]


                                SCENE VI

             _John and the Gaoler. Later, Maecha, Salome._

GAOLER

Well, thou art now thy own master. What are thy commands?

JOHN

The Tetrarch spoke of my disciples----

MAECHA

[_Appearing in the gateway to left._] He is alone.

SALOME

[_Signs to the Gaoler. Exeunt Maecha and Gaoler._]

JOHN

What wilt thou?

SALOME

Master, seest thou the sun sinking yonder between the pomegranate
boughs?

JOHN

I see it.

SALOME

Knowest thou whose doing it is that thou art able to see it ere it
goeth down, and ere thou goest down? Mine!

JOHN

May be. What dost thou want?

SALOME

Thou shalt not go down. Not thou. For my soul is thirsty. Teach me,
master.

JOHN

What shall I teach thee?

SALOME

See, I am pious by nature, and I have a longing for salvation.... What
thou givest to the humblest by the highway, give also to me. Let me sit
at thy feet. I will be pious. Yea, I will. And if I touch thy hairy
shirt, then be not frightened. I mean thee no harm.

JOHN

Why shouldst thou mean me harm, young virgin?

SALOME

Who can say ... if thou shouldst reject me! No one knows how powerful I
am to-day. When I stretch my limbs [_she spreads out her arms_] it
seems to me as if I carried the whole world like this ... only to hug
it to my heart.

JOHN

Maiden, thou hast a playmate.

SALOME

[_Attentively._] Which playmate?

JOHN

Her name is Miriam.

SALOME

I _had_ her. Now she is dead.

JOHN

[_Bows his head. His suspicions realized._]

SALOME

I had her slain because she went to thee. No one shall go to thee
except me. Seest thou now how pious I am? Seest thou? My soul feels thy
strength, and feels it with joy; for I have never seen anyone so strong
as thou art. I have made thankofferings and secret vows like those the
Psalms sing of. Then I have been forth in the gloaming to seek thy
countenance and the light of thy eyes. And I have decked my bed with
beautiful, many-coloured rugs from Egypt, and I have sprinkled my
pillows with myrtle, aloes, and cinnamon. I will give thee my fair
young body, thou barbarian among the sons of Israel! Come, let us make
love till morning. And my playmates shall keep watch on the threshold,
and greet the dawn with their harps.

JOHN

Verily, thou art powerful; thou carriest the world in thy arms ... for
thou art sin itself.

SALOME

Yes. Sweet as sin.... That am I.

JOHN

Go!

SALOME

Thou spurnest me! Spurnest me? [_She rushes through the gate._]


                               SCENE VII

                   _John, Josaphat, Manassa, Amarja._

JOHN

[_Goes to the door, where the Gaoler is waiting._]

GAOLER

Wouldst thou see thy disciples now?

JOHN

Bring them to me.

[_Manassa, Amarja hasten to him and kiss his garment. Josaphat hangs
back._]

JOHN

Matthias is not with you?

JOSAPHAT

No.

JOHN

What, Josaphat, thou who wast ever the nearest to me, hast thou no
greeting to give?

JOSAPHAT

[_Turns away._]

JOHN

Well, then, what is it?

JOSAPHAT

Rabbi, it is written ... One knife sharpens another, and one man
another ... but thou hast made us blunt.

JOHN

And thou hast come this long way to tell me that?

JOSAPHAT

Rabbi, thou shouldst be the way that all the erring follow. Thou
shouldst strengthen weak knees and mould trembling hands to the sword's
hilt. Thy work was wrath, Rabbi, but thou hast made of it a sophistry
and a weakness.

JOHN

Thou art not to know what my work was. Had I known myself, I should not
be here. Truly the time of my fall is come, when enemies sing my
praises and friends speak ill of me. What would ye have me do? My end
must be in solitude and silence.

JOSAPHAT

Thy end, Rabbi, is no concern of ours. It is for Israel's end that I
fear. Thou tookest the law from us. What hast thou given us instead?

JOHN

Who art thou, that like a kennelled hound, thou bitest at my shanks?
_I_ took the law from you? My soul hath wrestled with the law till it
is weary; my forehead beat against its walls till it bled! But now ye
have opened your mouths wide that salvation should slip down them like
sweet crumbs. Ye gazed up at me so long as I stood erect, and now
shrink away like cowards from my fall. I have not fallen for myself, I
fell for you. To you it was a compulsion and a matter of watching. To
me it was voluntary, and a combat at the sword's point.... Look at me!
Twice to-day I have been face to face with the world's sin. But it
seemed to me almost fair, for I have yet to meet the worst. Thou art a
renegade! Thou hast ever been a renegade, and renegades will ye be to
all eternity, ye men of universal utility, who manure your acres with
the blood of those who have died for you! Go! I am weary of you!

JOSAPHAT

I am going, Rabbi, whither Matthias hath gone before me, to Jesus of
Nazareth.

JOHN

[_Startled and moved._] To Jesus of Nazareth?

JOSAPHAT

[_Turns silently to go out._]                            [_Exit._


                               SCENE VIII

                        _Manassa, Amarja, John._

JOHN

How Amarja, and how Manassa? Those whom I trusted the most have
forsaken me, and ye are still here!

AMARJA

Rabbi, I was at all times the least among thy disciples. What should I
be worth if I were not faithful?

MANASSA

And to me, Rabbi, thou hast given a hope.

JOHN

Yet he is gone to Jesus of Nazareth. Be ye not fools. Go with him.

MANASSA

Let us be fools, Rabbi.

JOHN

[_Sitting down on a stone._] So seat yourselves with me. Night draweth
nigh, and I am weary. Hearken! It was even as if I heard a beating of
wings above me. Did ye hear nothing?

AMARJA

Nothing, Rabbi.

JOHN

The womb of my soul is opened. I am ready for the blessing from on
high. Is there not a whispering, roundabout? Heard ye nothing?

MANASSA

Nothing, Rabbi.

JOHN

There is a light shining over yonder mountains. Lovely is that light,
and within me dawns the meaning of a contradiction. Who alone can
deliver the world? To obtain it as a gift is to stretch forth your
hands for the unobtainable.... We are in Galilee, know ye, where He now
teacheth, this Jesus of Nazareth!

AMARJA

We heard in the streets that He was not far off. He tarries on the
sea-coast.

MANASSA

And they say He may perhaps come into the town.

JOHN

Mayhap. Yet only mayhap! And my time is over. I must make haste, lest I
die. Will ye do me a service?

AMARJA, MANASSA

Rabbi, command us!

JOHN

Get ye up and go unto Him.

AMARJA, MANASSA

To Him?

JOHN

[_Nods._] And wheresoever ye find Him, speak to Him. Ask: "Art Thou He
Who cometh, or shall we wait for another?" So ask Him, and when He hath
answered, come back--quickly--for my longing for Him is very great. I
believe I could not die ere ye returned.

AMARJA

Master, we will not pause or rest.

JOHN

And ye will not forget my darkness in His radiance?

MANASSA

Master, why makest thou us ashamed?

JOHN

Then, farewell.

MANASSA, AMARJA

Farewell, Rabbi. [_They turn to go._]

JOHN

Go not thus; not yet. Let me clasp your hands, then ye are the least
among my disciples, and [_in great emotion_] methinks I--I--love you.

                         [_The Curtain falls._]




                               FIFTH ACT




                               FIFTH ACT

_Hall in Herod's Palace. A row of pillars, raised by two steps, in the
background, which lead to an open balcony with balustrade. This can be
shut off by curtains, which at first are thrown back. A street is
supposed to run at the foot of the next storey. In the middle of the
stage, raised on a dais, is a table, with couches ranged round it;
flowers and ornaments. Doors to right and left._


                                SCENE I

_Servants moving about arranging pictures and flowers, Gabalos
superintending them; afterwards, Herod._

A SERVANT

[_Announces from door on left._] Our governor!

HEROD

[_Following him._] Now, Gabalos, thou who hast washed in many waters,
what has thy art provided? Thou knowest our guests are spoiled
children.

GABALOS

Sire, thou needest have no anxiety about food and drink. Something
customary is best for jaded palates. Therefore I chartered the cook of
Vitellius. But for the other part of the entertainment the prospect is
bad.

HEROD

[_Smiling._] Is that thy opinion?

GABALOS

Noble Merokles will declaim a new ode, I warrant. Our Libyan
flute-players will have washed their brown legs in honour of the
occasion. Sire, mistrust those legs even when washed. As I tell thee
every day, we are sick of Judean morality. Judean morality is devouring
us like the plague.

HEROD

Say, Gabalos, dost thou think that our Legate from Syria, before whom
all the gaiety and colour of life doth shimmer, hath ever seen a young
daughter of Princes dance at table?

GABALOS

That would be grand, because it is something new.


                                SCENE II

                  _The same. Herodias_ [_from right_].

HEROD

[_Noticing her._] Get thee gone!

[_Gabalos and the servants withdraw to the background, where they let
down the curtains which now shut in the hall._]

HEROD

What hast thou decided? Will it come to pass?

HERODIAS

Thy countenance beams. Thy eyes betray a badly concealed desire.

HEROD

[_Bewildered_] Of what desire dost thou speak?

HERODIAS

Do not prevaricate. I know thee, my friend. The poisonous weed which
thou cultivatest with little sighs, and coverest up with thy crooked
smiles, I know it!

HEROD

I vow, love, that I ask this only for the sake of the Roman. And
how should I ever have conceived the idea had it not been for thy
half-promises and suggestion of its possibilities? Thou knowest as well
as I that we must offer the Roman something immense, something that may
not have faded from his tired memory when he enters Cæsar's presence.

HERODIAS

That is it. And thou thyself gainest thereby a dainty tit-bit for thy
lonely night-dreams! It will be nothing more than that. I'll see to it.

HEROD

I am simple of understanding. I cannot follow thee.

HERODIAS

Oh, yes; very simple is thy understanding. I know.

HEROD

Then it seems thou refusest?

HERODIAS

How could I refuse, when youth smiled and consented?

HEROD

Ah! And what reward wilt thou claim?

HERODIAS

Nothing.

HEROD

Thou art like those priests, dearest. What didst thou ever do for
nothing? Hasten then, I pray, to name thy price!

HERODIAS

Farewell!

HEROD

[_Looks after her, shaking his head._]

HERODIAS

[_Turning round._] Before I forget it, just tell me, my friend, what
art thou going to do with that Baptist?

HEROD

My Baptist is nothing to thee.

HERODIAS

The maids tell me he wanders about loose in the gardens.

HEROD

Let him; he will not hurt thee.

HERODIAS

I only asked, because I wish to know how I am to avoid him.

HEROD

I'll take care, love, that he doth not meet thee. But enough of the
Baptist. Once more thy price, Herodias?

HERODIAS

Look at me! Here is a woman that no longer adorns her own body because
thou now scornest it; she therefore adorns instead the body that came
from hers. Here is a woman whose breasts have withered because her eyes
have shed tears of blood. Therefore she will let the budding bosom,
from which the veil has never yet fallen, be exposed to thine and thy
guests' lustful gaze. And for this sacrifice of unspeakable bitterness
I ask nothing, for I am without wishes. One who can still hope shall
ask. Salome shall ask.

HEROD

Salome ... I would rather it were so.

HERODIAS

And thou wilt grant what she asks?

HEROD

I know not. I will see. I will let myself be driven. For in combat with
the strong that is the last resource of the weak. But take care whither
thou drivest me.... Mistress!                             [_Exit._


                               SCENE III

                          _Herodias, Salome._

SALOME

[_Putting her head through the door._] Mother, am I to dance here?

HERODIAS

Come, softly. Art thou trembling, my dove? Art thou afraid of thy own
will?

SALOME

Take my hand, mother. I am not trembling, because I know that thou art
my will.

HERODIAS

Not I! thou must will.

SALOME

For only the one who willeth exerciseth power. [_As Herodias regards
her suspiciously, she adds quickly._] I read that in the Scriptures,
mother. I did not understand what it meant.

HERODIAS

Listen to me, thou sharpwits. A carpet of Indian wool will be spread
here, there the Prince will sit with the foreign guests.... Let not thy
foot touch the stone, raise not thy eyes.... Dance thy dance modestly,
and when thou hast finished, wipe signs of shame from thy face; hearken
narrowly to what the Tetrarch saith to thee. And if he should say, "Now
ask of me, and----"

SALOME

What then, mother?

HERODIAS

Ask nothing.... Then look at him for the first time a long, smiling
look, and ... ask nothing. After that thou mayest demand.

SALOME

[_Attentive._] What shall I demand, mother? A gold hair-ornament, or
shoes of velvet? No; I know what I'll demand--a mirror.

HERODIAS

[_Passing her hand through Salome's hair._] Verily thou hast never felt
hate to boil in thy breast, like love on a night in May?

SALOME

[_Feigning innocence._] No, mother. How should I?

HERODIAS

Thou hast never felt an insult coursing through thee, like burning,
liquid fire?

SALOME

[_In the same tone._] No, mother; really I have not.

HERODIAS

Thou shalt demand no mirror, no hair-ornament, and no velvet shoes. But
that the head of him they call John the Baptist shall be brought to
thee on a dish.

SALOME

[_Setting her teeth, and controlling herself with difficulty._] On a
golden dish?

HERODIAS

What dost thou say? Understandest thou me not or--who----

SALOME

There's something else. One thing more I want to be sure of! Will _he_
know--that ... that Baptist, from whom the request cometh?

HERODIAS

[_Breaking out_] Certainly, he shall know! I will stand behind thy
bloody trophy as thy will.

SALOME

[_Half to herself._] As the will of my will?

HERODIAS

I will grow over him, as the sword groweth forth from the sleeve of the
executioner ... [_Trumpets sound._] Come!

SALOME

And I will grow over him like a sweet grapevine. [_Exeunt both, to
right._]


                                SCENE IV

_Herod. Vitellius. Marcellus_ (_and other Romans of the Legate and
suite_), _Merokles, Gabalos, Jabad._

HEROD

Welcome to my table, exalted Vitellius, who bringest on the soles of
thy feet the sacred soil of Rome into my poor dwelling. Welcome to you
also, ye who follow him, according to Rome's command. She, our august
mother, but ordereth what my soul desireth.

VITELLIUS

Thou hast my thanks, excellent prince.

HEROD

Repose now at thy pleasure, exalted one. [_They lie on the couches._]

GABALOS

[_Low._] Say, my brave Marcellus, how dost thou like this Jewish
ear-wig?

MARCELLUS

It doth not find its way to our ears.

HEROD

And if thou wilt consent to crown thy brow with this wreath, as our
Lord and Master, I shall be able to persuade myself that I am thy
guest, instead of thou being mine.

VITELLIUS

Thou art _Rome's_ guest, Highness. Thus I will accept what befitteth
me. [_Puts on the wreath which a servant hands to him._]

GABALOS

There was a sting in that speech.

HEROD

[_Quickly collecting himself._] My good Merokles, begin.

MEROKLES

           [_Stands up and reads from a roll of parchment._]

     "Cooled by Hebron's far-gleaming snow,
      The fiery soul, concealed in ice,
      Favours with its flickering smile
      Us the worshippers.

     "So thou sendest forth twofold beams of silent light,
      So flames for us shoot forth from thy coldness,
      So we prize as sacred thy flickering smile, mighty Vitellius--
      Till we----"

VITELLIUS

My dear friend, what is this man talking about?

HEROD

Doth it displease thee, Exalted One?

VITELLIUS

It seemed to me that he called my name. In the case of his desiring a
favour, it shall be immediately granted if he promises to keep silent
for the future!

GABALOS

Oh, friends, what a success!

VITELLIUS

Nevertheless, thy peacock's liver is good, very good, my dear Herod.

HEROD

Thou rejoicest me, Exalted Highness. Wilt thou not now command thy
Libyan flute-players to come and charm thy ear?

VITELLIUS

My ear is obedient. Let them come.


                                SCENE V

[_The same. Salome_ (_thickly veiled_) _led in by Herodias while the
harps are tuned. A murmur of astonishment runs round the table._]

VITELLIUS

Are these thy Libyan----

HEROD

[_Who has risen._] This is my wife, Exalted Highness.

VITELLIUS

[_Also rising._] Mistress, if thou wouldst grace this feast with thy
smiles, I bid thee welcome.

HERODIAS

Pardon, noble Vitellius. The custom of the East, over which thou
reignest so gloriously, doth not permit of my sitting beside thee at
table. Yet we know how to entertain even when we are not merry. My lord
and consort, zealous to please thee, hath commanded me to adorn myself
and my little daughter to enter thy presence, therewith she may delight
thy eyes with her maidenly art, trembling in maidenly modesty.

VITELLIUS

Hail to thee, Prince, and to thy noble wife! Rome will not be grudging
where thou art so lavish. Hearest thou not?

HEROD

[_With his eyes fixed on Salome._] Exalted, look!

VITELLIUS

Truly, he is right; let us look, Romans. Open your eyes wide, for what
is coming is the art of all arts. And if thou tremblest, maiden,
remember that thou rulest because thou tremblest.

MARCELLUS

One is obliged to say that, Gabalos, to encourage her.

GABALOS

Ah, my brave Marcellus, see to it, is it fast on its neck?

MARCELLUS

Who? What?

GABALOS

The head! the head! Look at Herodias. That will cost some one his head!
Only _whose_ has not yet transpired.

MARCELLUS

[_Pointing to Salome._] Silence!... See!...

SALOME

[_Has extricated herself from the arms of Herodias and, accompanied by
exclamations of admiration and delight, has begun to dance. Her dance
becomes wilder and more abandoned; she gradually loosens her veil, then
covers herself with it again in voluptuous playfulness, till at last,
quite unveiled, she stands with the upper part of her body apparently
unclothed. She sinks on her knees half exhausted, half in homage,
before Herod, who stands on the right side of the table._]

               [_All break into ecstasies of applause._]

HEROD

[_Rushes forward to raise her._]

HERODIAS

[_Who has retreated as far as the proscenium on right, and has watched
everything intently with a harassed expression playing on her face, now
intervenes to prevent him. She and Herod exchange hostile glances._]

HEROD

[_Hoarsely._] Salome!

SALOME

Sire!

HEROD

Stand up and speak.

SALOME

[_Slowly rising._] What shall I say, Sire?

HEROD

I am a poor man. Rome--who gave Herod's son, as if in mockery, the name
of Herod--Rome has not left him much of his father's heritage. Yet
enough is still his wherewith to thank thee. Speak, what wilt thou
have? And by that God and Lord before whom we kneel in the dust,
barefoot, at Jerusalem, I swear it shall be thine.

SALOME

I beg and desire that thou wilt give me, on a dish, the head of John
the Baptist.

HEROD

Herodias--thou!

VITELLIUS

Dear friend, whose head doth she want?

HEROD

The head of a man, great legate, who lies in my prison, whom I have
there learnt to respect, I had almost said, to love.

VITELLIUS

Oh, oh!... And is he on view, this man for whose head daughters of
princes dance before thee?

HEROD

Fetch him. [_Exit servant._] Damsel, thy mother led thee into this.
Thou knowest not what thou askest.... Take back thy request.

SALOME

I beg and desire that thou wilt give me the head of John the Baptist on
a golden dish. [_Silence._]

HEROD

And if I refuse?

HERODIAS

[_Drawing herself erect._] Thou hast sworn, Sire.

VITELLIUS

[_Laughing._] Of course, my friend, thou hast sworn. We are all
witnesses of that. Ah! What a wood-god they are bringing in over there.


                                SCENE VI

              _The same. John_ [_led in by two armed men_].

HEROD

I have summoned thee, Baptist. I am sorry for thee. Prepare thyself,
for the evening of thy days is come.

JOHN

I am ready, Sire.

HEROD

Understand me. I am truly sorry. But thou must meet death. Now, on the
spot.

JOHN

[_After looking searchingly towards the door._] Sire, grant me a
respite.

VITELLIUS

Thy hero doth not appear to be all too ready. A little more and he
would whimper.

HEROD

Baptist, wherefore dost thou want this respite?

JOHN

I have sent out messengers and await their return.

HEROD

To whom hast thou sent these messengers?... Thou art silent.... As I
said before. I am from my heart sorry. So much might have been made of
thee.... Still ... [_He shrugs his shoulders._]

JOHN

[_Holding out his arms distressed._] I beseech thee, Sire!

VITELLIUS

Did not I tell you? All kinds of people struggle to live, only the
Roman understands how to die.

HEROD

Thou must ask the maiden, Baptist. Know that in her hands rests what
chance thou hast of the thing called life.

SALOME

Master, now see'st thou how powerful I am? Now ask me! Ask me!

HERODIAS

[_Prompting her, behind._] If he does ask, laugh at him.

SALOME

Perhaps, but who knoweth what my heart desireth?... Now, master, why
dost thou not beg?

JOHN

Maiden ... I ...

SALOME

There is the stone floor, see! The stone longs for the touch of thy
knees.

                               [_Pause._]


                               SCENE VII

                        _The same. The Gaoler._

HEROD

What brings thee here?

GAOLER

Forgive, Sire. Had I not known that thou wast friendly towards the
prisoner ...

HEROD

What dost thou want with him?

GAOLER

Two of his friends who were with him yesterday, the same thou sawest
outside the gate, have come back, and learning that his life is now
in jeopardy--thy servant hath told me, and I have got everything
ready--they became like creatures possessed, and implored me to lead
them to him wheresoever he might be.

HEROD

Dost thou approve, Mighty Legate?

VITELLIUS

Dear friend, this is the most enjoyable entertainment that has ever
been provided for me at meat. Let them come! Let them come!

HEROD

[_Signs._]

GAOLER

[_Retires behind curtain of door and beckons._]


                               SCENE VIII

                      _The same. Manassa. Amarja._

[_They seem at first as if they would rush to John, but overcome by
shyness stand still._]

JOHN

What have ye to tell me?

MANASSA

Master!

HEROD

Speak louder, my good men! Unless ye let us participate in the news, I
will have you carried off through separate doors.

MANASSA

May we, Master?

JOHN

Speak freely, for methinks we are alone together.

MANASSA

We took the road in all haste to Bethesda, and at break of day we found
Him there.

JOHN

Ye found him there?

MANASSA

And many people were gathered about him resting in the olive gardens,
and praised the Lord for the miracle which had been done to them at
that hour. And behold there was a light in every eye, and in every
mouth the music of thanksgiving.

JOHN

And He? How looked His countenance? What were His gestures?

MANASSA

Master, I know not.

JOHN

But ye saw Him?

AMARJA

Rabbi, thou mightest as well ask, What is the face of the sun, and what
the gestures of light?... As we beheld His smile we sank to the ground,
and in our souls was a great peace.

JOHN

And when ye had questioned Him, and He began to speak, tell me what was
His manner of speech? Say; I stand here awaiting His wrath.

AMARJA

Rabbi.... He spoke to us like a brother. His speech was simple.

MANASSA

And it was beautiful ... like the voice of the wind which blows from
the sea towards evening.

AMARJA

And this is what He spake. "Go and tell John what ye have seen and
heard. The blind see, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf
hear, the dead rise, and the poor have the gospel preached to them."

JOHN

The poor--He said the poor?

MANASSA

And when He prepared to come hither to this town with the people who
were gathered about Him, we accompanied Him as far as the gate, and
then hurried on before, according to thy wish.

JOHN

And said He nothing else to you? Reflect well.

AMARJA

Yes; yet one more thing. He said, "Blessed be he who hath not been
offended at me." But this we could not understand.

JOHN

But I understand it well and to whom He spoke. I have been offended,
for I have not recognized Him. And my anger filled the world, for I
knew Him not. Ye yourselves are my witnesses that I have said, "I am
not the Christ, but one sent to prepare the way for Him that cometh." A
man can take nothing to himself that is not given him by Heaven. And
unto me nothing was given. The key of death ... I held it not ... the
scales of sin were not confided to me. For out of no man's mouth may
the name of sin sound, save out of the mouth of the one that loveth.
But I would have scourged you with iron rods. Therefore is my kingdom
come to shame, and my lips are sealed. I hear roundabout a rushing
noise, as of many waters, and the divine radiance is near me.... A
throne hath descended out of heaven amidst darts of fire. The King of
Peace sitteth thereon in white robes. And His sword is called Love, and
His watchword is mercy.... Behold He hath the bride, He is the
bridegroom. But the friend of the bridegroom standeth and listeneth,
and rejoiceth over the voice that is coming. The same is my joy. Now is
it fulfilled. [_He stands with his arms outspread and his eyes turned
towards heaven. Manassa and Amarja sink at his feet._]

VITELLIUS

Dear friend, it seems to me that we have had enough of this maniac.

HEROD

[_Between emotion and scorn._] John, I am truly grieved on thy account.
And when He cometh of whom thou dreamest, I will greet Him as I have
greeted thee. Ha! ha! ha! Lead him to execution.

SALOME

Now, ask me! [_As John smilingly looks beyond her._] Mother, will he
not ask?


                                SCENE IX

_Vitellius, his suite, Herod, Herodias, Salome, Merokles, Gabalos,
Jabad._

VITELLIUS

My friend, thy banquet has been somewhat disturbed. [_As Herod stares
at the door through which John has disappeared._] No matter what I say,
he does not hear me.

HEROD

Exalted highness, pardon!

SALOME

[_Has crossed over the stage and goes stealthily to the door on left.
In great curiosity she draws back the curtain, and after gazing eagerly
through it, reels backwards into the arms of Herodias. Outside, behind
the middle curtain, an ever-increasing tumult and murmur of many voices
has arisen._]

VITELLIUS

Bid the women to sit down. Thou hast an ill-conducted people. They
brawl in the street while we dine.

HEROD

Are they already muttering about the Baptist? Gabalos, look to it, and
tell them to be quiet.

GABALOS

It shall be done, Sire.                                   [_Exit._

SALOME

[_Pointing to the door, the curtains of which are open._] Mother, see
what they are bringing. See! [_She rushes out._]

HEROD

[_Descending the steps of the dais._] What does she want there?

HERODIAS

Sire, thou art of simple understanding. I advise thee to look the other
way.

HEROD

What is she doing?

HERODIAS

She is dancing! She holds the charger with the Prophet's head high in
her arms, and dances.

JABAD

See, she dances!

HEROD

So thou hast corrupted thy own flesh and blood. So thou wilt corrupt us
all.

HERODIAS

[_Smiling, shrugs her shoulders._]

MEROKLES

She sways. She will fall!

HERODIAS

[_Goes out composedly._]

MEROKLES

The head is rolling on the floor!

MARCELLUS

Oh, horror!

HERODIAS

[_Comes back supporting Salome in her arms._]

SALOME

Mother, where is the dish? Where is the head?

HERODIAS

Make obeisance. Speak thy thanks.

SALOME

[_Before Herod._] Sire, I am a rose of Sharon. A flower of the valley
... Who would thank me should pluck me ... Oh, look at the head!

HEROD

Take the women away!

HERODIAS

[_Curtseys, and leads, smiling; the half-swooning Salome off to
right._]


                                SCENE X

             _The same_. [_Without Herodias and Salome._]
                 _Gabalos_ [_has re-entered from left_].

HEROD

Well, what is the matter?

GABALOS

Sire, the people will not be restrained. Men and women in holiday
raiment fill the streets and crowd on the roofs. They carry palms in
their hands, and sing and shout for joy.

HEROD

What are they singing?

GABALOS

Thou knowest, Sire, I am not servile, but I scarcely like to say.

HEROD

Speak!

GABALOS

Hosannah! to Him Who shall come. Hosannah to the King of the Jews! So
they sing.

HEROD

[_Grinding his teeth._] I have had John beheaded. Who may this one be?

GABALOS

If thou wouldst see Him, Sire, they say He is coming this way.

HEROD

I will see Him. I will greet Him as I promised. Ha! ha! ha! Open!


                                SCENE XI

[_The curtains are drawn aside. One sees the roofs crowded with women
waving palms. Others, with palms in their hands, climb the hilly street
below. The shouting swells in volume and becomes an orderly, harmonious
song._]

VITELLIUS

[_Who has continued sitting, turns round indignantly._] What is going
on there again?

HEROD

[_Has grasped a goblet, and springs on the topmost step._]

Greeting to thee, my King ---- of the ----

[_He looks, stops short ... the goblet slips from his hand, he turns
away and hides his face in his mantle._]

THE OTHERS

[_Also stand, looking down in silent amazement. The Hosannahs rise from
the street._]

                         [_The Curtain falls._]




                                 FINIS
﻿                                  TEJA

                           A DRAMA IN ONE ACT




                                PERSONS

      Teja, King of the Goths.
      Balthilda, Queen.
      Amalaberga, her mother.
      Agila, Bishop.
      Euric             \
      Theodemir          >Lords in the former kingdom of the Goths.
      Athanaric         /
      Ildibad, spearbearer of the King.
      Haribalt, a warrior.
      Two Camp Watchers.




                                  TEJA


_The scene represents the King's tent. The curtains are open in the
background and permit a view through the camp of the Gothic warriors,
over toward Vesuvius, and the distant sea, which shine in the splendour
of the setting sun. On the left stands the rudely constructed throne of
the King. In the centre, a table with seats around it. On the right,
the King's couch, consisting of skins pieced together; above, a rack
holding many kinds of weapons. Link torches on the right and left._


                             _FIRST SCENE_.

                           TWO CAMP WATCHERS.

                          First Camp Watcher.

Ho thou! Art thou fallen asleep?

                          Second Camp Watcher.

Why should I be fallen asleep?

                          First Camp Watcher.

Because thou leanest so limber upon thy spear, bent like the bow of a
Hun.

                          Second Camp Watcher.

I stand so bent, because thus hunger gripes me less.

                          First Camp Watcher.

'Tis of no avail. It availeth as little as thy belt. Afterward, in
standing upright, it is the more severe.

                          Second Camp Watcher.

How long is this to last?

                          First Camp Watcher.

Until the ships come--that is simple indeed.

                          Second Camp Watcher.

Yea, but when are the ships coming?

                          First Camp Watcher.

How can I know that? Look toward the heights. There, high upon the
Milchberg, there standeth the watch, and overlooketh the sea for twenty
miles. If he knoweth not! There, behind the Misenian hills, there they
must be coming.

                          Second Camp Watcher.

Verily, if the Byzantian let them pass.

                          First Camp Watcher.

The Byzantian hath no ships.

                          Second Camp Watcher.

The Byzantian hath so many ships that he can surround the whole Italian
world with them as with a hedge; as close as the Byzantian Eunuch hath
surrounded us, these seven weeks.

                          First Camp Watcher.

These seven weeks!

                          Second Camp Watcher.

Knowest thou what I got for nourishment, at noon this day? The same
rind of bacon on which I brake my teeth eight days ago. Forsooth, I had
cut my three crosses, with my knife. That was a meeting again! But
to-day, I devoured it ... a noble feast for a king's marriage day!

                          First Camp Watcher.

Think'st thou the King had more?

                          Second Camp Watcher.

And think'st thou we would suffer ourselves to be beaten to death,
suffer ourselves to be broken on the wheel, to be thrust through and
put to shame, if he had more than we? Think'st thou we would lie here
like chained dogs, and watch, did we not know that there is nothing to
watch?

                          First Camp Watcher.

There is gold enough.

                          Second Camp Watcher.

Gold! Pah, gold! Of gold I have enough myself. In my cellar at
Canusium, I have buried a treasure--eh! ... thou! The wives behind
there in the Wagenburg must have meat left ... wine too, they must
still have.

                          First Camp Watcher.

Yea, the wives are there well enough--thou hast none, I suppose.

                          Second Camp Watcher.

A Greek dishonoured mine, and I stabbed him to death! (_Pauses_.) Good!
The wives must have meat; they must have wine too. But how long that--
(_Noise and clash of weapons, slowly approaching_.) There, the marriage
is surely ended.

                          First Camp Watcher.

Silence! There cometh the aged Ildibad--with the King's shield. (_Both
put themselves on guard_.)


                            _SECOND SCENE_.

                           THE SAME. Ildibad.

                                Ildibad.

(_Hangs the shield in its place, and puts away the weapons lying
about_.) Hath any news been sent down?

                          First Camp Watcher.

Nay!

                                Ildibad.

Are ye hungry?

                          Second Camp Watcher.

Oh, yea.

                                Ildibad.

Hunger is for women--mark ye that! And show not such dark faces to our
young Queen. That becometh not a marriage day.


                             _THIRD SCENE_.

_Surrounded by noisy people_, Teja _and_ Balthilda _have appeared in
front of the tent. They enter led by_ Bishop Agila. _Before them, two
choir-boys swinging censers. Behind them_, Amalaberga, Euric,
Athanaric, Theodemir, _and other lords and military leaders. The tent
covers are let down. Exeunt the watchers_.

(Bishop _lets go the hands of the bridal pair, and turns back to_
Amalaberga.)

(Teja _stands gloomy and brooding_. Balthilda _casts a shy imploring
look around her. Painful silence_.)

                          Ildibad (_softly_).

Now must thou say something, King, to welcome thy young wife.

                            Teja (_softly_).

Must I? (_Taking one of the choir-boys by the nape of the neck_.) Not
so vehemently, boy; the smoke cometh up into our nostrils. What dost
thou when thou wieldest not thy censer?

                                  Boy.

I wield my sword, King.

                                 Teja.

That is right. But make ye haste with wielding the sword, or ye may
easily be too late. (_Softly_.) Nothing to be seen of the ships,
Ildibad?

                                Ildibad.

Nothing, my King. But thou must speak to thy young wife.

                                 Teja.

Yea ... so now I have a wife, Bishop?

                                Bishop.

Here standeth thy wife. King, and waiteth on thy word.

                                 Teja.

Forgive me, Queen, if I find not this word. I have been brought up in
the midst of battles, and other dwelling-place have I not known. It
will be hard for thee to share this with me.

                               Balthilda.

King ... my mother ... taught me ... (_She stops_.)

                    Teja (_with assumed kindness_).

And what taught thee thy mother?

                              Amalaberga.

That a wife belongeth to her husband--above all, in the hour of
distress; she taught her that, King.

                                 Teja.

That may indeed be true and holy to ye wives.... If only the husband
also belonged to his wife in the hour of distress. And yet one thing,
Amalaberga. It hath been told me that in the morning, cocks crow near
ye wives yonder in the Wagenburg. For weeks, the warriors have eaten no
meat. I counsel ye, give them the cocks. (Amalaberga _bows_.)

                                Bishop.

My King!

                                 Teja.

Heh! Thou hast but now spoken so beautifully at the field-altar,
Bishop. Dost thou desire to preach so soon again?

                                Bishop.

I will speak to thee, because bitterness devoureth thy soul.

                                 Teja.

Verily? Thou thinkest it? Then I give ear.

                                Bishop.

Behold, like the spirit of divine wrath, so hast thou risen up among
us, young man.... Not thy years did the nation count, only thy
deeds.... Old men bowed willingly to thy youth, and since thou hadst
yet a long time to serve, as one of the humblest, wert thou already our
ruler. From the golden throne of Theoderic, where mercy had sat in
judgment, where Totilas bestowed pardon with a smile, rang out sternly
thy bloody word ... And woe clave to us as a poisoned wound.... Pursued
hither and thither beneath the hot outpourings of Vesuvius, we are now
encamped with women and children; while Byzantium, with its hireling
soldiers, holdeth us surrounded.

                                 Teja.

That it surely doth, ha, ha! Not a mouse can come through.

                                Bishop.

Our gaze wandereth wistfully seaward: for thence hath God promised us
bread.

                                 Teja.

No tidings of the ships?

                           Ildibad (softly).

Nothing.

                                Bishop.

Before we armed ourselves for a new war with misery, as free men, true
to the ancient law, we determined to choose thee a wife, for in his own
body should the King taste why the Goth loveth death.

                                 Teja.

Found ye that your King loved life overmuch?

                                Bishop.

My King!

                                 Teja.

Nay, that dared ye not, for every hour of this life would hold ye up to
mockery.... And even if the ancient law required it, why must ye weld
me with this young thing which, trembling for fear before me and ye,
hideth in her mother's skirts? And especially on so fitting a day, when
hunger doth furnish the marriage music.... Look upon me, Queen--I must
call thee by thy title of a half-hour, for, by God! I hardly yet know
thy name. I pray thee, look upon me! Dost thou know me?

                               Balthilda.

Thou art the King, Sire.

                                 Teja.

Yea. But for thee I should be man, not King.... And knowest thou what
manner of man standeth here before thee?... Behold! These arms have
been hitherto plunged in reeking blood, not the blood of men shed in
manly strife, I speak not of that, that honoureth the man--blood of
unarmed pale children, of--(_shudders_)--Thou shalt have great joy, if
I come with these arms to wind them about thy neck.... Dost thou indeed
hear me? Have I not a beautiful voice, a sweet voice? Only it is a
little hoarse. It is weary with screaming loud commands to murder....
Peculiar pleasure shall be thine when thou hearest tender words with
this bewitching hoarseness. Am I not truly a born lover? These wise men
knew that; therefore they taught me my calling.... Or believe ye, it
was your duty to beguile your King in the weariness of camp life; as
the great Justinian dallied in golden Byzantium, and sent forth his
eunuchs to slay Gothic men? Ha, ha, ha!

                                Bishop.

My King, take heed lest thou be angry.

                                 Teja.

I thank thee, friend. Yet that signifieth nothing. It is but my
marriage humour.... But now I will speak to ye in earnest--(_Ascends to
the high seat of the throne_.) On the golden throne of Theoderic, where
mercy sat in judgment, can I, alas! not take my place; for that is
being chopped into firewood at Byzantium.... Neither smiling like
Totilas can I pardon, for no one longer desireth our pardon.... From
the glorious nation of the Goths, there hath sprung a horde of hungry
wolves therefore it needeth a wolf as master. Thou, Bishop, didst call
me the spirit of divine wrath, which I am not.... I am but the spirit
of your despair. As one who all his life hath hoped for nothing, hath
wished for nothing, I stand before you, and so I shall fall before you.
That ye knew, and therefore ye are wrong, ye men, to reproach me
secretly. Contradict me not!... I read it clearly enough between your
lowering brows.... Because it goeth ill with us, make not a scapegoat
of me--that I counsel ye.

                               Theodemir.

King, wound us not.... The last drop of our blood belongeth to thee.
Cast us not into the pot with these old men.

                                 Euric.

We old men fight as well as they; and love, young man, as well as they.

                                 Teja.

Then let that suffice. Your Queen shall soon enough learn how, in
misfortune, friends quarrel among themselves. And as ye pass through
the camp, tell the warriors, the only thing that frets the King this
day this day of joy, is it not?--is that he hath not the power to offer
them a worthy marriage feast ... or yet perchance-- Ildibad.

                                Ildibad.

(_Who on the right has secretly spoken in bewilderment to a watcher who
has just entered_.) Yea, Sire.

                                 Teja.

What have we still in our stores, old man?

                  Ildibad (_controlling his emotion_).

Truly, thou hast given away almost all thy provisions.

                                 Teja.

I ask thee, what remaineth?

                                Ildibad.

A jar of fermented milk, and two stale crusts of bread.

                                 Teja.

Ha, ha, ha! Now thou seest, Queen, what a poor husband thou hast got.
Yet if the ships be there, as the people say, then will I do royal
honours to every one, even as is his due. Yet tell it not, that would
mar their joy. But if they hear the trumpets sound, then tell them
there will be meat and wine on the long tables, so much as--

(_To_ Ildibad, _who glides across the stage to his side_) What is it?

                          Ildibad (_softly_).

The watch departeth. The ships are lost.

                                 Teja.

(_Without the least change of countenance_.) Lost--how--in what way?

                                Ildibad.

Treason.

                                 Teja.

Yea, verily! Yea--meat and wine so much as each one will, at long white
tables--I shall have it divided--and Sicilian fruits for the women, and
sweetmeats from Massilia. (_Sinks reeling upon the seat of the throne,
and gazes absently into the distance_.)

                                The Men.

What aileth the King? Look to the King!

                               Balthilda.

Surely he is hungry, mother. (_Approaches him. The men draw back_.) My
King!

                                 Teja.

Who art thou, woman? What wilt thou, woman?

                               Balthilda.

Can I help thee, Sire?

                                 Teja.

Ah, it is thou, the Queen! Pardon me; and pardon me, also, ye men.
(_Rises_.)

                                Bishop.

King, thou must husband thy strength.

                               Theoderic.

Yea, King, for the sake of us all.

                                The Men.

For the sake of us all.

                                 Teja.

In truth, ye warn me rightly. Women, I pray ye, return to your
encampment. We have to take counsel. Do thou, Bishop, see well to their
safe conduct.

                         Amalaberga (_softly_).

Make thy obeisance, child!

                         Balthilda (_softly_).

Mother, will he speak no more to me?

                              Amalaberga.

Make thy obeisance! (_Balthilda obeys_.)

                                 Teja.

Fare ye well! (_Exeunt_ Balthilda, Amalaberga, Bishop. _Shouts of
applause without, greet them_.)


                            _FOURTH SCENE_.

                                 Teja.

Theodemir. Euric. Ildibad. The Watcher. The Lords.

                                 Teja.

I have sent away the women and the priest; for what comes now
concerneth us warriors alone. Where is the watcher? Come forth, man.

                          The Men (muttering).

The watcher from the hill! The watcher!

                                 Teja.

Hereby ye know, men: the ships are lost. (_Tumult. Cries of horror_.)

                                 Teja.

Quiet, friends, quiet! Thy name is Haribalt.

                                Watcher.

Yea, Sire!

                                 Teja.

How long hast thou stood at thy post?

                                Watcher.

Since early yesterday, Sire.

                                 Teja.

Where are thy two companions?

                                Watcher.

They remain above, as thou hast commanded, Sire.

                                 Teja.

Good, then what saw ye?

                                Watcher.

The smoke of Vesuvius, Sire, descended upon the sea, beyond the
promontory of Misenum. Thus we saw nothing until to-day about the sixth
hour of the evening. Then suddenly the ships appeared five in number
quite near the shore, there where it is said a city of the Romans lies
buried in ruins.... One of us determined to hasten away, since----

                                 Teja.

Stay! What signal bare the ships?

                                Watcher.

The foresail bound crosswise and----

                                 Teja.

And?

                                Watcher.

A palm branch at the stern.

                                 Teja.

Ye saw the palm branch?

                                Watcher.

As I see thee, Sire.

                                 Teja.

Good, go on.

                                Watcher.

Then we perceived that the fishing-boats with which the Byzantians take
their food, closely surrounded the ships, and then----

                                 Teja.

What then?

                                Watcher.

Verily, Sire, they steered quite peaceably toward the camp of the
enemy. There they unloaded. (_The men cover their heads. Silence_.)

                                 Teja.

(_Who looks, smiling, from one to the other_.) It is good.... That is:
thou shalt say nothing there without.... From me they should learn it.
(_Exit Watcher_.)


                             _FIFTH SCENE_.

       TEJA. THEODEMIR. EURIC. ATHANARIC _and the_ OTHERS. LORDS.

                                 Teja.

Your counsel, ye men!

                               Theodemir.

Sire, we have none to give.

                                 Teja.

And thou, Euric, with all thy wisdom?

                                 Euric.

Sire, I have served the great Theoderic. And yet he would have had none
to give.

                                 Teja.
Come then, I know.... It is easy and quick to be understood: Die!...
Why look ye at me with such mistrust?... Do ye not yet understand me?
Think ye I require ye to wrap yourselves in your mantles, like cowardly
Greeks, and beg your neighbours for a thrust in the back? Be calm:
I will protect you against shame, since I can no more lead you to
honour.--Our place here cannot be taken, so long as thirty of us have
power to wield our spears. But the hour shall come--and at no distant
time--when the last arm, crippled by hunger, can no more be
outstretched to beg quarter of the invading murderers.

                               Theodemir.

No Gothic man doeth that, King!

                                 Teja.

For what thou art, thou canst give surety; for what thou shalt become,
thou givest no surety to me. So I counsel and command ye to prepare
yourselves for the last conflict. In the first gray of the morning, we
shall burst forth from the clefts, and array ourselves against the
Byzantian in open field.

                                  All.

Sire, that is impossible.

                               Theodemir.

King, consider, we are one against a hundred.

                                 Teja.

And thou, Euric?

                                 Euric.

Sire, thou leadest us to destruction.

                                 Teja.

Yea, verily. Said I anything else? Do ye believe me to be so untried in
things of war that I know not that? Why then halt ye? When Totilas led
us, we were more than a hundred thousand. Now we are but five. They all
knew how to die, and can we, a miserable remnant, have forgotten it?

                                  All.

Nay, King, nay!

                                 Euric.

Sire, grant us time to accustom ourselves to that horrible thing.

                                 Teja.

Horrible? What seemeth horrible to ye? I speak not indeed to Romans who
reel from the mass to the lupanar, and from the lupanar to the mass.
Yet there is not one among ye whose breast is not covered with scars
like an old stone with moss. These twenty years ye have made sport of
death, and now it cometh in earnest, doth a Gothic man speak of
"horrible"? What will ye? Will ye lie and hunger? Will ye devour one
the other, like rats? Good. But I shall not do it with ye! Not I!
To-morrow, I take spear and shield, and go to gain on my own account
the bit of death for which I long and languish like a thief since ye
made me leader of your lost cause.--And thou at least, my old
companion, thou comest with me--eh?

                  Ildibad (_falling down before him_).

I thank thee, Sire! Why ask whether I come!

                                  All.

We too, King. We all, we all!

                               Theodemir.

Thou shouldst be praised, King, that thou hast pointed to us the way of
happiness. And be not angry with us, if we were not able straightway to
follow thee. Now I perceive clearly thy great thought. From grief and
discord and despair, we rise, we do not go down to death.... Laughing,
treadeth each on the other's corpse, in order laughing to sink down
like him.... A light will go forth from us over the wide world.... Ah,
that will be a draught from golden goblets--that will be a riot of
exultant joy. Thank thee, my King. Often have I envied thee thy crown,
now I venture to envy it no more.

                                 Teja.

The thing will come to pass for the most part otherwise than thou dost
imagine it, Theodemir. Yet I am glad that among the Goths, such
inspiration still abideth.

                                 Euric.

Also to me, King, grudge not a word; for I have indeed seen golden
days.... Thou art not only the boldest, thou art also the wisest of
all.... Had we now faltered, so should we all have fallen without
defence, by the murderer's sword ... And not only we, but the sick--and
the children--and the wives.

                                 Teja.

Ay, indeed, the wives! Of them I had not thought at all.

                                 Euric.

But now to-morrow, we shall stand in battle, and on the second and
third day, if we hold out so long, so that astonishment and fear at the
miracle will lay hold on the Byzantian and all the rabble of Huns and
Suevians which he draggeth after him.... We cannot utterly destroy
them, but we can bait them with our blood till they be weary.... And
when no one on that side is able to hold spear and bow, then shall the
hour come when the Eunuch will have it said: "Depart in peace." How
many of ye are then still left? I fear not many----

                           Teja (_laughing_).

We, surely not!

                      All (_with cruel laughter_).

Nay, we surely not!

                                 Euric.

Then shall they take wives and children into the midst of them, and,
head high, with naked swords, descend straight through the Byzantian
camp toward Naples, to buy a piece of bread. And I tell ye, with such
fear shall they be gazed at, that not even once shall a dog of the Huns
dare to bark at them.

                                 Teja.

Wife and child! Wife and child! What have we to do with them?

                               Athanaric.

King, thou revilest the dearest of our possessions.

                                 Teja.

Maybe!--I know only that there were too many mouths in the morning when
the rations were divided. Otherwise we might have been able to support
ourselves. And yet, this one thing I say to ye--and I shall enjoin it
on the men without, upon their word as warriors--that none of the women
know aught of our purpose. I will not that even one man be softened by
the tears and cries of women.

                               Athanaric.

Sire, that is inhuman which thou requirest, to take no leave of our
wives.

                                 Teja.

Take leave of them, me notwithstanding, but remain dumb as ye do it. He
that hath wife and child here, let him go to the Wagenburg, and provide
himself food and drink, for the women delight to keep a remnant between
their fingers. This let him share with the unmarried, and be joyful
when he can.

                                 Euric.

And what should they say to their wives, Sire, since already thou hast
strictly forbidden communication?

                                 Teja.

Say ye, it happens because of my marriage! Or the ships are there, if
that sounds more worthy of belief. Say what ye will. Only that one
thing, keep for yourselves.

                               Theodemir.

And wilt thou thyself nevermore see thy young wife?

                                 Teja.

Eh? Nay.... I mark not the least desire to. Surely now I shall speak to
the people. I would that I had thy tongue, Theodemir.--The errand is
troublesome to me, for I should speak great words, and I feel them not.
Come! (_Exeunt all, with_ Ildibad _slowly following_.)


                             _SIXTH SCENE_.


_The stage remains unoccupied for a short time. The voice of the King
is heard, who is received with acclamation. Then after a few seconds,
subdued cries of woe_. Ildibad _returns and sits down upon a stump near
the curtain. Then he lights two torches which he puts into the links,
and prepares the weapons of the King. Outside arises a shout of
enthusiasm, which again is subdued_.


                            _SEVENTH SCENE_.

ILDIBAD. BISHOP AGILA (_tottering in with exhaustion and excitement_).

                                Ildibad.

Wilt thou not be seated, most worthy lord?

                                Bishop.

And goest thou not to hear what the King saith?

                                Ildibad.

That hath naught to do with me, most worthy lord. The King and I--for a
long time, we are united in action.

                                Bishop.

Verily, he standeth there like the angel of death.

                                Ildibad.

Whether angel or devil, it is the same for me. (_The shout of
enthusiasm rises anew and approaches the tent_.)


                            _EIGHTH SCENE_.

     THE SAME. THE KING (_with flaming eyes, pale yet calm_).

                                 Teja.

Are the weapons in order?--Ah, 'tis thou, Bishop!

                                Bishop.

King, my King!

                                 Teja.

Surely, thou shall now be driven to seek another flock, Bishop. Wilt
thou but give me thy blessing, pray give it quickly.... Theodemir is
about to come.

                                Bishop.

And dost thou know thyself to be free, my son, from the trembling of
every dying creature?

                                 Teja.

Bishop, I have been a good servant of thy church. To dedicate her
temples, as once Totilas did, have I not been able; but what there was
to kill, I have killed for her welfare. Shall I perform a posture for
the blessed Arius?

                                Bishop.

My son, I understand thee not.

                                 Teja.

For that I am sorry, my father.

                                Bishop.

And hast thou taken leave?

                                 Teja.

Leave--of whom? Rather have I a mind to cry "welcome"; but yet nothing
is there!

                        Bishop (_indignantly_).

I speak of thy wife, Sire.

                                 Teja.

At this hour, I know only men, Bishop. Of wives I know nothing.
Farewell! (_Enter_ Theodemir _and_ Ildibad.)

                                Bishop.

Farewell--and God be gracious to thy soul!

                                 Teja.

I thank thee, Bishop.... Ah, there art thou, Theodemir. (_Exit_ Bishop
Agila.)


                             _NINTH SCENE_.

Teja. Theodemir. Ildibad (_in the background, occupied with the King's
weapons, going noiselessly in and out_).

                                 Teja.

What are the warriors doing?

                               Theodemir.

They who have their wives here, are gone to the Wagenburg.... There
they will surely eat and drink and play with their children.

                                 Teja.

And is thy wife here also?

                               Theodemir.

Yea, Sire!

                                 Teja.

And thy children?

                               Theodemir.

Two boys, Sire!

                                 Teja.

And thou didst not go?

                               Theodemir.

I waited on thy call, Sire.

                                 Teja.

What hour is it?

                               Theodemir.

The ninth, Sire.

                                 Teja.

And what do they who are free--the unmarried, and they whose wives are
not here?

                               Theodemir.

They lie by the fires and are silent.

                           (_Exit_ Ildibad.)

                                 Teja.

See to it that something is brought to them also. I already ordered it.
Will they sleep?

                               Theodemir.

No one will sleep.

                                 Teja.

At midnight, come and fetch me.

                               Theodemir.

Yea, Sire. (_Makes as if to go_.)

                   Teja (_with a shade of anxiety_).

Theodemir, stay!... Thou hast always been my adversary.

                               Theodemir.

I was, Sire. For a long time I have ceased to be.

                    Teja (_stretches out his arms_).

Come! (_They hold each other in a close embrace; then they clasp
hands_.) I would fain hold thee here, but truly thou must go to thy
wife. (Ildibad _again enters_.) And forget not to have food brought to
those who are gazing at the fires. They should have occupation.
Brooding profiteth not in such an hour.

                               Theodemir.

Yea, Sire. (_Exit_.)


                             _TENTH SCENE_.

                             TEJA. ILDIBAD.

                                 Teja.

Now, my old man, we should have nothing further to do upon this earth.
Shall we talk?

                                Ildibad.

Sire, if I might beg a favour for myself.

                                 Teja.

Still favours, at this time?... I believe thou wouldst flatter me, old
companion!

                                Ildibad.

Sire, I am old. My arm would grow weary with bearing a spear, more
quickly than is good for thy life. And by my fault shouldst thou not
fall, Sire.... If no one else sleeps, think not evil of me, and let me
sleep away the two hours.

                                 Teja.

(_With a new gleam of deep anxiety_.) Go, but not far away.

                                Ildibad.

Surely, Sire, I have always lain as a dog before thy tent. In respect
of that, on this last night, nothing will be changed.... Hast thou
orders to give, Sire?

                                 Teja.

Good-night! (_Exit_ Ildibad.)


                           _ELEVENTH SCENE_.

TEJA. _Afterward_ BALTHILDA. (TEJA _left alone, throws himself on his
couch, staring straight before him with a bitter, wearied smile_.
BALTHILDA _enters shyly. In one hand she carries a basket containing
meat, bread, and fruits; in the other, a golden tankard of wine. She
advances a few steps toward the table_.)

                         Teja (_half rising_).

Who art thou?

                   Balthilda (_feebly and timidly_).

Knowest thou me not, King?

                    Teja (_rising from his couch_).

The torches burn dimly.... Thy voice I have heard before!... What wilt
thou of me?

                               Balthilda.

I am indeed thy wife, King.

                       Teja (_after a silence_).

And what wilt thou of me?

                               Balthilda.

My mother sendeth me. I am to bring thee food and wine. The others eat
and drink, and so my mother saith---- (_She stops_.)

                                 Teja.

How didst thou enter here?... Did not the watch forbid thee to enter?

                   Balthilda (_drawing herself up_).

I am the Queen, Sire.

                                 Teja.

Yea, verily. And Ildibad, what said he?

                               Balthilda.

Thy old spearbearer lay and slept. I stepped across him, Sire.

                                 Teja.

I thank thee, Balthilda.... I am not hungry. I thank thee. (_Silence_.
Balthilda _stands and looks tearfully at him_.)

                                 Teja.

I see, thou hast still a request to make of me. I pray thee, speak!

                               Balthilda.

My King, if I return home with a well-filled basket, then shall I be
mocked by all the women.... And the men shall say----

                           Teja (_smiling_).

And what shall the men say?

                               Balthilda.

He esteemeth her so little that--he consenteth not to take food from
her hand.

                                 Teja.

On my word, I assure thee, Balthilda, the men have other things to
think on ... yet nevertheless ... reproach thou shalt not suffer
through me. Set thy basket there.... Have ye still much of such things?

                               Balthilda.

Sire, these two weeks have my mother and I and the women about us put
aside the best of our share--flour and fruits--and the fowls have we
not killed till this very day.

                                 Teja.

Then indeed must ye have been mightily hungry, ye women?

                               Balthilda.

Ah, it hath done us no hurt, Sire.... It was for a feast.

                                 Teja.

In truth? Ye believed we should celebrate a feast to-day?

                               Balthilda.

Well ... is it then not a feast, Sire?

                                 Teja.

(_Is silent and bites his nether lip, examining her furtively_.) Wilt
thou not be seated, Balthilda?... I should not yet let thee go home!
That too would be a reproach, would it not?

                (Balthilda _is silent and looks down_.)

                                 Teja.

And if I bade thee, wouldst thou wish to stay?

                               Balthilda.

Sire, how should a wife not wish to stay beside her husband?

                                 Teja.

Hast thou then the feeling in thy heart, that I--am--thy--husband?

                               Balthilda.

Indeed, how could it be otherwise? The Bishop hath joined us together.

                                 Teja.

And wert thou glad when he did it?

                               Balthilda.

Yea.... Nay, I was not glad then.

                                 Teja.

Why not?

                  Balthilda (_with a bright glance_).

Perhaps because, because ... I was afraid, Sire, and I was praying.

                                 Teja.

What didst thou pray?

                               Balthilda.

That God would grant to me, his humble handmaid, the power to bring
thee the happiness which thou needest, and which thou awaitest from me.

                                 Teja.

Which I from thee--that didst thou pray?

                               Balthilda.

Sire, may I not offer thee the food, and the wine?

                                 Teja.

Nay, nay!... Hearken, Balthilda: without, by our fires, are
warriors--they are hungry--I am not hungry.

                               Balthilda.

Sire, give them what thou pleasest ... give them everything!

                                 Teja.

I thank thee, Balthilda. (_Raising the curtain_.) Ho there, watch! Come
in, but prudently so as not to wake the old man.... (_Watcher enters_.)
Here, take this basket with food and wine, and divide it honestly....
Say your Queen sends it.

                                Watcher.

May I thank the Queen, Sire?

        (Teja _nods_. Watcher _shakes her hand heartily. Exit_.)

                                 Teja.

Go--and bring me to eat!

                        Balthilda (_perplexed_).

Sire--why--mockest thou--me?

                                 Teja.

Dost thou then not understand me? If thou wilt be my wife, thou must
offer me my property, not thine!

                               Balthilda.

Is not all of mine thy property, Sire?

                                 Teja.

Hm! (_Silence. He takes her hands._) Call me not Sire and call me not
King.... Knowest thou not my name?

                               Balthilda.

Thy name is Teja!

                                 Teja.

Say it yet once again!

                  Balthilda (_softly, turning away_).

Teja!

                                 Teja.

Is the name so strange to thee?

                     (Balthilda _shakes her head_.)

                                 Teja.

Then why hesitate?

                               Balthilda.

Not for that, Sire! Since I knew that I was to serve thee as thy wife,
I have often named thee by day and in the night. Only I never said it
aloud....

                                 Teja.

And before thou knewest it, what was then thy thought?

                               Balthilda.

Sire, why dost thou ask?

                                 Teja.

And why dost thou not answer?

                               Balthilda.

Sire, when I heard of thy bloody commands, and the others feared
thee--then I often thought: How unhappy must he be that the destiny of
the Goths compelleth him to such deeds!

                                 Teja.

That hast thou thought?--That hast thou----?

                               Balthilda.

Sire, was it wrong that I should think it?

                                 Teja.

Thou hadst never seen my face, and thou didst understand me? And they
who were around me, the wise men and tried soldiers, they understood me
not!... Who art thou, woman? Who hath taught thee to read my heart?
Thee, thee alone of all?

                               Balthilda.

Sire--I----

                                 Teja.

All shuddered and muttering hid themselves from me in corners--and saw
not the way, the only way which haply might still have saved them. When
the butcher's knife was already at their throat, they still told
themselves some tale of compromise. And then came the crafty Greeks,
measured themselves with them, and killed them one by one. Thus
perished the hundred thousand. And I wrapped myself in grief and
anger--I cast hope away from me like a bloody rag, I sprang into the
breach with scornful laughter. I sowed horrors about me, when my own
heart was convulsed with horror of myself. I have not once been drunk
with all the blood. I have killed, killed, and still knew all the
while: it is in vain! (_He sinks to his seat overcome with anguish, and
stares straight before him_.)

             Balthilda (_with a shy attempt at a caress_).

My poor dear King! Dear Teja!

                                 Teja.

(_Raises his head and looks confusedly around him_.) My God, what do I
here?... Why do I tell all this to thee? Thou must not despise me
because I am such a babbler.... Nor must thou believe that it is aught
of remorse that compels me to this confession.... Perhaps I feel pity
for the victims, but my conscience stands high above all that!... Far
higher than my poor Gothic throne.... Look not upon me so.... There is
in thy eye something that compels me to reveal my inmost thought to
thee.... Who hath endued thee with this power over me?... Begone!...
Nay, stay ... Stay! I wish to tell thee yet something, quite in secret,
before thou goest.... Besides, I should not cry out so, otherwise the
watch may hear.... Incline thine ear to me. Never yet have I confessed
it to any man, nor have I held it possible that I should ever confess
it.... I bear an envy within me which devoureth my heart, whenever I
think--knowest thou toward whom?... Toward Totilas.... Yea, toward
Totilas in his grave.... They called him the "shining" Totilas and
their affection still cleaveth to him to-day.... Their eyes still flash
when they even think of him.

                               Balthilda.

Ah, Sire, how thou dost fret thyself!

                          Teja (_anxiously_).

Didst thou ever see him?

                               Balthilda.

Never.

                                 Teja.

God be thanked! For hadst thou ever seen him as I saw him on the
morning of the battle in which he fell ... arrayed in golden armour ...
and the white steed pranced beneath him, and his yellow locks streamed
like sunlight about him. And he laughed the foe in the face.... Laughed
like a child!... Ah, laughing to die like him!

                               Balthilda.

His lot was easy, Sire! He went from hence, but left to thee as an
inheritance the half-destroyed kingdom.... How shouldst thou then have
laughed?

                           Teja (_eagerly_).

Is it not so?--Is it not so?--How ... Ah, that doeth good! (_Stretching
himself_.) Ah, thou doest me good!

                               Balthilda.

How proud thou makest me, Sire!

                                 Teja.

But hadst thou seen him and compared him to me, thou wouldst spit upon
me!

                        Balthilda (_fervently_).

I should have seen only thee, Sire dear, dear Sire!

(Teja _looks askance at her, shyly and distrustfully, then walks
silently to the left, sinks down before the seat on the throne, and
burying his face in the chair, weeps bitterly_.)

                               Balthilda.

(_Follows him shyly and kneels down beside him_.) Teja, beloved, if I
hurt thee, pardon me!

                   Teja (_rises and grasps her arm_).

Tell it to no one!

                               Balthilda.

What, Sire?

                                 Teja.

That thou hast seen me weep! Swear it to me!

                               Balthilda.

It hath been told me that I am now even as a piece of thy body--and of
thy soul also!... Wherefore should I swear?

                                 Teja.

If thou art a piece of my body, then come nearer to me, that thou mayst
not see my tears.

                               Balthilda.

Let me dry them for thee! See, for this cause am I here.

                                 Teja.

Ah, 'tis well with me.... I must indeed have died of shame, for never
yet hath a Gothic man been seen to weep. Even when we buried Totilas,
we wept not.... Yet I am not ashamed.... If I but knew why suddenly it
is so well with me!... Balthilda, I will tell thee something. But thou
must not laugh me to scorn.

                               Balthilda.

How should I laugh at thee, beloved?

                                 Teja.

I am hungry.

                Balthilda (_springing up in surprise_).

Alas, surely thou hast given everything away!

                                 Teja.

Oh, by no means! Go just over there, wilt thou? (_She obeys_.) Behind
my couch--seest thou the fireplace?

                               Balthilda.

Here where the ashes lie?

                                 Teja.

There standeth a chest?

                               Balthilda.

Yea.

                                 Teja.

Wilt thou open the lid?

                               Balthilda.

Ah, it is heavy!

                                 Teja.

Now feel within! Deep, deep!... There Ildibad the old miser--well?

                     Balthilda (_disappointedly_).

A couple of bread crusts; is that all, Sire?

                                 Teja.

There is indeed nothing more.

                               Balthilda.

May I not then go quickly over to the Wagenburg?... Perhaps still ...

                                 Teja.

Oh nay.... They themselves need the fragments.... Bring that hither! As
brothers we shall share it--eh? And then there is sufficient for both.
Wilt thou?

                               Balthilda.

Yea. (_She sits beside him_.)

                                 Teja.

So, now give to me! Ah, that is good to the taste! Is it not good to
the taste? But ah, thou also must eat.

                               Balthilda.

I fear there is not enough for thee.

                                 Teja.

Nay, that is against the agreement.... So.... Is it not good to the
taste?

                               Balthilda.

To me nothing hath ever tasted half so sweet.

                                 Teja.

Pray come nearer to me ... I will take the crumbs from thy lap ...
So--why is it that suddenly I am hungry? See, now we celebrate our
marriage feast.

                               Balthilda.

And better than those without, with meat and wine--do we not?

                                 Teja.

Well, did I not tell thee?... But thou hast a bad seat!

                               Balthilda.

Nay, I am seated well!

                                 Teja.

Come, stand up! Pray, stand up!

                         Balthilda (_rising_).

Well?

                                 Teja.

Sit there, just above!

                        Balthilda (_terrified_).

Upon the throne--for God's sake--how dare I----?

                                 Teja.

Art thou not then the Queen?

                        Balthilda (_decidedly_).

If I must sit there in earnest! But in jest--nay!

                                 Teja.

Ah, the stupid bit of wood! (_He hurls down the throne_.) At least it
should be of use for something!... So now lean against it!

                               Balthilda.

Beloved, doest thou justly?

                          Teja (_surprised_).

Nay! (_He sets the throne up again, leads her to her former place,
and places her head against the seat_.) There indeed thou art well
seated--yea!... And we trespass not against this trash. If the Bishop
had seen that--he, ha, ha, ha! Wait, I will eat again!

                               Balthilda.

There, take!

                                 Teja.

Still--remain quite still! I shall fetch it for myself. (_He kneels
upon the podium beside her_.) Now I am quite upon my knees before
thee.... What is there that we do not learn!... Thou art beautiful!...
I never knew my mother!

                               Balthilda.

Never knew!

                                 Teja.

Never had a sister.... No one.... Never played in my life.... That I am
surely learning last not least.

                               Balthilda.

Why last not least?

                                 Teja.

Ask not--nay? Ah thou, thou! Ha, ha, ha! Pray eat! Bite from mine--yea?
Obediently--thou knowest what the Bishop said?

                Balthilda (_bites and then springs up_).

But wilt thou not also drink?

                                 Teja.

Ah, surely! Bring me only the milk jar! Bring me only the milk jar....
Thou knowest the one that Ildibad told us of.

                  Balthilda (_who has walked across_).

Is this the one?

                            Teja (_rising_).

That is indeed it. But thou also must drink.

                               Balthilda.

Is it fitting so?

                                 Teja.

I know not. It should be!

                               Balthilda.

So be it, then. (_She drinks and shakes with laughter_.) Ugh! That hath
a bad taste.

                                 Teja.

Give it to me. (_He drinks_.) Nay! (_He drinks again_.) Go!... Art thou
then such a despiser of nourishment?... Yea, who art thou then? And how
comest thou hither? And just what wilt thou of me?

                               Balthilda.

I will love thee!

                                 Teja.

Thou--my wife! Thou ... (_They fly into one another's arms. Softly_.)
And wilt thou not kiss me?

                (Balthilda _shakes her head, ashamed_.)

                                 Teja.

Why not?

                  (Balthilda _again shakes her head_.)

                                 Teja.

Yet tell me, why not?

                               Balthilda.

I will tell thee in thine ear.

                                 Teja.

Well?

                               Balthilda.

Thou hast a downy beard.[1]

                                 Teja.

(_Wipes his month in terror, then in assumed anger_.) What have I?
Knowest thou not who I am? How then dost thou suffer thyself to tell
thy King he--say it yet once more! I will but see.

                        Balthilda (_laughing_).

A--downy--beard.

                           Teja (_laughing_).

Now, wait!


                            _TWELFTH SCENE_.

                           THE SAME. ILDIBAD.

                                Ildibad.

Sire, thou calledst? (_He stands rigid with astonishment, and is about
to retire silently_.)

                                 Teja.

(_Collects himself abruptly. He appears to wake out of a dream. His
manners and bearing revert to the gloomy energy which previously had
the ascendency_.) Stop, stay, what happens without?

                                Ildibad.

The warriors return from the Wagenburg, sire, and most of the wives
come with them.

                                 Teja.

Are the leaders assembled?

                                Ildibad.

Yea, Sire.

                                 Teja.

They might have patience for a moment more.

                                Ildibad.

Yea, Sire.

                                 Teja.

For I also have a wife.

                                Ildibad.

Yea, verily, Sire.

                               [_Exit_.]


                          _THIRTEENTH SCENE_.

                            TEJA. BALTHILDA.

                               Balthilda.

Teja, beloved, what happeneth to thee?

                                 Teja.

(_Remains standing before her and takes her head in his hands_.) To me,
it is as if in this hour we had strayed hand in hand through a whole
world of joy and sorrow. That disappeareth--all disappeareth. I am
again the--I was--nay, I am not he.--But be thou high above all the
women, the Queen ... Wilt thou?

                               Balthilda.

Sire, what dost thou require of me?

                                 Teja.

Thou wilt not entreat and wilt not cry out?

                               Balthilda.

Nay, Sire.

                                 Teja.

The day draweth nigh. Before us standeth death.

                               Balthilda.

Sire, I understand thee not. None can attack us, and until the ships
come----

                                 Teja.

The ships come never more.

(Balthilda _strokes herself on the cheeks, and then stands
motionless_.)

                                 Teja.

But we men are going forth upon the field, to fight.

                               Balthilda.

That can ye not do--that is surely--impossible.

                                 Teja.

We must. Art thou the Queen, and perceivest not that we must?

                               Balthilda.

Yea--I--per--ceive--it.

                                 Teja.

The King fights in the foremost rank, and we shall see each other no
more alive.... Knowest thou that?

                               Balthilda.

Yea, I know it!... (_Silence. They look at each other_.)

                                 Teja.

Thy blessing will I have upon the way. (_He sinks on his knees before
her; she lays her hands upon his head, bends down to him, trembling,
and kisses him on the forehead_.)

                                 Teja.

(_Springs up and tears back the curtain_.) Enter, who waiteth there!


                          _FOURTEENTH SCENE_.

THE SAME. AMALABERGA, EURIC, AGILA, ATHANARIC, THEODEMIR, _and other
leaders_.

                              Amalaberga.

King, I sent my child to thee.... I hear ye men have to act.... Give
her again to me.

                                 Teja.

Here hast thou thy child! (_Exeunt_ Amalaberga _and_ Balthilda.)


                           _FIFTEENTH SCENE_.

             THE SAME. _Except_ AMALABERGA _and_ BALTHILDA.

                                 Teja.

(_Stares after them, rouses himself, and perceives the Bishop_.)
Bishop, I treated thee basely this evening. Forgive me and have my
thanks, for surely I also know why the Goth loveth death.... (_Grasps
his sword_.) Now be ye ready? Have the farewells been said?

                               Theodemir.

Sire, we have disobeyed thy command. Which of our wives betrayed it,
and which of us told it, that cannot be determined. Enough, they all
know it.

                                 Teja.

And then have cried ah and woe?

                               Theodemir.

Sire, they have silently kissed the blessing of death upon our brows.

                   Teja (_exclaims half to himself_).

They also! (_Aloud_.) Truly we are a nation of kings. It is our
misfortune. So come! (_He strides to the background. The others follow.
Amid the noisy cries of the people greeting the King, the curtain
falls_.)





                                   II

                               FRITZCHEN

                           A DRAMA IN ONE ACT





                                PERSONS

      Herr von Drosse, Major (retired), Lord of the Manor.
      Helene, his wife.
      Fritz, their son.
      Agnes, niece of Frau von Drosse.
      Von Hallerpfort, lieutenant.
      Stephan, overseer.
      Wilhelm, servant.





                               FRITZCHEN

_The action takes place on Herr von Drosse's estate. Time, the
present_.

_The scene represents a drawing-room on the ground floor. In the rear
are wide glass doors which stand open, and permit a view of the terrace
and splendid park lying beyond. Windows to the right and left. On the
right side, a sofa with table and chairs; on the left, a secretary with
writing materials. Handsome old-fashioned decorations, pictures of
battles, portraits in oval frames, racing prints, etc. The terrace is
sheltered by a broad awning which slightly subdues the glare of the
bright summer afternoon._


                             _FIRST SCENE_.

Wilhelm (_servant over sixty, in half livery, is engaged in arranging
the samovar for the afternoon coffee_). Agnes (_extremely slender,
nervous, with traces of mental distress--twenty years of age--blonde
hair smoothed on the temples, light muslin gown, a garden hat in her
hand--enters from the terrace_).

                                 Agnes.

Wilhelm, has the postman been here?

                          Wilhelm (_sighing_).

Yes, yes, he was here.

                                 Agnes.

Where are the things?

                                Wilhelm.

They are on the table, Fräulein.

                                 Agnes.

(_Goes quickly to the table and with feverish haste looks through the
small pile of newspapers and letters lying there_.) Again, nothing!

                                Wilhelm.

Yes, indeed--and this is the seventh day. Ah, it is really
heart-breaking.

                                 Agnes.

Are your master and mistress still taking their afternoon nap?

                                Wilhelm.

I have just heard the Major. He will be here directly--there he is now!


                            _SECOND SCENE_.

THE SAME. MAJOR VON DROSSE (_about fifty, tall, broad-shouldered,
rather stout. Dark-grayish full beard parted in the middle, waving
right and left over his shoulders. In the full, well-browned face with
flashing eyes and bushy eyebrows, there are energy and abundant
vitality, controlled by the self-command and chivalric manner of an old
officer. Brief in speech, domineering, but never without a gleam of
inner kindness_).

                                 Major.

Afternoon, Agnes!

                                 Agnes.

Afternoon, uncle!

                                 Major.

(_Goes to the table, examines the letters, sits down and looks straight
before him for a little while_.) Wilhelm!

                                Wilhelm.

What does the Major wish?

                                 Major.

Stephan is to come at once to the castle.

                                Wilhelm.

Very well, Major. (_Exit_.)

                                 Major.

Agnes, my child, just listen to me ... You are a reasonable creature
... One that I can talk to.... So the rascal has again not written.
He should have come to us, day before yesterday. Has made no
excuses--doesn't write--nothing. That has not happened during the six
years that he has been away from home. I ordered him most strictly to
send a letter, or at least a card, every day--for with her illness,
your aunt must be guarded against the slightest anxiety or excitement.
He knows that, and moreover has always observed it conscientiously. I
can't any longer be responsible for your aunt and her weakened heart.
Unless we use every means to keep her in her--visionary life, she will
go to pieces.

                                 Agnes.

Uncle!

                                 Major.

We must make up our minds to that, Agnes. Really, I do what I can.
Yesterday I even forged a telegram to her--you know that, eh! I did
intend to write to his intimate friend Hallerpfort, but thought better
of it. I shall drive into town directly after dark. Without your aunt
knowing it, of course--for now, during the harvest, that would upset
her still more. So you will stay all night with her, and er--well, the
rest I will arrange with Stephan.

                                 Agnes.

Very well, dear uncle.

                                 Major.

Just come here, girl, look me in the face ... We two know each other
and ... Eh?

                     (Agnes _casts down her eyes_.)

                                 Major.

Now see, I know very well that for two years you have been secretly
corresponding with Fritz.

                                 Agnes.

Uncle! (_Presses her hands to her face_.)

                                 Major.

There, that will do, that will do, that will do.... You can well
believe, if I had been opposed to it on principle, I should have
long since put an end to the business, shouldn't I?... But there are
things--well, in short, that you don't understand. Well, I should not
have begun about the matter to-day, but necessity knows no law, eh? And
if I go to see him this evening, I don't wish to grope altogether in
the dark.... So--on the basis of what has just been said--have you,
perhaps, by any chance had a letter from him?

                                 Agnes.

No, uncle!

                                 Major.

Hm!

                   Agnes (_hesitating, embarrassed_).

For some time we have not corresponded.

                                 Major.

So?--Ho, ho ...! Who is to blame for that?

                                 Agnes.

Ah, let us not talk about that, uncle. But from another quarter, I have
had news of him.

                                 Major.

When?

                                 Agnes.

Yesterday.

                                 Major.

And that you have----?

                                 Agnes.

(_Taking a letter from her pocket_.) Please read--and I think you will
not reproach me.

                    Major (_unfolding the letter_).

Ah, from the little Frohn! Now then, what does the little Frohn write?
(_Reads, muttering_.) Lanskis--Steinhof--met cousin--danced (_aloud_).
Indeed, then he could dance, but not write, that is a nice business--I
should not have believed it of him at all.... (_Reads further,
muttering_.) Eyes for the so-called beautiful Frau von Lanski ... The
whole regiment is talking of it.... Hm! eh, what! Such a goose! What
things such a goose does cackle!... Regiment has other things to bother
itself about.... But such a regulation goose ... If a young lieutenant
like that isn't all the time trotting after them. And when he once
shows attention to a lady who doesn't belong to the regiment ...
Besides, the Lanski is nearly forty ... Such idiocy! Then he might at
least--hm--hm--eh, pardon! Now then, what is it?... My poor old girl
... Yes, yes, jealousy ... You have borne up disgracefully since
yesterday.

                                 Agnes.

I think I have controlled myself, uncle?

                                 Major.

Yes, very true, girl, no one has noticed anything.


                             _THIRD SCENE_.

        THE SAME. WILHELM. _Afterward_ STEPHAN, _the overseer_.

                  Wilhelm (_entering from the right_).

Herr Stephan is there, Major.

                                 Major.

Come in!

                           (_Enter_ Stephan.)

Very well, my dear Stephen, I must drive into town directly after
dark. Unless I should be detained, I shall be here early to-morrow
morning--four and a half and four and a half more miles--nine miles....
The coach horses have been exercised to-day?

                                Stephan.

Yes, indeed, Major.

                                 Major.

Which are in better condition now, the browns or the whites?

                                Stephan.

That I don't permit myself to decide, Major. They have all had it
severely!

                                 Major.

Well, I will just go and have a look myself. Wilhelm--cap!

                                Wilhelm.

Very well, Major. (_Exit to the right_.)

                                 Major.

And at half after nine this evening, send a message to my wife and have
her told that I must stay all night at the brick kilns--eh, you
remember (_softly, looking around at_ Agnes) how we managed it the
other times when I was out at night.

                                Stephan.

All right, Major.

                                 Major.

Where is that fellow stopping with my cap? (_Enter_ Wilhelm.) Where
were you hiding, man? (Wilhelm _hands him the cap_.) And he is
tottering on his old legs! What are you tottering so for?

                                Wilhelm.

Indeed I am not tottering, Major.

                                 Major.

Well, come on, Stephan! (_Exeunt_ Major, Stephan, _through the garden
door_.)


                            _FOURTH SCENE_.

        AGNES. WILHELM. _Afterward_ LIEUTENANT VON HALLERPFORT.

                          Wilhelm (_softly_).

Fräulein, just now as I went out, Lieutenant von Hallerpfort was
standing there and wished to speak with Fräulein, privately. Neither
the master nor the mistress is to know anything of it ... God, Fräulein
is deadly pale!

                                 Agnes.

Ask the lieutenant to come in, and keep a lookout, if my aunt comes.

(Wilhelm _opens the door on the right, and disappears through the door
on the left hand_.)

                                 Agnes.

(_Meeting the lieutenant as he enters_.) Herr von Hallerpfort, what has
happened to Fritz?

                              Hallerpfort.

Nothing, Fräulein, not the least thing.... I am surprised that he is
not yet here.

                       Agnes (_rising joyfully_).

Ah! (_With a sigh of relief_.) Ha!

                              Hallerpfort.

I beg pardon a thousand times if I startled you.

                                 Agnes.

Will you please take a seat.

                              Hallerpfort.

Thank you, most humbly! (_They are seated_.) Your uncle and aunt, I
hope, will not----

                                 Agnes.

Uncle has just gone to the stables, and aunt's coming will be announced
to us.

                              Hallerpfort.

How is your aunt?

                                 Agnes.

Oh, I thank you, much as usual.--Herr von Hallerpfort, be frank with
me: What is this all about?

                              Hallerpfort.

Oh, absolutely nothing of any consequence. A little surprise--nothing
further--nothing further!

                                 Agnes.

To be sure, if he is really on his way here--didn't you ride here
together?

                              Hallerpfort.

No, I came by the way of the levee, and thought to overtake him. He
will have ridden by the highway.

                                 Agnes.

Then what is the object of this secrecy?

                              Hallerpfort.

That will soon be cleared up, Fräulein.... At this moment, in Fritz's
interest, I have to ask a great favour of you.... It is now (_takes out
his watch_) three forty-five o'clock. At four o'clock let us say five
minutes after four--even if we take into account some unforeseen
delay--yes--he must be here.... How long does it take to go to the
village to Braun's inn?

                                 Agnes.

Ten minutes--that is, by a short cut through the park, about five.

                              Hallerpfort.

Thank you most humbly. Then will you have the great kindness to reckon
by your watch a half hour from the moment when he comes in here, and
then send me a message to Braun's where I am stopping?

                                 Agnes.

At Braun's? I think you know, Herr von Hallerpfort, that this house----

                              Hallerpfort.

Oh, certainly that I know!... I only made the mistake of putting my
horse at the entrance to Braun's, and as he doesn't belong to me, it is
my duty to look after him.

                                 Agnes.

And all that is the truth?

                              Hallerpfort.

Absolutely.

                                 Agnes.

I should not be so persistent--forgive me for it--but here we have all
been so distressed about him. For nearly a week, we have sat and waited
for news.... Tell me truly.

                   Wilhelm (_entering at the left_).

Fräulein, your aunt.

                     Hallerpfort (_springing up_).

Good-bye, then! And be reassured, it is all about a joke--about----

                                 Agnes.

If only your face were not so serious.

                              Hallerpfort.

Oh, that--that is deceptive. (_Exit quickly to the right_.)


                             _FIFTH SCENE_.

AGNES. FRAU VON DROSSE (_extremely delicate in appearance, forty,
suffering--with girlish complexion--gay, absent smile--dreamy, gentle
expression--gliding, careful walk--breathing deeply_).

                                 Agnes.

(_Hastens to meet her, to support her_.) Forgive me, aunt, that I did
not go to fetch you.

                            Frau von Drosse.

No matter, darling ... I could manage.... Is there any news?

                       (Agnes _shakes her head_.)

                      Frau von Drosse (_sighing_).

Ah, yes.

                                 Agnes.

Do you know, aunt, I have a sort of presentiment that he will soon be
here himself.

                            Frau von Drosse.

Yes, if things happened according to presentiments!


                             _SIXTH SCENE_.

                       THE SAME. MAJOR. WILHELM.

                                 Major.

Well, darling, are you in good spirits?... No!... Well, what is it
then? What is it then?

                            Frau von Drosse.

Ah, Richard, you surely know.

                                 Major.

Oh, nonsense! Don't worry yourself uselessly.... A young badger like
that--service and casino and what not! I used not to do any better
myself ... Eh, Wilhelm, that you will have remembered even in your
booziness? Many a time I didn't write for four weeks.

                 Wilhelm (_who is handing the coffee_).

Yes, Major.

                                 Major.

And were you at all worried then?

                                Wilhelm.

Yes, Major.

                                 Major.

Old donkey.... Well, you see how it is ... The same old story.

                            Frau von Drosse.

Richard, do you know, last night a thought came to me. They all idolise
him--that boy.

                                 Major.

Yes?

                            Frau von Drosse.

Well, with the ladies of the regiment, it is no great wonder....

                                 Major.

So far as they wish to get married--no.

                            Frau von Drosse.

But there is another who takes a very special interest in
him--motherly, as one might say.... No, motherly is not just the right
word, but at any rate, purely human, purely spiritual--you know what I
mean. At the last ball in Wartenstein, she questioned me at length
about him, about his childhood, and everything possible. At the time I
was really rather indignant, but now it pleases me.... I shall write to
her to-day and ask her to keep an eye upon him. For you see, a woman's
influence--that is what he needs.

                                 Major.

Ah, the poor devil! And for that purpose, one of the kind.... Who then
is it?

                            Frau von Drosse.

Why! You surely know her ... Frau von Lanski of Steinhof.

                           (Agnes _winces_.)

                                 Major.

Ah, indeed--well, to be sure, hm--that is quite probable.

                            Frau von Drosse.

Their estate is quite close to the city ... There he could always go in
the evenings ... If only the husband were not so rude. I should be
afraid of him.

                                 Major.

Well, you are not a lieutenant of hussars, darling.

                                 Agnes.

Won't you drink your coffee, aunt? It will be quite cold.

                            Frau von Drosse.

Ah, the stupid fig-coffee. To be sure, your health is good, you don't
need anything of the kind! (_drinks_) Richard, do you know, last night
I saw a vision.

                                 Major.

Well, what did you see this time, darling?

                            Frau von Drosse.

There was a wide chamber with many mirrors and lights--perhaps it was
Versailles--perhaps the castle at Berlin. And hundreds of generals
stood there and waited.... (_Excitedly_.) And suddenly the door was
opened wide and at the side of the Emperor----

                                 Agnes.

Drink, aunt--tell about it later--it excites you.

                            Frau von Drosse.

Yes, my sweet one, yes. (_Drinks and leans back exhausted_.) You know,
Richard, perhaps they are to increase his pay.

                                 Major.

Surely he has enough, darling. Do you wish him to gamble it away?

                            Frau von Drosse.

Very well, then, let him gamble it away. I find that in general we pay
so little heed to him.... I am obliged to think all the time how he
acted in a roundabout way in the matter of Foxblaze. He didn't trust
himself even to tell it.

                          Major (_laughing_).

No, child--but just stop.... Besides the charger he already has two
others ... And one of them is Mohammed! Such a big stable--it is only a
nuisance to him.... Just consider!

                            Frau von Drosse.

Ah, it is surely only restlessness. Ah, I wish he were only----

                                Wilhelm.

(_Who had gone out, appears excitedly at the door on the right and
calls softly_.) Major, Major!

                        Major (_springing up_).

What is it?

                       Wilhelm (_in a whisper_).

The--the--young master!

              Frau von Drosse (_turning round suddenly_).

What is it about the young master?

               Major (_rushes out. His voice is heard_).

Boy, boy, boy!

          (Frau von Drosse _breaks out in ecstatic laughter_.)

                                 Agnes.

Quietly, aunt! Quietly! Don't excite yourself!


                            _SEVENTH SCENE_.

THE SAME. FRITZ VON DROSSE (_in hussar uniform, his mother's son,
slender, delicate, very youthful, blond to the roots of his closely
cropped hair, small curled moustache, erratic person. Uneasiness is
veiled beneath a noisy cheerfulness_).

                            Frau von Drosse.

(_Goes to meet him with outstretched arms_.) My God! there he really
is!

                                 Fritz.

I should think he was! (_Presses her to his heart and strokes her hair,
closes his eyes a moment, as if overcome with faintness_.) But be
seated, mamma, be seated. Confound it, but I have ridden! And on the
way, my horse lost another shoe.

                                 Major.

Mohammed?

                                 Fritz.

No, I am riding the Spy.

                                 Major.

Where did it happen?

                                 Fritz.

Thank God! just near Gehlsdorf.... I wasted twenty-five minutes at the
blacksmith's.... But then--when--you should have seen!... Yes, Wilhelm,
just see to it that the horse is well scraped and rubbed down. And
don't let him stand just now--first lead him about properly.... An
hour, feeding time--understand, old chap?... There, give me your
paw--so!--don't be so agitated.... And now, go on, out with you!

                           (_Exit_ Wilhelm.)

                            Frau von Drosse.

Come here, my Fritzchen, sit beside me!

                                 Fritz.

Very well, mamma, let us, very well!

                            Frau von Drosse.

You see, Agnes she had a presentiment about you.

                                 Fritz.

Ah! Good-day, Agnes!

                                 Agnes.

Good-day, Fritz!

                                 Fritz.

You are so formal!

                                 Agnes.

I?... Ah, no, dear Fritz.... Would you not like to drink something?

               (Fritz _stares at her, without replying_.)

                                 Major.

Fritz!

                         Fritz (_starting up_).

Yes, father!

                                 Major.

You are asked a question.

                                 Fritz.

To be sure, pardon me!... Pardon me, dear Agnes!... It is the heat ...
It makes one quite idiotic.... Please bring me anything you like....
No, bring me rather some Rhine wine.... Bring some of the '64.

                          Major (_laughing_).

You go eagerly at the stuff, my son....

                                 Fritz.

Forgive me, father, if I was too bold. I don't know how I came to do
it.

                          Major (_to_ Agnes).

Just bring it, bring it.

(Agnes _takes the keys from the shelf and goes out to the right_.)

                            Frau von Drosse.

How long have you furlough, my boy?

                                 Fritz.

Furlough? Ha, ha, furlough ... No furlough at all. Sixty precious
minutes, I have spared for you (_stretching himself_) then it is over!
(_Throws himself into a chair standing near the place where his mother
is sitting_.)

                                 Major.

It is "over," what does that mean? Are you then on duty?

                                 Fritz.

On duty?... Well, yes indeed, I am on duty--to be sure--of course.

                                 Major.

What duty can that be?

                                 Fritz.

Well, a patrol ride, of course.

                                 Major.

When did you set out?

                                 Fritz.

At noon, father.

                                 Major.

Remarkable. In my time, the cavalry rode in patrol service rather about
midnight.

                                 Fritz.

Yes, the old man[2] does such things.... It is all one to him. If he
can give petty annoyance. Yes.

                                 Major.

How do you have time to stop in here?

                                 Fritz.

Well, I had to unsaddle, and anyhow have ridden four and a half miles.
It was only the question whether I should feed the horse at Braun's at
the entrance where one gets merely water or----

                                 Major.

Of course you are right about that.

                Frau von Drosse (_stroking his hands_).

See what brown hands the boy has got.... I wonder how they can be
burned through the gloves ... Just look, Richard, he has the white mark
on his forehead, there where it is shaded. The last time, it was not
there. My boy, my boy! (_Bends down her head and kisses him on the
forehead_.)

(Fritz _closes his eyes and utters a low whimpering exclamation of
pain_.)

                            Frau von Drosse.

What was it? Did I hurt you, my boy?

                  Fritz (_with embarrassed laughter_).

Oh, no--no!

                                 Major.

Control yourself, Fritz!

                                 Fritz.

Yes, father!

                            Frau von Drosse.

Let him alone, Richard! Remember he has to leave directly.

                 Fritz (_staring straight before him_).

Yes, I must go directly.

               Major (_shaking his head, examines him_).

Remarkable!

            Agnes (_who returns with a bottle and glasses_).

There is the wine, dear Fritz.

                                 Fritz.

Ah, if only the wine is there! (_Hurries to the table and pours the
wine_.) Does no one touch glasses with me?

                                 Major.

Just wait, I will touch glasses with you.

                                 Fritz.

Then long life to us, friends! May we live happily.... Long may we
live.... (_Musing_.) May we live as long as possible!

                                 Major.

But you are not drinking.

                                 Fritz.

Yes, yes. (_Tosses down a glass_.)

                                 Major.

Well, I should like to take this occasion to ask you just why you don't
write to us any more.

                            Frau von Drosse.

Please, Richard, please say nothing to him--he telegraphed.

                     Fritz (_starting anxiously_).

Telegraphed? What did I telegraph?

        (Major _makes signals to him behind his mother's back_.)

                                 Fritz.

Yes, of course. You see, father, I telegraphed.... And then, not long
ago, I fell from the trapeze and sprained my arm a bit.

                            Frau von Drosse.

You see, Richard, that is what hurt him just now; and yet you scolded
him.

                                 Fritz.

Mamma, father is right.... A soldier is not allowed to show signs of
pain--he has no pain. That is something which doesn't happen, it is
something which doesn't happen at all, does it, Agnes?

                                 Agnes.

Why do you ask _me_, Fritz?

                                 Major.

Remarkable!... You know, darling, the boy would like something to eat.
In such cases, you always see to it yourself--eh?

                                 Fritz.

No, indeed, mother--stay here, mother. (_He grasps her hands_.)

                    Frau von Drosse (_imploringly_).

Richard, the time is just now so short.

                                 Major.

Won't do, child! I have to speak to him about something.

                                 Fritz.

What is it, father? There is indeed no question of ...

              Frau von Drosse (_standing up and sighing_).

Don't be too long, Richard. Remember I wish to have something more of
him. (_Goes with_ Agnes _to the door on the left, where she turns
again_.) My boy, don't you look at me any more?

                                 Fritz.

(_Who has been standing with averted face, biting his lips, turns
suddenly_.) At your service, mother!

                            Frau von Drosse.

Now he is on his "at your service" footing, even with me.

                 (_Exit_ Frau von Drosse _with_ Agnes.)


                            _EIGHTH SCENE_.

                             MAJOR. FRITZ.

                                 Major.

Well, Fritz, my boy, here we are now alone, just out with what you have
to say ... Exactly what is the matter?

                                 Fritz.

Nothing, father, absolutely nothing ... What should be the matter?

                                 Major.

You know, this story about the sprained arm and the patrol ride, that
is simply a lie!

                                 Fritz.

How so?

                                 Major.

Will you smoke a cigar with me?

                                 Fritz.

If you please ... That is, I should like a glass of water. (_Tosses
down two glasses of water_.)

                      Major (_lights his cigar_).

Just see, Fritz, in your rage you fail to notice that I am insulting
you here.

                                 Fritz.

How can a father be said to insult his son? If you don't believe me,
then you just don't believe me.

                                 Major.

But we are both officers, my son.... Well, let us set that
aside--besides that, we are a couple of good friends from time
immemorial.... Isn't that the case--are we not?

                                 Fritz.

Oh, to be sure.

                                 Major.

And when I see you running about here--in ecstasy or despair--I can
make nothing out of it. Yes, I should like to advise you to put a
little more confidence in me.... The affair is surely not so bad that a
man of experience cannot put it in order again.... So just sit down
here a while.... Have you gambled?

                                 Fritz.

Yes, I have gambled too.

                                 Major.

Have you lost?

                                 Fritz.

No, I have won.

                                 Major.

Then, as to women--how is it about women?

                    Fritz (_shrugs his shoulders_).

Ah!

                                 Major.

Boy, don't be so hard in the mouth.... Do you think I don't know you
are in love?...

                                 Fritz.

In love? Ah, good God!

                                 Major.

Just think, my boy, only a year and a half ago, you came to me one fine
day and explained to me that you wished to engage yourself to Agnes....
You know that I have not the slightest objection to Agnes. She will
make an excellent Frau von Drosse.

                                 Fritz.

Indeed? Do you believe it?

                                 Major.

But your twenty-one years and, ah, good God!... You still carry about
with you most merrily the eggshells on your back--as the infantry
carries the knapsack. You hadn't the slightest idea of what are
commonly called "women"--of course, I don't count barmaids and such
people.... So I said to you: "My boy, let this interview be buried--and
above all, so far as Agnes is concerned.... Do as your father and your
grandfather did! Get some experience and--then come again." Don't you
remember that?

                                 Fritz.

I should think I did remember it.

                           Major (_smiling_).

And now, it seems to me, you have had some experience.

                                 Fritz.

Oh, yes, there is no denying that.

                        Major (_still smiling_).

You have in the end had a so-called "passion," or are stuck in the
middle of it; which of the two I don't know. Yet to judge from the
discontinuance of your letters, the latter is the case.... Since we are
here together as two men, I will not expostulate with you further....
You know perhaps the story of that abbé who, in society, once excused
the absence of his bishop with the words: "Monseigneur est en retard à
cause d'amour." To a certain extent, this holds good in every case....
But in spite of that, on your mother's account, don't do it again. That
is my advice to you.... There! And now we'll enter at once upon the
matter itself.... Just see, Frau von Lanski is, it will be admitted, a
very charming woman, but----

                         Fritz (_impetuously_).

Father, how do you come to refer to Frau von Lanski?

                                 Major.

There, there, there, only take it calmly, only take it calmly.... I
know just what there is to know about such affairs, and I don't by any
means wish to pry into your secrets ... But so far as the grand passion
is concerned, be calm.... I can cure you again ... Be quite calm.

                                 Fritz.

That I can well believe, father, if only you have the time necessary to
do it.

                           Major (_smiling_).

Well, why haven't I?

                                 Fritz.

Because, in twenty-four hours, I shall be a dead man.

                                 Major.

(_Springing up, and taking him by the shoulder_.) Boy!

                                 Fritz.

Father, I did not wish to tell anything. I came here only to take
farewell of you in silence. But you have drawn it out of me, father.

                    Major (_flying into a passion_).

So, there's a scandal.... You had to carry it to the point of making a
scandal--you damned fool! (_More calmly_.) Lanski has challenged you?

                         (Fritz _nods assent_.)

                                 Major.

Well, yes--and it is well known--Lanski is a dead shot. He is perhaps
the best shot anywhere hereabouts.... But still your wrist is in good
order. How can one throw the thing away like that? I have fought three
duels, and two of them under difficult conditions--eh--and--there, see
here! How can one say such a thing? How can one, man?

                                 Fritz.

Father, the affair at this moment is in such a state that, after all, I
don't know whether I shall be granted a duel!

                          Major (_hoarsely_).

I don't understand that, Fritz.

                                 Fritz.

Then don't ask me!... I can't say it, father.... I had rather bite off
my tongue. (_Pauses_.)

                                 Major.

(_Goes to the door on the left, opens it, looks out, and closes it
again_.) Now speak! (_Wildly_.) Speak or----

                                 Fritz.

For me, father, there is no more any "or." ... Whether you turn me out
or not, it is all the same.

                 Major (_softly, grinding his teeth_).

Do you wish to drive me mad, boy?

                         (Fritz _crying out_).

He whipped me--across the courtyard--out into the street--whipped me
like a beast!

                       Major (_after a silence_).

Where was your sabre? You could have run him through.

                 (Fritz _silent, with downcast eyes_.)

                                 Major.

Where was your sabre, I ask you?

                                 Fritz.

It was--not--at hand, father.

                                 Major.

It was not at hand.... Hm!... Now I understand it all. Surely there is
nothing left to wish! And this catastrophe occurred when?

                                 Fritz.

Yesterday evening, father!

                                 Major.

At what time?

                                 Fritz.

It was still--daylight!

                                 Major.

Ha, ha!

                                 Fritz.

Father, only don't laugh! Have pity on me!

                                 Major.

Have you had pity on me?... Or on your mother? or on--on.... Just look,
look about you ... All that was made for you!... All that was waiting
for you.... For two centuries we Drosses have struggled and scraped
together and fought with death and devil merely for you.... The house
of Drosse was resting on your two shoulders, my son.... And you have
let it fall into the mire, and now you would like to be pitied!

                                 Fritz.

Dear father, listen.... Since you have known it, I am quite calm....
What you say is all very true, but I cannot bear the responsibility
alone. Listen; when I came to you that time, on account of Agnes, my
whole heart was attached to her. So far as I was concerned, other men's
wives could go to the devil.

                                 Major.

Did I drive you, then, after other men's wives?

                                 Fritz.

Yes, father, otherwise what does that mean: "Get some experience,
ripen, do as your father and grandfather did"?... In the regiment, they
still call you the wild Drosse, and tales are still told of your former
love adventures.... They tell some such stories even of a late date....
For my part, I had not the least taste for such diversions. I used to
see in every woman who did not belong to me, a sort of holy thing....
That may have been a green way of looking at it, but you would have
allowed it; and with Agnes, I should have quietly----

                                 Major.

Stop! Have pity! Stop!

                                 Fritz.

See, now you say to me all at once, "have pity"--Father, I am a dying
man, I did not come here to make reproaches, but do you make none to
me!

                                 Major.

(_Embracing him, and stroking his hair_.) My son--my all--my boy--I
don't permit--I will not----

                                 Fritz.

Silence, silence, father! Mother should not hear that.

                                 Major.

Yes, forgive me for giving way. It shall not happen again.... So how
does the affair stand now?

                                 Fritz.

I reported myself to the old man, that very night.

                                 Major.

My God! Whatever did the old Frohn say?

                                 Fritz.

Spare me that, father.... Of course, I obtained the usual furlough at
once, until the discharge comes. Well, that doesn't matter now.... It
does not last long, thus.... This morning, the court of honor had a
sitting. After my hearing, I rode away at once, so as to lose no time.
I gave Mohammed to Hallerpfort in order to have him follow me as soon
as judgment was pronounced. He may be here at any moment.

                                 Major.

Why did you summon a court of honor?

                                 Fritz.

What was I to do, father, after Lanski declared to those who delivered
my challenge that I was no longer--capable of having satisfaction?

                                 Major.

Ah! I will shoot the dog dead for that.

                                 Fritz.

Well, I hope they will decide favourably to me.

                                 Major.

If not, the dev-- (_Softly_.) And then I will tell you a couple of
measures to take so as to have a steady hand. Sleep properly, and don't
eat a bite, and then tell the doctor----

                                 Fritz.

Enough, enough, father, that is of no further use.

                                 Major.

What does that mean? Is it possible that you will--to Lanski?----

                                 Fritz.

Lanski will hit me. Depend upon it....

                                 Major.

Man, are you--are you----?

                                 Fritz.

Lanski will hit me. Depend upon it....

                                 Major.

Man, yet have--yet consider----

                                 Fritz.

I will not, father! And if you had seen the spectacle which the people
of Wartenstein saw yesterday (_shudders_), you would demand nothing
more of life for me than a half-respectable death....

                          Major (_brokenly_).

Perhaps--they will not--grant you--the duel.

                                 Fritz.

Well, if we have got to that last hope, father, then we are indeed in
bad straits.... Shall I perhaps open a dram-shop in Chicago, or a
cattle business with my paternal capital? Yes? Would you have done it?

                          Major (_perplexed_).

I?

                                 Fritz.

Say then say!

                     Major (_drawing himself up_).

No! (_Sinks down in his chair_.)

                                 Fritz.

So you see, father--so or so--your Fritz is done for.

                   Major (_sunk in gloomy reverie_).

My fault!--my----


                             _NINTH SCENE_.

       THE SAME. WILHELM. _Afterward_ LIEUTENANT VON HALLERPFORT.

                                 Fritz.

What is it?

                                Wilhelm.

Lieutenant von Hallerpfort wishes to speak to the young master.

                                 Fritz.

(_Hurrying past him to the door_.) Well?

(Hallerpfort _shakes hands with him and the_ Major, _and casts a glance
at_ Wilhelm, _who forthwith disappears_.)

                                 Fritz.

Well?

                              Hallerpfort.

Does your father know?

                                 Major.

Yes, my dear Hallerpfort, I know.--Granted?

                              Hallerpfort.

To-morrow morning, half after four o'clock behind the large
drill-ground.

                                 Fritz.

Thank God!

                                 Major.

Thank God! (_They embrace_.)

                     Fritz (_disengaging himself_).

Conditions?

                              Hallerpfort.

Fifteen paces--advance--five paces barrier--exchange of shots----

                                 Fritz.

To a finish?

                              Hallerpfort.

To a finish.

                                 Fritz.

Very well!

(Major _turns toward the door, and presses his hands to his face_.)

                    Hallerpfort (_approaching him_).

Major, as your son's best friend----

                     Major (_grasping his hands_).

I thank you, my dear Hallerpfort, I thank you.... You will ride away at
once, will you not?

                              Hallerpfort.

Unfortunately we must, Major.

                                 Major.

Then just listen.... I will pass the hours until the duel, with my
son.... That you can understand, can't you?... My carriage is hitched
up but I cannot go away with you for fear of making my sick wife
uneasy. Wait for me at the end of half an hour in Schrander's inn....
Don't fear. We shall be on time....

                              Hallerpfort.

It will be as you order, Major.

                                 Major.

And now, courage, Fritz!

                                 Fritz.

That is understood, father!

                                 Major.

(_Holding open the door on the left, in a different tone_.) Now, boys,
just come quickly in! Only think, darling----


                             _TENTH SCENE_.

                       THE SAME. FRAU VON DROSSE.

                            Frau von Drosse.

Ah--Herr von Hallerpfort! (_He kisses her hand_.) How does this happen?
Two lieutenants in the house at the same time--if that doesn't bring
luck!

                           Fritz (_quickly_).

We have orders together, mamma.

                              Hallerpfort.

And alas, madam, we have to be off this very minute.

                            Frau von Drosse.

How is that? Then I don't have my full hour? And now everything is so
beautifully arranged.... Fritz, my dear Hallerpfort--just a bite, won't
you?... Richard, dear, come to my aid.

                                 Major.

But, dear child, service is service.

                     Fritz (_with quick decision_).

So, good-bye, mamma!

                   Frau von Drosse (_embracing him_).

My boy--you will soon have furlough, won't you?

                                 Fritz.

Yes indeed, mamma! After the man[oe]uvres. Then we are free. Then we
will be merry!

                            Frau von Drosse.

And Hallerpfort is coming with you, isn't he?

                              Hallerpfort.

With your permission, madam.

                      Major (_softly, to_ Agnes).

Take leave of him! You will never see him again!

                                 Fritz.

(_Stretching out his hand cheerfully to her_.) Dear Ag-- (_Looks into
her face, and understands that she knows. Softly, earnestly_.)
Farewell, then.

                                 Agnes.

Farewell, Fritz!

                                 Fritz.

I love you.

                                 Agnes.

I shall always love you, Fritz!

                                 Fritz.

Away then, Hallerpfort! Au revoir, papa! Au revoir! Revoir! (_Starts
for the door on the right_.)

                            Frau von Drosse.

Go by the park, boys--there I have you longer in sight.

                                 Fritz.

Very well, mamma, we will do it! (_Passes with_ Hallerpfort _through
the door at the centre; on the terrace, he turns with a cheerful
gesture, and calls once more_.) Au revoir! (_His voice is still
audible_.) Au revoir!

(Frau von Drosse _throws kisses after him, and waves her handkerchief,
then presses her hand wearily to her heart and sighs heavily_.)


                           _ELEVENTH SCENE_.

                     MAJOR. FRAU VON DROSSE. AGNES.

(Agnes _hurries to her, and leads her to a chair, then goes over to
the_ Major, _who, with heaving breast is lost in thought_.)

                            Frau von Drosse.

Thank you, my darling!--Already, I am quite well again!... God, the
boy! How handsome he looked! And so brown and so healthy.... You see, I
saw him exactly like that last night.... No, that is no illusion! And I
told you how the Emperor led him in among all the generals! And the
emperor said (_More softly, looking far away with a beatific smile_.)
And the Emperor said----



                                CURTAIN.
﻿                               FRITZCHEN

                           A DRAMA IN ONE ACT





                                PERSONS

      Herr von Drosse, Major (retired), Lord of the Manor.
      Helene, his wife.
      Fritz, their son.
      Agnes, niece of Frau von Drosse.
      Von Hallerpfort, lieutenant.
      Stephan, overseer.
      Wilhelm, servant.





                               FRITZCHEN

_The action takes place on Herr von Drosse's estate. Time, the
present_.

_The scene represents a drawing-room on the ground floor. In the rear
are wide glass doors which stand open, and permit a view of the terrace
and splendid park lying beyond. Windows to the right and left. On the
right side, a sofa with table and chairs; on the left, a secretary with
writing materials. Handsome old-fashioned decorations, pictures of
battles, portraits in oval frames, racing prints, etc. The terrace is
sheltered by a broad awning which slightly subdues the glare of the
bright summer afternoon._


                             _FIRST SCENE_.

Wilhelm (_servant over sixty, in half livery, is engaged in arranging
the samovar for the afternoon coffee_). Agnes (_extremely slender,
nervous, with traces of mental distress--twenty years of age--blonde
hair smoothed on the temples, light muslin gown, a garden hat in her
hand--enters from the terrace_).

                                 Agnes.

Wilhelm, has the postman been here?

                          Wilhelm (_sighing_).

Yes, yes, he was here.

                                 Agnes.

Where are the things?

                                Wilhelm.

They are on the table, Fräulein.

                                 Agnes.

(_Goes quickly to the table and with feverish haste looks through the
small pile of newspapers and letters lying there_.) Again, nothing!

                                Wilhelm.

Yes, indeed--and this is the seventh day. Ah, it is really
heart-breaking.

                                 Agnes.

Are your master and mistress still taking their afternoon nap?

                                Wilhelm.

I have just heard the Major. He will be here directly--there he is now!


                            _SECOND SCENE_.

THE SAME. MAJOR VON DROSSE (_about fifty, tall, broad-shouldered,
rather stout. Dark-grayish full beard parted in the middle, waving
right and left over his shoulders. In the full, well-browned face with
flashing eyes and bushy eyebrows, there are energy and abundant
vitality, controlled by the self-command and chivalric manner of an old
officer. Brief in speech, domineering, but never without a gleam of
inner kindness_).

                                 Major.

Afternoon, Agnes!

                                 Agnes.

Afternoon, uncle!

                                 Major.

(_Goes to the table, examines the letters, sits down and looks straight
before him for a little while_.) Wilhelm!

                                Wilhelm.

What does the Major wish?

                                 Major.

Stephan is to come at once to the castle.

                                Wilhelm.

Very well, Major. (_Exit_.)

                                 Major.

Agnes, my child, just listen to me ... You are a reasonable creature
... One that I can talk to.... So the rascal has again not written.
He should have come to us, day before yesterday. Has made no
excuses--doesn't write--nothing. That has not happened during the six
years that he has been away from home. I ordered him most strictly to
send a letter, or at least a card, every day--for with her illness,
your aunt must be guarded against the slightest anxiety or excitement.
He knows that, and moreover has always observed it conscientiously. I
can't any longer be responsible for your aunt and her weakened heart.
Unless we use every means to keep her in her--visionary life, she will
go to pieces.

                                 Agnes.

Uncle!

                                 Major.

We must make up our minds to that, Agnes. Really, I do what I can.
Yesterday I even forged a telegram to her--you know that, eh! I did
intend to write to his intimate friend Hallerpfort, but thought better
of it. I shall drive into town directly after dark. Without your aunt
knowing it, of course--for now, during the harvest, that would upset
her still more. So you will stay all night with her, and er--well, the
rest I will arrange with Stephan.

                                 Agnes.

Very well, dear uncle.

                                 Major.

Just come here, girl, look me in the face ... We two know each other
and ... Eh?

                     (Agnes _casts down her eyes_.)

                                 Major.

Now see, I know very well that for two years you have been secretly
corresponding with Fritz.

                                 Agnes.

Uncle! (_Presses her hands to her face_.)

                                 Major.

There, that will do, that will do, that will do.... You can well
believe, if I had been opposed to it on principle, I should have
long since put an end to the business, shouldn't I?... But there are
things--well, in short, that you don't understand. Well, I should not
have begun about the matter to-day, but necessity knows no law, eh? And
if I go to see him this evening, I don't wish to grope altogether in
the dark.... So--on the basis of what has just been said--have you,
perhaps, by any chance had a letter from him?

                                 Agnes.

No, uncle!

                                 Major.

Hm!

                   Agnes (_hesitating, embarrassed_).

For some time we have not corresponded.

                                 Major.

So?--Ho, ho ...! Who is to blame for that?

                                 Agnes.

Ah, let us not talk about that, uncle. But from another quarter, I have
had news of him.

                                 Major.

When?

                                 Agnes.

Yesterday.

                                 Major.

And that you have----?

                                 Agnes.

(_Taking a letter from her pocket_.) Please read--and I think you will
not reproach me.

                    Major (_unfolding the letter_).

Ah, from the little Frohn! Now then, what does the little Frohn write?
(_Reads, muttering_.) Lanskis--Steinhof--met cousin--danced (_aloud_).
Indeed, then he could dance, but not write, that is a nice business--I
should not have believed it of him at all.... (_Reads further,
muttering_.) Eyes for the so-called beautiful Frau von Lanski ... The
whole regiment is talking of it.... Hm! eh, what! Such a goose! What
things such a goose does cackle!... Regiment has other things to bother
itself about.... But such a regulation goose ... If a young lieutenant
like that isn't all the time trotting after them. And when he once
shows attention to a lady who doesn't belong to the regiment ...
Besides, the Lanski is nearly forty ... Such idiocy! Then he might at
least--hm--hm--eh, pardon! Now then, what is it?... My poor old girl
... Yes, yes, jealousy ... You have borne up disgracefully since
yesterday.

                                 Agnes.

I think I have controlled myself, uncle?

                                 Major.

Yes, very true, girl, no one has noticed anything.


                             _THIRD SCENE_.

        THE SAME. WILHELM. _Afterward_ STEPHAN, _the overseer_.

                  Wilhelm (_entering from the right_).

Herr Stephan is there, Major.

                                 Major.

Come in!

                           (_Enter_ Stephan.)

Very well, my dear Stephen, I must drive into town directly after
dark. Unless I should be detained, I shall be here early to-morrow
morning--four and a half and four and a half more miles--nine miles....
The coach horses have been exercised to-day?

                                Stephan.

Yes, indeed, Major.

                                 Major.

Which are in better condition now, the browns or the whites?

                                Stephan.

That I don't permit myself to decide, Major. They have all had it
severely!

                                 Major.

Well, I will just go and have a look myself. Wilhelm--cap!

                                Wilhelm.

Very well, Major. (_Exit to the right_.)

                                 Major.

And at half after nine this evening, send a message to my wife and have
her told that I must stay all night at the brick kilns--eh, you
remember (_softly, looking around at_ Agnes) how we managed it the
other times when I was out at night.

                                Stephan.

All right, Major.

                                 Major.

Where is that fellow stopping with my cap? (_Enter_ Wilhelm.) Where
were you hiding, man? (Wilhelm _hands him the cap_.) And he is
tottering on his old legs! What are you tottering so for?

                                Wilhelm.

Indeed I am not tottering, Major.

                                 Major.

Well, come on, Stephan! (_Exeunt_ Major, Stephan, _through the garden
door_.)


                            _FOURTH SCENE_.

        AGNES. WILHELM. _Afterward_ LIEUTENANT VON HALLERPFORT.

                          Wilhelm (_softly_).

Fräulein, just now as I went out, Lieutenant von Hallerpfort was
standing there and wished to speak with Fräulein, privately. Neither
the master nor the mistress is to know anything of it ... God, Fräulein
is deadly pale!

                                 Agnes.

Ask the lieutenant to come in, and keep a lookout, if my aunt comes.

(Wilhelm _opens the door on the right, and disappears through the door
on the left hand_.)

                                 Agnes.

(_Meeting the lieutenant as he enters_.) Herr von Hallerpfort, what has
happened to Fritz?

                              Hallerpfort.

Nothing, Fräulein, not the least thing.... I am surprised that he is
not yet here.

                       Agnes (_rising joyfully_).

Ah! (_With a sigh of relief_.) Ha!

                              Hallerpfort.

I beg pardon a thousand times if I startled you.

                                 Agnes.

Will you please take a seat.

                              Hallerpfort.

Thank you, most humbly! (_They are seated_.) Your uncle and aunt, I
hope, will not----

                                 Agnes.

Uncle has just gone to the stables, and aunt's coming will be announced
to us.

                              Hallerpfort.

How is your aunt?

                                 Agnes.

Oh, I thank you, much as usual.--Herr von Hallerpfort, be frank with
me: What is this all about?

                              Hallerpfort.

Oh, absolutely nothing of any consequence. A little surprise--nothing
further--nothing further!

                                 Agnes.

To be sure, if he is really on his way here--didn't you ride here
together?

                              Hallerpfort.

No, I came by the way of the levee, and thought to overtake him. He
will have ridden by the highway.

                                 Agnes.

Then what is the object of this secrecy?

                              Hallerpfort.

That will soon be cleared up, Fräulein.... At this moment, in Fritz's
interest, I have to ask a great favour of you.... It is now (_takes out
his watch_) three forty-five o'clock. At four o'clock let us say five
minutes after four--even if we take into account some unforeseen
delay--yes--he must be here.... How long does it take to go to the
village to Braun's inn?

                                 Agnes.

Ten minutes--that is, by a short cut through the park, about five.

                              Hallerpfort.

Thank you most humbly. Then will you have the great kindness to reckon
by your watch a half hour from the moment when he comes in here, and
then send me a message to Braun's where I am stopping?

                                 Agnes.

At Braun's? I think you know, Herr von Hallerpfort, that this house----

                              Hallerpfort.

Oh, certainly that I know!... I only made the mistake of putting my
horse at the entrance to Braun's, and as he doesn't belong to me, it is
my duty to look after him.

                                 Agnes.

And all that is the truth?

                              Hallerpfort.

Absolutely.

                                 Agnes.

I should not be so persistent--forgive me for it--but here we have all
been so distressed about him. For nearly a week, we have sat and waited
for news.... Tell me truly.

                   Wilhelm (_entering at the left_).

Fräulein, your aunt.

                     Hallerpfort (_springing up_).

Good-bye, then! And be reassured, it is all about a joke--about----

                                 Agnes.

If only your face were not so serious.

                              Hallerpfort.

Oh, that--that is deceptive. (_Exit quickly to the right_.)


                             _FIFTH SCENE_.

AGNES. FRAU VON DROSSE (_extremely delicate in appearance, forty,
suffering--with girlish complexion--gay, absent smile--dreamy, gentle
expression--gliding, careful walk--breathing deeply_).

                                 Agnes.

(_Hastens to meet her, to support her_.) Forgive me, aunt, that I did
not go to fetch you.

                            Frau von Drosse.

No matter, darling ... I could manage.... Is there any news?

                       (Agnes _shakes her head_.)

                      Frau von Drosse (_sighing_).

Ah, yes.

                                 Agnes.

Do you know, aunt, I have a sort of presentiment that he will soon be
here himself.

                            Frau von Drosse.

Yes, if things happened according to presentiments!


                             _SIXTH SCENE_.

                       THE SAME. MAJOR. WILHELM.

                                 Major.

Well, darling, are you in good spirits?... No!... Well, what is it
then? What is it then?

                            Frau von Drosse.

Ah, Richard, you surely know.

                                 Major.

Oh, nonsense! Don't worry yourself uselessly.... A young badger like
that--service and casino and what not! I used not to do any better
myself ... Eh, Wilhelm, that you will have remembered even in your
booziness? Many a time I didn't write for four weeks.

                 Wilhelm (_who is handing the coffee_).

Yes, Major.

                                 Major.

And were you at all worried then?

                                Wilhelm.

Yes, Major.

                                 Major.

Old donkey.... Well, you see how it is ... The same old story.

                            Frau von Drosse.

Richard, do you know, last night a thought came to me. They all idolise
him--that boy.

                                 Major.

Yes?

                            Frau von Drosse.

Well, with the ladies of the regiment, it is no great wonder....

                                 Major.

So far as they wish to get married--no.

                            Frau von Drosse.

But there is another who takes a very special interest in
him--motherly, as one might say.... No, motherly is not just the right
word, but at any rate, purely human, purely spiritual--you know what I
mean. At the last ball in Wartenstein, she questioned me at length
about him, about his childhood, and everything possible. At the time I
was really rather indignant, but now it pleases me.... I shall write to
her to-day and ask her to keep an eye upon him. For you see, a woman's
influence--that is what he needs.

                                 Major.

Ah, the poor devil! And for that purpose, one of the kind.... Who then
is it?

                            Frau von Drosse.

Why! You surely know her ... Frau von Lanski of Steinhof.

                           (Agnes _winces_.)

                                 Major.

Ah, indeed--well, to be sure, hm--that is quite probable.

                            Frau von Drosse.

Their estate is quite close to the city ... There he could always go in
the evenings ... If only the husband were not so rude. I should be
afraid of him.

                                 Major.

Well, you are not a lieutenant of hussars, darling.

                                 Agnes.

Won't you drink your coffee, aunt? It will be quite cold.

                            Frau von Drosse.

Ah, the stupid fig-coffee. To be sure, your health is good, you don't
need anything of the kind! (_drinks_) Richard, do you know, last night
I saw a vision.

                                 Major.

Well, what did you see this time, darling?

                            Frau von Drosse.

There was a wide chamber with many mirrors and lights--perhaps it was
Versailles--perhaps the castle at Berlin. And hundreds of generals
stood there and waited.... (_Excitedly_.) And suddenly the door was
opened wide and at the side of the Emperor----

                                 Agnes.

Drink, aunt--tell about it later--it excites you.

                            Frau von Drosse.

Yes, my sweet one, yes. (_Drinks and leans back exhausted_.) You know,
Richard, perhaps they are to increase his pay.

                                 Major.

Surely he has enough, darling. Do you wish him to gamble it away?

                            Frau von Drosse.

Very well, then, let him gamble it away. I find that in general we pay
so little heed to him.... I am obliged to think all the time how he
acted in a roundabout way in the matter of Foxblaze. He didn't trust
himself even to tell it.

                          Major (_laughing_).

No, child--but just stop.... Besides the charger he already has two
others ... And one of them is Mohammed! Such a big stable--it is only a
nuisance to him.... Just consider!

                            Frau von Drosse.

Ah, it is surely only restlessness. Ah, I wish he were only----

                                Wilhelm.

(_Who had gone out, appears excitedly at the door on the right and
calls softly_.) Major, Major!

                        Major (_springing up_).

What is it?

                       Wilhelm (_in a whisper_).

The--the--young master!

              Frau von Drosse (_turning round suddenly_).

What is it about the young master?

               Major (_rushes out. His voice is heard_).

Boy, boy, boy!

          (Frau von Drosse _breaks out in ecstatic laughter_.)

                                 Agnes.

Quietly, aunt! Quietly! Don't excite yourself!


                            _SEVENTH SCENE_.

THE SAME. FRITZ VON DROSSE (_in hussar uniform, his mother's son,
slender, delicate, very youthful, blond to the roots of his closely
cropped hair, small curled moustache, erratic person. Uneasiness is
veiled beneath a noisy cheerfulness_).

                            Frau von Drosse.

(_Goes to meet him with outstretched arms_.) My God! there he really
is!

                                 Fritz.

I should think he was! (_Presses her to his heart and strokes her hair,
closes his eyes a moment, as if overcome with faintness_.) But be
seated, mamma, be seated. Confound it, but I have ridden! And on the
way, my horse lost another shoe.

                                 Major.

Mohammed?

                                 Fritz.

No, I am riding the Spy.

                                 Major.

Where did it happen?

                                 Fritz.

Thank God! just near Gehlsdorf.... I wasted twenty-five minutes at the
blacksmith's.... But then--when--you should have seen!... Yes, Wilhelm,
just see to it that the horse is well scraped and rubbed down. And
don't let him stand just now--first lead him about properly.... An
hour, feeding time--understand, old chap?... There, give me your
paw--so!--don't be so agitated.... And now, go on, out with you!

                           (_Exit_ Wilhelm.)

                            Frau von Drosse.

Come here, my Fritzchen, sit beside me!

                                 Fritz.

Very well, mamma, let us, very well!

                            Frau von Drosse.

You see, Agnes she had a presentiment about you.

                                 Fritz.

Ah! Good-day, Agnes!

                                 Agnes.

Good-day, Fritz!

                                 Fritz.

You are so formal!

                                 Agnes.

I?... Ah, no, dear Fritz.... Would you not like to drink something?

               (Fritz _stares at her, without replying_.)

                                 Major.

Fritz!

                         Fritz (_starting up_).

Yes, father!

                                 Major.

You are asked a question.

                                 Fritz.

To be sure, pardon me!... Pardon me, dear Agnes!... It is the heat ...
It makes one quite idiotic.... Please bring me anything you like....
No, bring me rather some Rhine wine.... Bring some of the '64.

                          Major (_laughing_).

You go eagerly at the stuff, my son....

                                 Fritz.

Forgive me, father, if I was too bold. I don't know how I came to do
it.

                          Major (_to_ Agnes).

Just bring it, bring it.

(Agnes _takes the keys from the shelf and goes out to the right_.)

                            Frau von Drosse.

How long have you furlough, my boy?

                                 Fritz.

Furlough? Ha, ha, furlough ... No furlough at all. Sixty precious
minutes, I have spared for you (_stretching himself_) then it is over!
(_Throws himself into a chair standing near the place where his mother
is sitting_.)

                                 Major.

It is "over," what does that mean? Are you then on duty?

                                 Fritz.

On duty?... Well, yes indeed, I am on duty--to be sure--of course.

                                 Major.

What duty can that be?

                                 Fritz.

Well, a patrol ride, of course.

                                 Major.

When did you set out?

                                 Fritz.

At noon, father.

                                 Major.

Remarkable. In my time, the cavalry rode in patrol service rather about
midnight.

                                 Fritz.

Yes, the old man[2] does such things.... It is all one to him. If he
can give petty annoyance. Yes.

                                 Major.

How do you have time to stop in here?

                                 Fritz.

Well, I had to unsaddle, and anyhow have ridden four and a half miles.
It was only the question whether I should feed the horse at Braun's at
the entrance where one gets merely water or----

                                 Major.

Of course you are right about that.

                Frau von Drosse (_stroking his hands_).

See what brown hands the boy has got.... I wonder how they can be
burned through the gloves ... Just look, Richard, he has the white mark
on his forehead, there where it is shaded. The last time, it was not
there. My boy, my boy! (_Bends down her head and kisses him on the
forehead_.)

(Fritz _closes his eyes and utters a low whimpering exclamation of
pain_.)

                            Frau von Drosse.

What was it? Did I hurt you, my boy?

                  Fritz (_with embarrassed laughter_).

Oh, no--no!

                                 Major.

Control yourself, Fritz!

                                 Fritz.

Yes, father!

                            Frau von Drosse.

Let him alone, Richard! Remember he has to leave directly.

                 Fritz (_staring straight before him_).

Yes, I must go directly.

               Major (_shaking his head, examines him_).

Remarkable!

            Agnes (_who returns with a bottle and glasses_).

There is the wine, dear Fritz.

                                 Fritz.

Ah, if only the wine is there! (_Hurries to the table and pours the
wine_.) Does no one touch glasses with me?

                                 Major.

Just wait, I will touch glasses with you.

                                 Fritz.

Then long life to us, friends! May we live happily.... Long may we
live.... (_Musing_.) May we live as long as possible!

                                 Major.

But you are not drinking.

                                 Fritz.

Yes, yes. (_Tosses down a glass_.)

                                 Major.

Well, I should like to take this occasion to ask you just why you don't
write to us any more.

                            Frau von Drosse.

Please, Richard, please say nothing to him--he telegraphed.

                     Fritz (_starting anxiously_).

Telegraphed? What did I telegraph?

        (Major _makes signals to him behind his mother's back_.)

                                 Fritz.

Yes, of course. You see, father, I telegraphed.... And then, not long
ago, I fell from the trapeze and sprained my arm a bit.

                            Frau von Drosse.

You see, Richard, that is what hurt him just now; and yet you scolded
him.

                                 Fritz.

Mamma, father is right.... A soldier is not allowed to show signs of
pain--he has no pain. That is something which doesn't happen, it is
something which doesn't happen at all, does it, Agnes?

                                 Agnes.

Why do you ask _me_, Fritz?

                                 Major.

Remarkable!... You know, darling, the boy would like something to eat.
In such cases, you always see to it yourself--eh?

                                 Fritz.

No, indeed, mother--stay here, mother. (_He grasps her hands_.)

                    Frau von Drosse (_imploringly_).

Richard, the time is just now so short.

                                 Major.

Won't do, child! I have to speak to him about something.

                                 Fritz.

What is it, father? There is indeed no question of ...

              Frau von Drosse (_standing up and sighing_).

Don't be too long, Richard. Remember I wish to have something more of
him. (_Goes with_ Agnes _to the door on the left, where she turns
again_.) My boy, don't you look at me any more?

                                 Fritz.

(_Who has been standing with averted face, biting his lips, turns
suddenly_.) At your service, mother!

                            Frau von Drosse.

Now he is on his "at your service" footing, even with me.

                 (_Exit_ Frau von Drosse _with_ Agnes.)


                            _EIGHTH SCENE_.

                             MAJOR. FRITZ.

                                 Major.

Well, Fritz, my boy, here we are now alone, just out with what you have
to say ... Exactly what is the matter?

                                 Fritz.

Nothing, father, absolutely nothing ... What should be the matter?

                                 Major.

You know, this story about the sprained arm and the patrol ride, that
is simply a lie!

                                 Fritz.

How so?

                                 Major.

Will you smoke a cigar with me?

                                 Fritz.

If you please ... That is, I should like a glass of water. (_Tosses
down two glasses of water_.)

                      Major (_lights his cigar_).

Just see, Fritz, in your rage you fail to notice that I am insulting
you here.

                                 Fritz.

How can a father be said to insult his son? If you don't believe me,
then you just don't believe me.

                                 Major.

But we are both officers, my son.... Well, let us set that
aside--besides that, we are a couple of good friends from time
immemorial.... Isn't that the case--are we not?

                                 Fritz.

Oh, to be sure.

                                 Major.

And when I see you running about here--in ecstasy or despair--I can
make nothing out of it. Yes, I should like to advise you to put a
little more confidence in me.... The affair is surely not so bad that a
man of experience cannot put it in order again.... So just sit down
here a while.... Have you gambled?

                                 Fritz.

Yes, I have gambled too.

                                 Major.

Have you lost?

                                 Fritz.

No, I have won.

                                 Major.

Then, as to women--how is it about women?

                    Fritz (_shrugs his shoulders_).

Ah!

                                 Major.

Boy, don't be so hard in the mouth.... Do you think I don't know you
are in love?...

                                 Fritz.

In love? Ah, good God!

                                 Major.

Just think, my boy, only a year and a half ago, you came to me one fine
day and explained to me that you wished to engage yourself to Agnes....
You know that I have not the slightest objection to Agnes. She will
make an excellent Frau von Drosse.

                                 Fritz.

Indeed? Do you believe it?

                                 Major.

But your twenty-one years and, ah, good God!... You still carry about
with you most merrily the eggshells on your back--as the infantry
carries the knapsack. You hadn't the slightest idea of what are
commonly called "women"--of course, I don't count barmaids and such
people.... So I said to you: "My boy, let this interview be buried--and
above all, so far as Agnes is concerned.... Do as your father and your
grandfather did! Get some experience and--then come again." Don't you
remember that?

                                 Fritz.

I should think I did remember it.

                           Major (_smiling_).

And now, it seems to me, you have had some experience.

                                 Fritz.

Oh, yes, there is no denying that.

                        Major (_still smiling_).

You have in the end had a so-called "passion," or are stuck in the
middle of it; which of the two I don't know. Yet to judge from the
discontinuance of your letters, the latter is the case.... Since we are
here together as two men, I will not expostulate with you further....
You know perhaps the story of that abbé who, in society, once excused
the absence of his bishop with the words: "Monseigneur est en retard à
cause d'amour." To a certain extent, this holds good in every case....
But in spite of that, on your mother's account, don't do it again. That
is my advice to you.... There! And now we'll enter at once upon the
matter itself.... Just see, Frau von Lanski is, it will be admitted, a
very charming woman, but----

                         Fritz (_impetuously_).

Father, how do you come to refer to Frau von Lanski?

                                 Major.

There, there, there, only take it calmly, only take it calmly.... I
know just what there is to know about such affairs, and I don't by any
means wish to pry into your secrets ... But so far as the grand passion
is concerned, be calm.... I can cure you again ... Be quite calm.

                                 Fritz.

That I can well believe, father, if only you have the time necessary to
do it.

                           Major (_smiling_).

Well, why haven't I?

                                 Fritz.

Because, in twenty-four hours, I shall be a dead man.

                                 Major.

(_Springing up, and taking him by the shoulder_.) Boy!

                                 Fritz.

Father, I did not wish to tell anything. I came here only to take
farewell of you in silence. But you have drawn it out of me, father.

                    Major (_flying into a passion_).

So, there's a scandal.... You had to carry it to the point of making a
scandal--you damned fool! (_More calmly_.) Lanski has challenged you?

                         (Fritz _nods assent_.)

                                 Major.

Well, yes--and it is well known--Lanski is a dead shot. He is perhaps
the best shot anywhere hereabouts.... But still your wrist is in good
order. How can one throw the thing away like that? I have fought three
duels, and two of them under difficult conditions--eh--and--there, see
here! How can one say such a thing? How can one, man?

                                 Fritz.

Father, the affair at this moment is in such a state that, after all, I
don't know whether I shall be granted a duel!

                          Major (_hoarsely_).

I don't understand that, Fritz.

                                 Fritz.

Then don't ask me!... I can't say it, father.... I had rather bite off
my tongue. (_Pauses_.)

                                 Major.

(_Goes to the door on the left, opens it, looks out, and closes it
again_.) Now speak! (_Wildly_.) Speak or----

                                 Fritz.

For me, father, there is no more any "or." ... Whether you turn me out
or not, it is all the same.

                 Major (_softly, grinding his teeth_).

Do you wish to drive me mad, boy?

                         (Fritz _crying out_).

He whipped me--across the courtyard--out into the street--whipped me
like a beast!

                       Major (_after a silence_).

Where was your sabre? You could have run him through.

                 (Fritz _silent, with downcast eyes_.)

                                 Major.

Where was your sabre, I ask you?

                                 Fritz.

It was--not--at hand, father.

                                 Major.

It was not at hand.... Hm!... Now I understand it all. Surely there is
nothing left to wish! And this catastrophe occurred when?

                                 Fritz.

Yesterday evening, father!

                                 Major.

At what time?

                                 Fritz.

It was still--daylight!

                                 Major.

Ha, ha!

                                 Fritz.

Father, only don't laugh! Have pity on me!

                                 Major.

Have you had pity on me?... Or on your mother? or on--on.... Just look,
look about you ... All that was made for you!... All that was waiting
for you.... For two centuries we Drosses have struggled and scraped
together and fought with death and devil merely for you.... The house
of Drosse was resting on your two shoulders, my son.... And you have
let it fall into the mire, and now you would like to be pitied!

                                 Fritz.

Dear father, listen.... Since you have known it, I am quite calm....
What you say is all very true, but I cannot bear the responsibility
alone. Listen; when I came to you that time, on account of Agnes, my
whole heart was attached to her. So far as I was concerned, other men's
wives could go to the devil.

                                 Major.

Did I drive you, then, after other men's wives?

                                 Fritz.

Yes, father, otherwise what does that mean: "Get some experience,
ripen, do as your father and grandfather did"?... In the regiment, they
still call you the wild Drosse, and tales are still told of your former
love adventures.... They tell some such stories even of a late date....
For my part, I had not the least taste for such diversions. I used to
see in every woman who did not belong to me, a sort of holy thing....
That may have been a green way of looking at it, but you would have
allowed it; and with Agnes, I should have quietly----

                                 Major.

Stop! Have pity! Stop!

                                 Fritz.

See, now you say to me all at once, "have pity"--Father, I am a dying
man, I did not come here to make reproaches, but do you make none to
me!

                                 Major.

(_Embracing him, and stroking his hair_.) My son--my all--my boy--I
don't permit--I will not----

                                 Fritz.

Silence, silence, father! Mother should not hear that.

                                 Major.

Yes, forgive me for giving way. It shall not happen again.... So how
does the affair stand now?

                                 Fritz.

I reported myself to the old man, that very night.

                                 Major.

My God! Whatever did the old Frohn say?

                                 Fritz.

Spare me that, father.... Of course, I obtained the usual furlough at
once, until the discharge comes. Well, that doesn't matter now.... It
does not last long, thus.... This morning, the court of honor had a
sitting. After my hearing, I rode away at once, so as to lose no time.
I gave Mohammed to Hallerpfort in order to have him follow me as soon
as judgment was pronounced. He may be here at any moment.

                                 Major.

Why did you summon a court of honor?

                                 Fritz.

What was I to do, father, after Lanski declared to those who delivered
my challenge that I was no longer--capable of having satisfaction?

                                 Major.

Ah! I will shoot the dog dead for that.

                                 Fritz.

Well, I hope they will decide favourably to me.

                                 Major.

If not, the dev-- (_Softly_.) And then I will tell you a couple of
measures to take so as to have a steady hand. Sleep properly, and don't
eat a bite, and then tell the doctor----

                                 Fritz.

Enough, enough, father, that is of no further use.

                                 Major.

What does that mean? Is it possible that you will--to Lanski?----

                                 Fritz.

Lanski will hit me. Depend upon it....

                                 Major.

Man, are you--are you----?

                                 Fritz.

Lanski will hit me. Depend upon it....

                                 Major.

Man, yet have--yet consider----

                                 Fritz.

I will not, father! And if you had seen the spectacle which the people
of Wartenstein saw yesterday (_shudders_), you would demand nothing
more of life for me than a half-respectable death....

                          Major (_brokenly_).

Perhaps--they will not--grant you--the duel.

                                 Fritz.

Well, if we have got to that last hope, father, then we are indeed in
bad straits.... Shall I perhaps open a dram-shop in Chicago, or a
cattle business with my paternal capital? Yes? Would you have done it?

                          Major (_perplexed_).

I?

                                 Fritz.

Say then say!

                     Major (_drawing himself up_).

No! (_Sinks down in his chair_.)

                                 Fritz.

So you see, father--so or so--your Fritz is done for.

                   Major (_sunk in gloomy reverie_).

My fault!--my----


                             _NINTH SCENE_.

       THE SAME. WILHELM. _Afterward_ LIEUTENANT VON HALLERPFORT.

                                 Fritz.

What is it?

                                Wilhelm.

Lieutenant von Hallerpfort wishes to speak to the young master.

                                 Fritz.

(_Hurrying past him to the door_.) Well?

(Hallerpfort _shakes hands with him and the_ Major, _and casts a glance
at_ Wilhelm, _who forthwith disappears_.)

                                 Fritz.

Well?

                              Hallerpfort.

Does your father know?

                                 Major.

Yes, my dear Hallerpfort, I know.--Granted?

                              Hallerpfort.

To-morrow morning, half after four o'clock behind the large
drill-ground.

                                 Fritz.

Thank God!

                                 Major.

Thank God! (_They embrace_.)

                     Fritz (_disengaging himself_).

Conditions?

                              Hallerpfort.

Fifteen paces--advance--five paces barrier--exchange of shots----

                                 Fritz.

To a finish?

                              Hallerpfort.

To a finish.

                                 Fritz.

Very well!

(Major _turns toward the door, and presses his hands to his face_.)

                    Hallerpfort (_approaching him_).

Major, as your son's best friend----

                     Major (_grasping his hands_).

I thank you, my dear Hallerpfort, I thank you.... You will ride away at
once, will you not?

                              Hallerpfort.

Unfortunately we must, Major.

                                 Major.

Then just listen.... I will pass the hours until the duel, with my
son.... That you can understand, can't you?... My carriage is hitched
up but I cannot go away with you for fear of making my sick wife
uneasy. Wait for me at the end of half an hour in Schrander's inn....
Don't fear. We shall be on time....

                              Hallerpfort.

It will be as you order, Major.

                                 Major.

And now, courage, Fritz!

                                 Fritz.

That is understood, father!

                                 Major.

(_Holding open the door on the left, in a different tone_.) Now, boys,
just come quickly in! Only think, darling----


                             _TENTH SCENE_.

                       THE SAME. FRAU VON DROSSE.

                            Frau von Drosse.

Ah--Herr von Hallerpfort! (_He kisses her hand_.) How does this happen?
Two lieutenants in the house at the same time--if that doesn't bring
luck!

                           Fritz (_quickly_).

We have orders together, mamma.

                              Hallerpfort.

And alas, madam, we have to be off this very minute.

                            Frau von Drosse.

How is that? Then I don't have my full hour? And now everything is so
beautifully arranged.... Fritz, my dear Hallerpfort--just a bite, won't
you?... Richard, dear, come to my aid.

                                 Major.

But, dear child, service is service.

                     Fritz (_with quick decision_).

So, good-bye, mamma!

                   Frau von Drosse (_embracing him_).

My boy--you will soon have furlough, won't you?

                                 Fritz.

Yes indeed, mamma! After the man[oe]uvres. Then we are free. Then we
will be merry!

                            Frau von Drosse.

And Hallerpfort is coming with you, isn't he?

                              Hallerpfort.

With your permission, madam.

                      Major (_softly, to_ Agnes).

Take leave of him! You will never see him again!

                                 Fritz.

(_Stretching out his hand cheerfully to her_.) Dear Ag-- (_Looks into
her face, and understands that she knows. Softly, earnestly_.)
Farewell, then.

                                 Agnes.

Farewell, Fritz!

                                 Fritz.

I love you.

                                 Agnes.

I shall always love you, Fritz!

                                 Fritz.

Away then, Hallerpfort! Au revoir, papa! Au revoir! Revoir! (_Starts
for the door on the right_.)

                            Frau von Drosse.

Go by the park, boys--there I have you longer in sight.

                                 Fritz.

Very well, mamma, we will do it! (_Passes with_ Hallerpfort _through
the door at the centre; on the terrace, he turns with a cheerful
gesture, and calls once more_.) Au revoir! (_His voice is still
audible_.) Au revoir!

(Frau von Drosse _throws kisses after him, and waves her handkerchief,
then presses her hand wearily to her heart and sighs heavily_.)


                           _ELEVENTH SCENE_.

                     MAJOR. FRAU VON DROSSE. AGNES.

(Agnes _hurries to her, and leads her to a chair, then goes over to
the_ Major, _who, with heaving breast is lost in thought_.)

                            Frau von Drosse.

Thank you, my darling!--Already, I am quite well again!... God, the
boy! How handsome he looked! And so brown and so healthy.... You see, I
saw him exactly like that last night.... No, that is no illusion! And I
told you how the Emperor led him in among all the generals! And the
emperor said (_More softly, looking far away with a beatific smile_.)
And the Emperor said----



                                CURTAIN.
﻿                         THE ETERNAL MASCULINE

                           A PLAY IN ONE ACT





                                PERSONS


      The Queen.
      The Marshal.
      The Painter.
      The Valet de Chambre.
      The Marquis in Pink.
      The Marquis in Pale Blue.
      The Sleepy Maid of Honour.
      The Deaf Maid of Honour.
      A Child as Cupid.

Several other Marquises and Maids of Honour.





                         THE ETERNAL MASCULINE

_The scene represents a state apartment in a royal castle. On the left,
a throne in baroque style. On the right, in the background a screen
with a table and chairs beside it. In the centre, an easel._


                             _FIRST SCENE_.

THE QUEEN _in a plaited coronation robe, on the throne_. THE PAINTER
_with palette in hand, painting_. A CHILD _as_ CUPID, _suspended by the
waist, swings on_ THE QUEEN'S _left, holding a crown over her head. The
background and the right of the stage are occupied by ladies and
gentlemen of the court, among them_ THE DEAF MAID OF HONOUR, THE SLEEPY
MAID OF HONOUR, THE MARQUIS IN PINK, and MARQUIS IN PALE BLUE.

                      SONG OF THE MAIDS OF HONOUR.

                   (Led by The Marquis in Pale Blue.)

            Zephyr rises at the dawn
            From the budding pillows of the roses.
            Lo, he will cool his hot desire
            In the silvery dew,
            Since he must console himself
            That his dream still fans the flame,
            And that Luna's icy kiss
            Does but touch his parched mouth.

            And Aurora's violet passion
            Looks on him with floods of tears.
            Ah! What matters Luna's favour?--
            She knows not how to kiss.

                         The Queen (_yawning_).

The pretty verses which you have just sung to sweeten this long posing
for me, grieve me slightly. Yet--aside from that--accept my thanks.

                       The Marquis in Pale Blue.

Oh, your Majesty!

                               The Queen.

Are you a poet, Marquis?

                       The Marquis in Pale Blue.

Oh, your Majesty, up to this time I have not been; but who should not
speak in verse where this magic enthrals us, where our hearts are
habitually broken, and Cupid himself bears the royal crown?

                        (Cupid _begins to cry_).

                         First Maid of Honour.

What is the matter with him?

                         Second Maid of Honour.

Ah, the sweet child!

                         First Maid of Honour.

Be good! Nice and good! Here is a sweetmeat!

                                 Cupid.

I want to get down! My legs are cold.

                               The Queen.

Oh, fie! The word offends my ears.

                          The Marquis In Pink.

Pardon him, your Majesty, the saucy child surely does not know that in
your presence one can speak only of roses, lilies, and such delicate
things.

                               The Queen.

It seems to me that the little fellow lacks education.

                       The Marquis in Pale Blue.

Hereafter, only children from superior families should be chosen for
this purpose.

                               The Queen.

And you, respected artist, have no word to say?

                              The Painter.

It is not fitting that every one should speak. I am engaged to paint,
not to make speeches. Still, may I ask you to send the boy away?

(The Queen _laughing, makes a sign. Two maids of honour set him free_.)

                          The Marquis In Pink.

What a way of speaking!

                       The Marquis in Pale Blue.

What a plebeian!

                          The Marquis In Pink.

 How self-conscious!

                       The Marquis in Pale Blue.

And she dotes on him!

                               The Queen.

Nay, dear master, speak! For rarely do I have the pleasure of finding
my thought sympathetically stimulated by the thought of another. I do
so like to think--I like to _feel_ perhaps even better--yet these
gentlemen talk as if they were in a fever.

                             The Marquises.

Oh, your Majesty!

                               The Queen.

Yes, indeed! Look for the man who without hope of meretricious gain
knows how to devote himself faithfully to noble service, and who
without honeyed phrases gracefully pursues what is dear to his soul; as
for you--you could borrow for yourselves a little of love's fire merely
from the confectioner's kitchen.

                          The Marquis In Pink.

Oh, that is severe!

                       The Marquis in Pale Blue.

Oh, that is almost deadly!

                               The Queen.

Then resist, and do not drag along inoffensively the burden, new every
day, of my old contempt which I bestow upon you, because it pleases me
to, like the ordinance of God. But let him expect my reward who can say
worthily and honourably: Behold, oh Queen, I am a man!

                       The Marquis in Pale Blue.

I am one!

                          The Marquis In Pink.

So am I!

                               The Queen.

I don't think ill of you! I like you. You don't disturb my repose--yet,
dear master, what say you to that?

                              The Painter.

I pray, your Majesty, still a little farther to the right.

                         The Queen (_smiling_).

And is that all? Does nothing which may occur in this room interest
you?

                              The Painter.

Pardon me, your Majesty, the daylight is scanty, and besides--I am
painting.

                               The Queen.

Look at him! A ray of light is of more value to him than all the
foolish, gaudy songs of love. Is it not true? See, his very silence and
bow betoken decided resistance.

                              The Painter.

Madam, forgive me if my words and bearing were an occasion and reason
for misunderstanding. I speak now, because you call on me to speak.
Every ray of light is a ray of love, and if its portrayer were to shut
it out, I should like to know what would remain of this poor art which
derives its sublimest power from the sources of desire. If our heart
does not tremble in our hand, if into the flood of forms which stream
from it, no flash of inner lightning shines, how shall we express in
these colours life's image, the storm of the passions, the shy play of
slight feeling, the desperate vacillation of exhausted hope, and all
the rest of our inner life? In these seven blotched colours (_points to
the palette_) where the whole wide universe is portrayed, where if our
senses are starving for truth, is phantasy to look for food and
deliverance? Yet if we have to speak with wisdom, elegantly and
cleverly, then the mysterious volition is silent and the promised land
recedes far away from us. Therefore, madam, leave me what belongs to us
who are poor, the sacred right to create and to be silent.

                               The Queen.

You call yourself poor and yet you are rich. You might be equal to the
rulers of this earth. Yet what avails the kingdom of your vision? The
splendid gift of confidence is wanting to you.

                              The Painter.

How, your Majesty?

                               The Queen.

Like a Harpagon, you guard the treasures of your soul, lest any
of your feelings should be stolen. No one risks it--Jean, give me my
smelling-bottle.

                       The Marquis in Pale Blue.

She inflames him.

                          The Marquis In Pink.

On the contrary, she cools him off.

                       The Marquis in Pale Blue.

Just to inflame him anew.

                          The Marquis In Pink.

I wonder if she truly loves him?

                       The Marquis in Pale Blue.

At any rate, she wishes to excite him.

                               The Queen.

There, Jean, _merci_.... Yet what was I about to say, has no one seen
anything of our Marshal?

                    The Marquis in Pink (_softly_).

Is he still missing?

                       The Marquis in Pale Blue.

Why does she want _him_, too?

                               The Queen.

I really believe the good Marshal is offended. It is three days since I
spoke to him graciously at the state reception.... That seems long to
me.

                 The Painter (_turning to_ The Queen).

Is the Marshal back? The Marshal here?

                       The Marquis in Pale Blue.

May it please your Majesty, a gentleman of the court met him to-day. He
was standing in a pouring rain, and trying a new sword.

                      The Painter (_to himself_).

The Marshal.

                          The Marquis In Pink.

(_Half aloud to_ The Painter.) Admit, sir, that his coming is
inconvenient to you?

                               The Queen.

Do you know him, master?

                              The Painter.

Your Majesty, I have never seen him.

                               The Queen.

Yet you would like to make his acquaintance?

                              The Painter.

That I don't know.

                          The Marquis In Pink.

(_Softly to_ The Marquis in Pale Blue.) How the coward betrays himself!

                              The Painter.

Too often I have heard his name spoken in wonder, here with disfavour,
there with enthusiasm, yet always as if a miracle was happening to me,
too often for me not to view with apprehension the nearness of this
powerful man.

                          The Marquis In Pink.

What did I say? He is afraid.

                       The Marquis in Pale Blue.

That is splendid!

                          The Marquis In Pink.

We must see to that and profit by it. (_Aloud_.) Yet I advise you, dear
master, hold your own. He has a habit sometimes of running people
through. Yet----

                              The Painter.

As one impales flies--of an afternoon--on the wall? My felicitations,
Marquis! Happily for you, it is plain that he has never been bored.

                          The Marquis In Pink.

How do you intend that?

                               The Queen.

Gentlemen, I must beg you! At court, the master has good company. It
amuses me when he meets your insolence with wit and spirit, and gives
you a return thrust. Only try the experiment! I am waiting.... Please,
Jean, my handkerchief!

                          The Marquis In Pink.

I have a right to be angry!

                       The Marquis in Pale Blue.

Yes, indeed, you have been insulted!

                          The Marquis In Pink.

Ha! Fearful is a man in anger! What do you think--can the dauber defend
himself?

                       The Marquis in Pale Blue.

Attack him first from behind, then to his face.

                               The Queen.

I thank you, Jean.... Well, now, you dear men, you whisper, sulk, and
mutter to each other. What is the use of my kindling your wit? I don't
strike even a little spark from the stone. So you are dismissed....
Take a holiday. And do you, my children, go home. But in a little
while, master, let us talk together, after our hearts' desire! The
ladies of the suite--they will not disturb you.

                          The Marquis In Pink.

I believe it. One of them is asleep.

                       The Marquis in Pale Blue.

The other can't hear.

                               The Queen.

Good-bye! I wish you to go home to do penance for your sins of love.
(_Goes to the door on the right_.) One thing more. When you see the
good Marshal, give him my greetings. (_Exit, followed by the ladies.
Only the sleepy lady remains, sitting_.)

                       The Marquis in Pale Blue.

(_Softly to the deaf lady_.) Pst! Wake her! (_She nods to him
pleasantly and goes out_.) Ah, yes, she is deaf!

                          The Marquis In Pink.

(_Pointing at the lady asleep_.) Pluck her by the sleeve.

                       The Marquis in Pale Blue.

Fräulein, allow me?

                       The Sleepy Maid Of Honour.

(_Springs up with a little cry, makes a low curtsey to_ The Marquis,
_which he returns in kind, then follows the other ladies_.)


                            _SECOND SCENE_.

                      THE MARQUISES. THE PAINTER.

(The Painter _paints, without noticing the others, then takes a
buttered roll from his pocket and eats_.)

                          The Marquis In Pink.

Ha, now I am going to kill him!

                       The Marquis in Pale Blue.

Don't you know it is forbidden? The punishment would be severe. They
say, too, that he wields a keen blade, and before you know it you are
dead as a mouse.

                          The Marquis In Pink.

I am surprised at that. Yet whether we love or hate him, one thing is
as clear to me as day: he must not be allowed to quit this palace
alive.

                            Another Marquis.

Pardon me, Marquis, why not?

                          The Marquis In Pink.

You don't see deeply into this, Marquis. It seems almost as if you were
a simpleton. Has she not mocked us, and exclaimed at our cooing,
rustling, sweet speaking, and whimpering? Yet she delights to have him
paint her; and as a reward, she loves him.

                          The Second Marquis.

Ha, terrible!

                           The Third Marquis.

Who told you that?

                       The Marquis in Pale Blue.

Have pity on us, friend, and give us proofs!

                          The Marquis In Pink.

Well, his Majesty (_all bow_) is, alas, well on in years! (_All assent
sorrowfully_.) Whom else does she love? There must at any rate be some
one!

                       The Marquis in Pale Blue.

For God's sake, be prudent and speak softly!

                          The Marquis In Pink.

What is he doing there?

                          The Second Marquis.

He is eating.

                          The Marquis In Pink.

Fie, how vulgar!

                       The Marquis in Pale Blue.

What will happen to the Marshal?

                          The Marquis In Pink.

That seems to me doubtful. Sometimes she is pleasant with him,
sometimes ill-humoured. I have tried to get rid of him, but he still
stays by me. He causes me the pangs of jealousy. She must love one of
us. We are here for that purpose. Yet inasmuch as this wandering fellow
has stolen her heart, he must die--and that on the spot.

                       The Marquis in Pale Blue.

Patience, Marquis, patience! Of all the means of shaking off this
insolent fellow, there is one which is really exquisite. Without
breaking the laws, if we set the Marshal on him, instead of being
disturbers of the peace, we shall escape scot-free. He dies, of course,
and it would be a wonder--yet what am I saying?--He is already as good
as a dead sparrow.

                            (_All chuckle_.)

                          The Marquis In Pink.

Dead sparrow is excellent!

                       The Marquis in Pale Blue.

This murder--listen--is bound to put the other one into disfavour. The
King's Majesty (_all bow_) will shorten his leave of absence, and we,
we shall be freed of him.

                            (_All chuckle_.)

                              The Painter.

What are they about? Alas, if they are glad, perhaps that means the
ruin of some man of honour. Perhaps they are meditating some ribaldry.
But in truth, what matters to me this vermin?

                       The Marquis in Pale Blue.

Now let us send out a message hastily to the Marshal, that we are
gathered in the antechamber, and while this poor dead mouse--no, pardon
me sparrow!--stammers his love to her, he, driven by us to extremes,
will burst in unannounced--and this fellow is detected.

                          The Marquis In Pink.

Very good! But if things turn out differently, what then?

                       The Marquis in Pale Blue.

Never mind! Take advantage of the right moment. No more is needed. For
she cannot refrain, she must see people kneel to her.

                          The Marquis In Pink.

Famous! Brilliant! A splendid plan! (_To_ The Painter, _with a low bow
which all imitate_.) Honoured sir, permit us to greet you!

                     The Painter (_very politely_).

My greeting implies the esteem of which you are aware.

                       The Marquis in Pale Blue.

We lay our esteem at your feet! (_After further bows, which_ The
Painter _good-humouredly returns_, The Marquises _depart at the
centre_.)

              (The Painter _smiling, continues to paint_.)


                             _THIRD SCENE_.

THE PAINTER. THE VALET DE CHAMBRE. _Then_ THE DEAF MAID OF HONOUR. THE
SLEEPY MAID OF HONOUR. THE QUEEN.

(The Valet _entering from the left, greets_ The Painter _with
condescending nods, and walks over to the throne_.)

                              The Painter.

Eh!--what?... Ah, indeed! (_Laughs aloud_.) Strange world, where the
lackey carries his head the highest!

(Valet _after arranging the cushions, places himself before the easel,
and ogles the portrait_.)

                              The Painter.

What is it?

                               The Valet.

(_Pleasantly, as a connoisseur_.) Ah these little furrows in the
cheeks! (_Benevolently_.) It can't be expected, sir, of you that your
brush should do justice to every fine point. Yet--aside from that--the
likeness is good.

                   The Painter (_laughing heartily_).

Indeed?

                               The Valet.

(_Opening the door on the left, announces_.) Her Majesty!

                              The Painter.

I scent trouble in this, and a voice says to me flee! I have already
committed many a folly, but I never loved a queen! Take heed to
yourself!

(The Two Maids of Honour _have entered during this soliloquy, and have
taken their positions to the right and left of the door_.)

                               The Queen.

(_Nods cordially to_ The Painter, _and takes her seat on the throne, as
before_.) My dear Jean, I must dispense with you now. Don't stay too
late.

                             (_Exit Jean_.)


                            _FOURTH SCENE_.

THE QUEEN. THE PAINTER. THE DEAF MAID OF HONOUR (_who seats herself
behind the screen_). THE SLEEPY MAID OF HONOUR (_who falls asleep
directly on a chair near the door on the left_).

                               The Queen.

Well, master, tell me: what is Genius doing?

                              The Painter.

Oh, your Majesty, he is pursuing Beauty.

                               The Queen.

Yet since Beauty lingers no more on earth, your genius will soon grow
weary.

                              The Painter.

How so? Does your Majesty think it roams in the sky? It lingers just at
the goal and cries: Oh behold! and what thou beholdest, that give to
eternity!

                               The Queen.

I did not know, my dear master, that you were so ready with your
compliments. Very well! As a man of many travels and of great
reputation, you tread continually on the scorn of men; and since we are
here chatting in confidence, take heart and tell me without reserve,
tell me quite frankly: am I really beautiful?

                              The Painter.

If I were to speak as a man, every word would be presumptuous. Yet you
ask the painter only. And he says that his hand is withered with
anxiety lest on this canvas there will be found only a pale blotted
vapour seen by a blind man.

                               The Queen.

There spoke the painter. But what says the man?

                              The Painter.

He has no opinion, your Majesty!

                               The Queen.

What a pity! One hears now and then this thing and that thing, yet that
seems to me insipid above all things. And one must be strict and always
be suppressing--suppressing. You don't need that. So I tell you
discreetly, I can't resist the suspicion that my beauty is leaving me.
Yes, indeed. And besides that, I am growing old. Yes, indeed. I am
almost thirty, and the matron has to go to the rear. I indeed do what I
can. They take great pains with me. And my late brother used to send me
a beauty powder from the holy sepulchre which was good for my
complexion. Then it is my habit to wash myself with the extract of
lilies, and off and on to nibble at arsenic bonbons. That is very
good--the eyes flash, and the blood comes to the cheeks....
(_Alarmed_.) It seems to me I am confiding in you.

                              The Painter.

Consider me as a thing--as a slave!

                               The Queen.

And you know how to be silent? Tell me--swear!

                              The Painter.

What you did not will me to hear, that I have not heard. What I did not
hear, I cannot keep as a secret.

                               The Queen.

Lofty sentiment and noble will find expression in you. So, in all
silence, I may show your heart what favours are granted to you.

                      The Painter (_tremulously_).

Am I worth it? And if you regret it to-morrow?

                               The Queen.

I do not know a to-morrow nor a to-day. My weary sense with crippled
wing never strays into the far future, for ah! I, poor, poor Queen,
suffer from intense melancholy. I have too much feeling. I have told
you that already, and then I am tired of my throne in this world of
dreary elegance, where----

                              The Painter.

Your Majesty! Remember the ladies there!

                               The Queen.

Ah, the ladies! No chance favours me. That you have perceived already.
Yet there is no question of the ladies. One doesn't hear a word; the
other sleeps, even while standing up.

                              The Painter.

Sure enough.... Yet when I consider----

                               The Queen.

Consider nothing.... Give me only a consoling word, which in the
sultriness of this perverted nature may penetrate my soul like a breath
from the forest. You are a man!

                  The Painter (_laughing to himself_).

Who has lost his head!

                               The Queen.

So I saw him in my dreams. I feel, too, that you could quite overflow,
and I am a little afraid of it.

                              The Painter.

(_Controlling himself with difficulty_.) Oh, fear nothing. I know very
well the barrier between me and the height of your throne. Not a
desire, not a thought, rises to you.

                               The Queen.

And yet you think that I am beautiful?

                      The Painter (_impulsively_).

Yes, you are beautiful! You--(_restraining himself_). Your Majesty, I
beg you to turn a little more to the left.

                               The Queen.

(_Turns her head quite to the left_.) So?

                              The Painter.

Yes.

                               The Queen.

What are you painting now?

                              The Painter.

Your hand.

                  The Queen (_pointing to her face_).

And it is for that, that I am to turn to the left?

                              The Painter.

I meant, just to the centre.

                               The Queen.

Is the hand well posed?

                              The Painter.

Very well.

                               The Queen.

Can you see it from where you sit?

                              The Painter.

No, yes--(_she laughs_). Forgive me if I am talking nonsense.

                 The Queen (_spreading out her hand_).

Here you have it! How the sapphire sparkles! A beautiful stone!... You
praised my face, but yet you don't say whether you like my hand.

                              The Painter.

Instead of finding fault with me, look! I have painted it.

                         The Queen (_pouting_).

You have indeed painted it, but you have not kissed it. From that I
conclude that it is not attractive.

                              The Painter.

And forgive me, if I transgress the rules of your court, more from
shyness than from want of intelligence. Even so, the sailor knows well
the laws of the stars' movements and yet must often sail a false
course.

                               The Queen.

It seems as if you wished to avoid the subject. I was speaking of a
hand--you speak of stars.

                              The Painter.

You were speaking of your hand and that is so far from me that even the
eternal will, the might which compels the starry heaven, brings it not
one inch nearer to me.

                               The Queen.

Indeed, do you believe that? (_She rises and goes to the easel_.) Now
pray what happened? You willed nothing and compelled nothing, yet
please observe--the hand is there.

                              The Painter.

Madam, where others fell down before you, here it is my duty to warn
you. I am not a simple shepherd, and never do I let people make game of
me.

                               The Queen.

Ah, now it becomes interesting! You look at me as savagely as if a
hatred quite unappeased and unappeasable possessed you.

                              The Painter.

A hatred? No, what I laughingly veiled from you was not hatred, no--yet
_if_ I hate, I hate myself, because, dazzled with splendour, like a
drowning man I grasp at the little words which you mockingly deal out
to me; because, after the manner of a venal courtier, I quite forgot
the pride of the man, and by your favour ate sweetmeats greedily from
these hands! Yes, just show them--the white fairy[3] hands laden with
the splendid tokens of love: yet stop--think of the end, by the holy
God--I recognise myself no more.

                               The Queen.

Never yet did I hear such words.

                              The Painter.

When did you ever bow yourself to force? When did passion build you a
throne on the ruins of the universe, the only throne to win which is
more than an idle pastime, on which in splendid grandeur, instead of
all the queens, sits Woman! And if a drone playing in colours ever
indeed won a smile from you, take from me but your crown, for I, oh
Queen, am--a man!

                               The Queen.

(_Shrinking back to the throne_.) Enough, I should not listen to you
any longer.

                              The Painter.

You must. You have so willed it.

                               The Queen.

I will beg you, sir, I will conjure you.

                              The Painter.

Too late. You offered me love's pay as you would throw a gold piece
into the cap of a beggar crouching in the street, and if I, thrilled
now by hot desire, employ the only moment of life which commits you
into my hands, I will not have you play with me any longer. I will, and
you--you--must--before this throne our alliance is ratified. Take away
the hand. That, others may kiss, but I, Queen, will have the mouth. I
will----


                             _FIFTH SCENE_.

                         THE SAME. THE MARSHAL.

                               The Queen.

(_Who until now has listened, anxious but not altogether unfriendly,
collects herself, and draws herself up in sudden anger_.) I deliver
this insolent fellow to you, Marshal. Deal with him as he deserves.
(_She goes to the door. There she stops, and gives_ The Sleepy Maid of
Honour _two angry little blows with her fan. The latter springs up,
bows, and goes out gravely behind_ The Queen, _with_ The Deaf Maid of
Honour, _who has risen_.)


                             _SIXTH SCENE_.

                       THE MARSHAL. THE PAINTER.

                              The Marshal.

Sir, if you wish to say a paternoster, make haste with it.

                              The Painter.

Your magnanimity affects me deeply, Marshal. But my soul carries light
baggage. Even so, it will journey to heaven. And instead of a last
testament, I present this portrait to you, so that, in the confusion,
no serious danger may happen to it.

                              The Marshal.

By your will, it has become mine, and I will gladly keep it. So, draw
your sword!

                              The Painter.

I, sir?

                              The Marshal.

So, draw!

                              The Painter.

No, that you will never live to see!

                              The Marshal.

Then why do you wear a sword?

                              The Painter.

Because I choose to.

                              The Marshal.

You are a coward.

                              The Painter.

(_Controlling himself, with a smiling bow_.) And you are a hero! (_In
the meanwhile the door at the centre is opened_. The Marquises _put
their heads in, listening_. The Painter _observes it and takes his
sword from the table where he has just laid it_.) See! As the traveller
uses the staff to defend himself against dogs, so I must wield it. Such
people are to be found at all doors where small men work and lie in
wait and play the parasite. (The Marquises _draw back. The door at the
centre is suddenly closed_.) Yet ever to bare the sword against you,
with whom, out of a timid trustfulness, a bond, a splendid bond of
pride, entwined me; whom of all the incompletely great men, I
admiringly called the only great man--if ever I were to be guilty of
such ignominy, I should not find my small share of peace even in the
shade of the most beautiful church-yard lindens.

                              The Marshal.

Are you still young?

                              The Painter.

I am not exactly old, yet my fortune has been so checkered and various
that I joyfully had given seven every-day lives for _one_ surfeit of
this. And in the end--however one may work and strive, it is man's
destiny: he dies of Woman. Therefore, instead of passing away slowly
by my own, I will quickly find my end by the wife of another. My
chariot of victory stops indeed suddenly. I greet its well-appointed
driver--and I greet my judge. Thrust on!

                              The Marshal.

I may be a judge, but I am not an executioner. So do me the favour----

                              The Painter.

And fighting, let you run me through? No, Marshal! That I must refuse.
See! Each of us two has his art. You employ the sword, I the palette.
How would it be if I should say to you now in accordance with the
practice of my craft: Come, we will paint on a wager? And you do not
know the merest precept of light-value, azure, modelling. Very well,
you are a dead man for me. Afterward you might--that is allowed
you--come to life into the bargain, if you liked.

                              The Marshal.

You are mocking me, surely!

                              The Painter.

Surely, no! Yet every fight should be a fight on a wager. Because in a
fight between men you are a complete man, I should like to show that I
too can do something. You are laughing.

                              The Marshal.

One who is so nimble with his tongue has, it is said, a sure hand.
Perhaps, too, many a device unknown to me is concealed in the wielding
of your sword. So be quick, I pray you. I hear the sound of footsteps.
Do you stare at me in silence?

                              The Painter.

Still a little farther to the right!

                              The Marshal.

What does that mean?

                              The Painter.

So!--And that may not be looked at, because one is mouldering away! I
cannot get over it. Never yet have I found lines like those, never yet
a working so gloriously true in the frontal plexus of veins, in the
eyebrows, as if one by pure will became a giant. The body delicate--the
cheeks thin; for Nature when she fashions her best, makes no boast of
vigorous strength.... The wish overpowers me--Before I die, sir, I must
paint you.

                              The Marshal.

You seem altogether mad.

                              The Painter.

I beg you to grant me a respite. I shall be glad to let you kill me,
yet only after your portrait is finished.

                              The Marshal.

And by your creation, you hope to obtain all manner of favour, and
quietly to escape. You are cunning indeed.

                              The Painter.

It is the peculiar pleasure of magnanimity to suspect the magnanimity
of others.

                              The Marshal.

Are you reading me a lecture?

                              The Painter.

It seems that I must. I must make an effort to win your heart's esteem,
which is worth more to me than any amount of foolish play with briskly
wielded swords.

                              The Marshal.

By heaven, sir, you risk a great deal!

                              The Painter.

I risk nothing. I am a man of death. The world lies behind me--a
many-colored picture which God has bestrewed with crumbs of white
bread, where each one snatches up and devours and yet does not satisfy
his appetite. Only in intoxication can a child of fortune know how the
flowers beneath bloom and wither. I have been able to, and my soul with
every new work drank to satiety. What matters it if life has deceived
me? I asked nothing of it--that was my strength. You see I am
pronouncing my obituary. Yet I depart gladly.... Already the new host
approaches and swarms for me in forests and on plains: What matters it
that this hand was mortal; for the portraying is as eternal as the
image.

                              The Marshal.

You are mistaken. Only the deed is eternal. If with bloody sword it did
not teach mankind to remember, I should perish like a seed sown by the
wind.

                              The Painter.

It is you who are mistaken, sir. Not your deed has life. It soon
follows you into the grave. The portrait of the dead which we give to
posterity, in song and form, in parchment and stone, this it is which
belongs to immortality. By this you shall be hereafter loved and
hated.--So even if Achilles destroys the whole world, he has but to let
Homer live.

                              The Marshal.

And so I, you? Yet no song tells us that Homer ever kneeled before
Helen.

                              The Painter.

Not that. But every child knows why: the poor singer was blind.

                              The Marshal.

Your brush, alas, will not help you at all. Yet I should be well
disposed toward you. For he who in death seems to remain a trifler, has
taken life in earnest.

                              The Painter.

That is true.

                              The Marshal.

I am sorry for you.

                              The Painter.

Without cause, I assure you!

                              The Marshal.

And why could you not be silent? How did you so dare, contrary to good
reason to climb to your Queen? Did nothing within you say: this is a
crime?

                              The Painter.

You call it crime--I call it folly!

                              The Marshal.

Do you pursue your secret pleasures, then, like a sly, cold-hearted
thief? The one thing fails which spoke in your favour, the almighty
love which disturbs the brain!

                              The Painter.

Marshal, see, love is a tribute which we piously pay to eternal
beauty; and since Nature in creative pride has poured it forth out of
her fulness, how should we in fretful resignation say: "This one I
love--not that one"? In my love, I love only the picture which proceeds
from the lap of pure forms; even as this Queen bestows it as a favour,
so it sheds its light far and near; and wherever a picture invites me
to a banquet, my heart is present without delay.

                              The Marshal.

Yet I ask you whether _this_ picture invited you to a banquet. Speak
quickly--by my sword!

                              The Painter.

You know very well that no gallant man should move an eyelash at such a
question.

                              The Marshal.

You do not love her--only like a faun you make bold to court her madly.
(_Taking hold of him_.) But I love her, and for this reason, you must
die.

                              The Painter.

Forgive me if I am surprised at your logic. It is a great honour
for me to know whom you love; moreover, you have already told
me repeatedly that I must die; yet that you are confused as to
this--is--indeed--only--temper. And see, it is but proper that you love
her. The contrary--according to court manners and practice--would be
unnatural. Yet the more important question seems to be: does she love
you? You look away. Very well, I will tell you. She has met you with
smiles and furtive questions, with sweet glances, half longingly, has
promised you a thousand delights and gradually has subdued you and your
obstinacy. Yet if it involved keeping her promises, she would
understand how to wrap herself in her innocence.----It was so--was it
not? You are silent, because you are ashamed of the game. Pardon me,
sir, if I irritate your wounds.

                              The Marshal.

It seems you set spies at the door!

                              The Painter.

Why spies? Eve's old practice, that, Marshal, I know well. Yet what
lies behind it, whether true love or not, for you or me, cannot be
deciphered. If I should survive the duel, she would probably love _me_:
yet because it is decreed that by your arm, you should be the victor in
this absurd quarrel, she will love you, Marshal. Where woman's glory
rules the world, that is the law--so says natural history. Do you say
nothing?

                              The Marshal.

A poison is distilled from your words which eats into the very marrow
of my soul.

                              The Painter.

Only the truth! I swear it, I promise it! And since against my wish I
am still very much alive, because of your favour, be of use to me, sir,
in an experiment.

                              The Marshal.

Explain yourself!

                              The Painter.

In order to know exactly how you are thought of in the highest place,
you must perish in the duel.

                              The Marshal.

In the duel?

                              The Painter.

Understand me rightly: only in appearance.

                              The Marshal.

And my reputation as a swordsman goes with it into the bargain.

                              The Painter.

Oh, not at all! You will get up again.

                       The Marshal (_laughing_).

My friend, I am not sorry that you are still alive. I have become
reconciled with you, and I who have dared a great deal in toil and
strife, am astonished at the extent of your courage. Very well, what
your cunning mind has devised for your escape, I accept. Yet woe to you
if this time you do not win! And now to the work!

                              The Painter.

Come on!... Yet no, by your leave! So that they may believe the
incredible about me, I will arrange the thing in naturalistic fashion.
(_He draws his sword_.) Is the door locked? (_He walks to the door at
the centre, and points his sword at the keyhole_.) Eyes away! I am
going to thrust! (_A scream is uttered in the antechamber_.) And now
look out! I am going to mark horrid pools of spilt blood! (_He mixes
colours on the palette, and hands the_ Marshal _his sword_.) Hold it, I
beg you. (_He smears the sword blade with his brush_.)

                              The Marshal.

My blood!

                              The Painter.

Without doubt! _Merci_. (_Takes back his sword_.) Just one tap upon the
breast. Yet in case you wish that I spare the waistcoat?

                              The Marshal.

By no means! That would be too much loss of blood!

                              The Painter.

Just as you please. (_He moves the easel and table to one side.
Softly_.) And make no mistake, the door will open at the first clash of
blades.

                              The Marshal.

Are you ready?

                (The Painter _nods assent. They fence_.)

                              The Marshal.

Famous.... Do you know that feint?

                              The Painter.

It is a good one, is it not?

                              The Marshal.

Who taught you that?

                              The Painter.

And this!...

                              The Marshal.

There you missed the quint.

                              The Painter.

Damnation!...

                              The Marshal.

Ah, that was admirable!

                              The Painter.

Yet at painting I do better.... Is any one listening?

                              The Marshal.

They are huddled together in a confused group.

                              The Painter.

Now, if you please!

                              The Marshal.

Only be at it!

                              The Painter.

Be careful of the throne, or you will get a bump if you fall! (_He
lunges at_ The Marshal, _far under the armpit_. The Marshal _falls_.
The Marquises _who are pressing in at the half-open door, draw back in
horror_.)


                            _SEVENTH SCENE_.

THE SAME. THE MARQUIS IN PINK. THE MARQUIS IN PALE BLUE. THE OTHER
MARQUISES.

                              The Painter.

Listen to me, gentlemen! What are you about in there? Stay and bear
witness to what you saw.

              The Marquis In Pink (_approaching timidly_).

We stand benumbed at such a glorious deed.

                 The Marquis In Pale Blue (_likewise_).

And we are almost beside ourself with admiration.

                          The Marquis In Pink.

What? Really dead?

                      The Painter (_tauntingly_).

Sir, you seem to be in doubt?

                          The Marquis In Pink.

Oh, dear man, how could you think it? I wished only to afford myself
the rapture of seeing whether you had altogether freed us.

                       The Marquis in Pale Blue.

Yes, indeed, freed! For even although you hated him, you can never
imagine how, in the chambers of this castle, he has trodden on our
dignity.

                          The Marquis In Pink.

He stalked about, puffed up with self-conceit, and when we were rising
in the esteem of his or her majesty----

                       The Marquis in Pale Blue.

Then came this man with a couple of new triumphs.

                              The Painter.

How odious!

                          The Marquis In Pink.

If you please, sir, how we have laughed when his dear name rang through
all the streets after some brand-new fight! As the clever man is aware,
fools advertise fools. And without going too near him, I will----

                              The Marshal.

There, wait!

               (All The Marquises _starting With fear_.)

                   The Marquis In Pink (_trembling_).

You said?

                              The Painter.

I said nothing at all.

                       The Marquis in Pale Blue.

Yet plainly----


                            _EIGHTH SCENE_.

THE SAME. THE VALET DE CHAMBRE. THE QUEEN. THE DEAF MAID OF HONOUR. THE
SLEEPY MAID OF HONOUR.

                        The Valet (_announces_).

Her Majesty!

                               The Queen.

I heard a rumour which greatly displeased me and troubled my peace of
mind extremely. Is it true?... There lies the great hero; and truly, in
death he seems even more insignificant than he was--as insignificant as
one of the most insignificant. Yet mourn with me! We have had a great
loss. Even if ambition urge you on with a double spur, many a fine day
will come and go before his like will be born to us.

               (The Marshal _clears his throat softly_.)

                               The Queen.

May his courtliness, too, be pleasantly remembered! After his campaign
he always brought back to his Queen the best of the splendid spoil of
his booty. That touched my royal heart and will be cited as a glorious
example. And yet now to you ... What did they say to me? It sounds
almost untrue and unnatural: are you the David of our Goliath? I use
the term "Goliath" only figuratively. For though we are mourning at his
bier, it cannot be said that he was a giant. Yet we know his
disposition was haughty. (The Marquises _eagerly assent_.) Surely he
broke in upon you in sudden anger? You are silent out of generosity. So
I will graciously forgive this fault and another fault too. (The
Painter _clears his throat softly. She stretches out her hand to him,
which he kisses_.) And be not grieved! (_To_ The Marquises.) Does not
what has happened seem almost like a judgment of God?

                       The Marquis in Pale Blue.

It is true! Here a higher power has been at work.

                        The Deaf Maid Of Honour.

Pardon me, your Majesty! The Marshal is laughing.

                 The Marquises (_muttering in horror_).

Is he laughing? Is he laughing? (_Silence_.)

                        The Marshal (_rising_).

Madam, forgive me! In the fight a sudden fainting fit overcame me.

                       The Marquis in Pale Blue.

(_Pointing at_ The Painter's _sword lying on the floor_.) And what is
this blood? (_Movement by_ The Painter.)

                              The Marshal.

Until the return to my senses relieved me (_with emphasis_) of _this_
trouble and _another_ trouble.

                               The Queen.

(_Quickly collecting herself. Sharply_.) My congratulations, sir! And
my sympathy as well! What has happened to you gives me unspeakable
distress. The court atmosphere is indeed rather close, and seems
insupportable to great conquerors; which often betrays itself in wrong
fancies and swoons. Therefore I am obliged to exercise my power as
Queen, and protect your good health against danger. Jean, announce me
to his Majesty! (_Exit_ Jean _on the left_. The Queen, _punishing_ The
Painter _with a glance of unspeakable scorn, follows slowly. The two
Maids of Honour go after her_.)


                             _NINTH SCENE_.

THE MARSHAL. THE PAINTER. THE MARQUISES (_in the background_).

                              The Marshal.

I thank you, sir! The mists are dissipated. The eye sees clearly once
more; the will has a free hand.

                              The Painter.

But I was silently executed. Did you notice her look?

               The Marshal (_pointing at_ The Marquises).

Of looks, there are sufficient.

                The Painter (_snatching up his sword_).

Oho! I am always expecting foul play.

                              The Marshal.

For what reason? Get along with you! Get along with you! Be quick!

                              The Painter.

It is true. You are right. Here, we are ruined.

                              The Marshal.

And what is to become of you?

                              The Painter.

That has never troubled me. The world is wide. One can walk about it,
and find something to sketch by the way.

                              The Marshal.

How would it be if you went with me?

                              The Painter.

Where?

                              The Marshal.

To the camp.

                              The Painter.

Yes, and what is there?

                              The Marshal.

Plenty for you! You will find gay fare, and pastimes and diversions. As
much as you want.

                              The Painter.

And are there fights too?

                              The Marshal.

Indeed, there are!

                              The Painter.

And will there be a bold reconnoissance by night?

                              The Marshal.

Often.

                              The Painter.

Capital! I will ride with you. In my mind's eye I see already golden
moonrise, and silver vapour on the dark alder bush.... Are there also
songs and notes of the mandolin?

                              The Marshal.

Plenty of them!

                              The Painter.

Hurrah! There is music too!

                              The Marshal.

And in the story-telling by night at the camp-fire many a tale of human
destiny will be unfolded to you.

                              The Painter.

A world of pictures! (_More softly_.) And love adventures?

                              The Marshal.

If you choose to call them "adventures."

                              The Painter.

Agreed, sir! And an excess of happiness will flow out of my soul like a
prayer.--Yet it seems I am forgetting the greatest happiness. I shall
be with you. I may paint you.

                              The Marshal.

Take care!


                             _TENTH SCENE_.

THE SAME. THE VALET DE CHAMBRE. THE QUEEN. THE TWO MAIDS OF HONOUR.

                                 Valet.

Your Majesty!

(The Queen _rustles over from the left to the right, without bestowing
a glance on the two men. At the door on the right she gives the_ Valet
_a scroll with which he advances. Then she goes out, followed by the
Maids of Honour_.)

                              The Marshal.

Now the hastily contrived reward of our misdeeds is at hand. (_To_
Jean.) My noble sir, bestir yourself. (_To_ The Painter.) That is the
handsome Jean as an angel of justice! (_He unfolds the scroll and
reads, laughing_.)

                              The Painter.

And to me, what do you bring to me?

                               The Valet.

(_With an expression of awkward contempt_.) You?--Nothing!

                              The Painter.

Exquisite!

                               The Valet.

But yes! Your reward shall be meted out to you in the office of the
Marshal of the court.

                        The Painter (_amused_).

Indeed?

                               The Valet.

Yes! (_Behind the scenes on the right are heard cries of "Jean!
Jean!"_)

                        The Deaf Maid of Honour.

(_Hurries in from the right_.) Jean! Have you forgotten her Majesty?

                         The Valet (_sweetly_).

Oh, no! Tell her Majesty I am coming directly.

                      The Painter and The Marshal.

          (_Look at each other, and break out into laughter_.)

                              The Marshal.

Look, look, my friend! He seems to have got into bad habits.

                    The Painter (_pointing at him_).

It is rightly so. I had almost begged him, at the court where we men
are forbidden, proudly to represent the eternal masculine. (_Laughing,
they both bow to him_.)

                          (_Exit_ The Valet.)

                              The Painter.

But we are going into the flowery open, to our merry pursuits.

                              The Marshal.

And to combat! (_They walk arm in arm, bowing right and left, toward
the door, past_ The Marquises, _who, without hiding their disrespect,
nevertheless recognise them in a not uncourtly fashion_.)



                                Curtain.
﻿                            STREAKS OF LIGHT

                           A PLAY IN ONE ACT




                               CHARACTERS

                        Julia.
                        Pierre.
                        Wittich.


                            The Present Day


_The action takes place at a small pavilion situated in the park
belonging to an old castle_.




                            STREAKS OF LIGHT

_An octagonal pavilion of the Rococo period, the three front walls of
which are cut off by the proscenium. Ceiling and walls are cracked and
spotted by rain, and bear the marks of long disuse. At the back, in the
centre, a large doorway. The glass door is thrown wide open; the
shutters behind are closed. On the right and left, in the oblique walls
of the room, are windows, the shutters of which are also closed.
Through the blinds at the door and the right window, sunbeams in
streaks of light penetrate the semi-darkness of the room._

_On the left, in the foreground, a Louis Sixteenth sofa with table and
gilded chairs to match. On the wall above, an old mirror. Near the
sofa, a tapestried doorway. A chandelier wrapped in a dusty gauze
covering is suspended from the ceiling. A four-post bed with hangings
of light net takes up the right side of the stage. In the foreground,
in front of the bed, a table with plates, glasses, wine-decanters, and
provisions on it. A coffee percolator stands under the table. In the
middle of the stage, a little to the right, a chaise-longue. At the
head of it, a small table. Between the large door and the windows,
dusty marble busts on dilapidated pedestals. Above them, on the walls,
a collection of various sorts of weapons. The Oriental rugs which are
thrown about the floor and over the chaise-longue contrast strangely
with the faded splendour of the past._

_The whole room is decorated with roses. On the table at the left is a
bronze vessel of antique design overflowing with roses. Garlands of
roses hang from the chandelier and encircle the bedposts. On the small
table near the chaise-longue, a large, flat dish, also filled with
roses. In fact wherever there is any place for these flowers, they have
been used in profusion._

_Part of the table which stands in front of the sofa is covered by a
napkin, upon which are seen a bottle of wine and the remains of a
luncheon for one. It is a sultry afternoon in midsummer._

Julia _lies on the chaise-longue, asleep. She is a beautiful woman,
about twenty-five years of age, intractable and passionate, with traces
of a bourgeois desire to be "romantic." She is dressed in white,
flowing draperies, fantastically arranged._

_A tower clock strikes four. Then the bells of the castle are heard
ringing. Both seem to be at a distance of about two hundred paces._

Pierre _enters cautiously through the tapestried doorway at the left.
He is a fashionably dressed, aristocratic young fellow who has been
petted and spoiled. He is effeminate, cowardly, arrogant, and is trying
to play the passionate man, although inwardly cold and nervous._

                                 Julia.

(_Laughs in her sleep. Her laughter dies out in groans._) Pierre!
Pierre! Help! Pierre!

                      Pierre (_bending over her_).

Yes, yes. What is it?

                                 Julia.

Nothing-- (_Laughs and goes on sleeping_).

                      Pierre (_straightening up_).

Whew How hot it is! (_He stares at_ Julia, _his face distorted by fear
and anger, and beats his forehead. Then indicating the outstretched
form of the woman._) Beautiful!--You beautiful animal--you! (_Kneels_.
Julia _holds out her arms to him, but he evades her embrace._) Stop!
Wake up!

                          Julia (_tearfully_).

Please let me sleep.

                                Pierre.

No! Wake up! I've only come for a moment. It's tea-time, and I have to
go back to the house.

                                 Julia.

Please stay!

                                Pierre.

No, mamma will be asking for me. I have to be there for tea.

                          Julia (_pettishly_).

I have a headache. I want some black coffee!

                                Pierre.

Then make it yourself. The gardener is cleaning the orchid rooms in the
hot-house, and he has no time for you now.

                                 Julia.

He never has time for me!--And the meals that his wife cooks are simply
abominable!--And the wine is always warm!--Do, for mercy's sake, steal
the key to the icehouse!

                                Pierre.

But you know that I can't!--I always bring you all the ice that I can
manage to take from the table. If I insist upon having the key, the
housekeeper will tell mamma.

                                 Julia.

But I won't drink warm wine--so there! That's what gives me these
headaches.

                                Pierre.

Your headaches, I want to tell you, come from the roses. Ugh!--this
nasty smell from the withered ones--sour--like stale tobacco
smoke--why, it burns the brains out of one's head!

                                 Julia.

See here, dearie, you let the roses alone! That was our agreement, you
know--basketsful, every morning! I wish the gardener would bring even
more! That's what he's bribed for.--More! More! Always more!

                                Pierre.

See here, if you were only reasonable----

                                 Julia.

But I'm not reasonable! O you--you-- (_She holds out her arms to him.
He comes to her. They kiss._) More!--More!--No end!--Ah, to die!----

                      Pierre (_freeing himself_).

Oh!

                                 Julia.

To die!

                     Pierre (_with hidden scorn_).

Yes--to die. (_Yawning nervously._) Pardon me!--It's as hot as an oven
in here.

                                 Julia.

And the shutters are always closed! For eight long days I've seen
nothing of the sun except these streaks of light. Do open the
shutters--just once!

                                Pierre.

For Heaven's sake!

                                 Julia.

Just for a second!

                                Pierre.

But don't you realize that the pavilion is locked and that not a soul
ever crosses the threshold?

                                 Julia.

Oh, yes, I know--because your lovely, reckless great-grandmother lost
her life here a hundred years ago! That's one of those old-wives' tales
that everyone knows.--Who can tell? Perhaps my fate will be the same as
hers.--But do open the shutters!

                                Pierre.

Do be reasonable! You know that in order to come in here by the side
door without being seen I have to crawl through the woods for a hundred
yards. The same performance twice a day--for a week! Now, if I should
open the shutters and one of the gardener's men should see it, why,
he'd come, and then----

                                 Julia.

Let him come! I'll smile at him--and he's no man if he doesn't keep
quiet after that! Why, your old gardener would cut his hand off
for me any day of his life--just for a bit of wheedling!--It can't be
helped--they all love me!

                           Pierre (_aside_).

Beast!

                                 Julia.

What were you muttering then? (Pierre _throws himself down before her
and weeps._) Pierre! Crying?--Oh!--Please don't--or I'll cry too. And
my head aches so!

            Pierre (_softly but nervously and with hatred_).

Do you know what I'd like to do? Strangle you!

                                 Julia.

Ha! Ha! Ha!--(_pityingly_) Dear me! Those soft fingers--so weak!--My
little boy has read in a naughty book that people strangle their
loves--and so he wants to do some strangling too!

                           Pierre (_rising_).

Well, what's to become of you? How much longer is the game to last in
this pavilion?

                                 Julia.

As long as the roses bloom--that was agreed, you know.

                                Pierre.

And then?

                                 Julia.

Bah! Then!--Why think of it? I'm here now, here under the protection of
your lovely, ghostly great-grandmother. No one suspects--no one dreams!
My husband is searching for me the whole world over!--That was a clever
notion of mine--writing him from Brussels--Nora, last act, last
scene--and then coming straight back again! I'll wager he's in Paris
now, sitting at the Café des Anglais, and looking up and down the
street--now toward the Place de l'Opera, now toward the Madeleine. Will
you wager? I'll go you anything you say. Well, go on, wager!

                                Pierre.

On anything else you wish--but not on that!

                                 Julia.

Why not?

                                Pierre.

Because your husband was at the castle this morning.

                       Julia (_rising hastily_).

My husband--was--at the castle----?

                                Pierre.

What's so surprising about that? He always used to come, you know--our
nearest neighbour--and all that sort of thing.

                                 Julia.

Did he have a reason for coming?

                                Pierre.

A special reason?--No.

                                 Julia.

Pierre--you're concealing something from me!

                         Pierre (_hesitating_).

Nothing that I know of. No.

                                 Julia.

Why didn't you come at once? And now--why have you waited to tell me?

                          Pierre (_sullenly_).

You're hearing it soon enough.

                                 Julia.

Pierre, what happened? Tell me, exactly!

                                Pierre.

Well, he came in the little runabout--without a groom--and asked for
mamma. I naturally pretended to be going out. But you know how she
always insists on my staying with her.

                                 Julia.

And how was he was he--just the same as ever?

                                Pierre.

Oh, no, I wouldn't say that.

                                 Julia.

How did he look? Tell me, tell me!

                                Pierre.

In the first place, he wore black gloves--like a gravedigger.

                                 Julia.

Ha! Ha! And what else?

                                Pierre.

In the second place, he was everlastingly twitching his legs.

                                 Julia.

And what else? What else?

                                Pierre.

Oh, he explained that you were at a Hungarian watering-place, that you
were improving, and that you were expected home soon. (Julia _bursts
out laughing._) Yes, (_gloomily_) it's screamingly funny, isn't it.

                                 Julia.

So I'm at a Hungarian watering-place! Ha! Ha! Ha!

                                Pierre.

But he looked at me so questioningly, so--so mournfully--why, it was
really most annoying the way he looked at me.

                                 Julia.

At a Hungarian watering-place!

                                Pierre.

And then, later, mamma said to him, "It's a dreadful pity your dear
wife isn't here just now. She does so love the roses."

                                 Julia.

And what did he say?

                                Pierre.

"Our roses are not thriving very well this year," said he.

                                 Julia.

But his turnips!--They always thrive!--And then----?

                                Pierre.

Then a strange thing occurred that I can't help worrying about.
Suddenly mamma said to him, "Something very peculiar is happening on
our estate this year. Now I can see from where I sit that the whole
place is one mass of roses. And yet, if at any time I ask for a few
more than usual, there are none to be had!"

                                 Julia.

Why, you must have been shaking in your boots! Did you do anything to
betray us?

                                Pierre.

Oh, I think I know how to take care of myself!--But suddenly he grew
absolutely rigid--as if--as if he had been reflecting. He acted like a
man who sleeps with his eyes open. Mamma asked him a question three
times, and he never answered a word!

                                 Julia.

I say, did you come here to frighten me?

                        Pierre (_bursting out_).

What is your fear compared to what I had to stand! Compared to my
biting, nauseous shame as I sat there opposite him?--I scorned the man
inwardly, and yet I felt as if I ought to lick the dust on his boots.
When mamma said to him, "You don't look very well, Herr Wittich--are
you ill?"--her words were like the box on the ear that she gave me
when, as a lad of fifteen, I got into mischief with the steward's
daughter.--Why did you drag me into this loathsome business? I don't
like it!--I won't stand it!--I like to feel straight! I want my hands
clean!--I want to look down on the people that I meet!--I owe that to
myself.

                                 Julia.

Reproaches?--I'd like to know who has the guilty conscience in this
case, you or I?

                                Pierre.

How long have you been concerned about your conscience?

                                 Julia.

Pierre, you know I had never belonged to any other man--except him.

                                Pierre.

But you've showered sweet glances right and left. You've flirted with
every man who would look at you--even the stable-boy wasn't beneath
your notice!

                                 Julia.

And he was better than you!--For he wanted nothing more than to follow
me with his eyes. But you, Pierre, you were not so easily satisfied.
No, the young Count was more exacting. Corrupt to the core--in spite of
his twenty years----

                          Pierre (_proudly_).

I am not a bit corrupt. I am a dreamer. My twenty years excuse that!

                                 Julia.

But your dreams are poisonous. You want a woman to be your mistress and
yet be chaste--to keep the blush of maidenhood and yet be as passionate
as yourself.--And what have you learned from your experience in the
world? Nothing, except how to scent and track out the sins that lie
hidden in one's inmost soul, the secret sins that one dares not admit
to oneself.--And when the prey is in reach, then you fire away with
your "rights of the modern woman," your "sovereignty of the freed
individuality"--and whatever the rest of the phrases may be.--Ah! You
knew better than I that we all have the Scarlet Woman's blood in our
veins!--Blow away the halo--and the saint is gone!

                                Pierre.

It seems to me you found a great deal of pleasure in your sin!

                                 Julia.

Yes--at least that's what one tells oneself--perhaps one feels it,
too.--It depends--more in the evening than the morning--more in March
than October.--But the dread, the horror of it, is always there.--The
weight of such love is like the weight of one's own coffin-lid.--And
you soon discovered that, Pierre.--Then you began softly, gently, to
bind me to you with glances and caresses that were like chains of
roses!--Yes, and that I become maddened by roses as cats by valerian,
that, too, you soon found out.--Then--then you began to speak to me of
the lover's pavilion--all covered with roses--where your ancestors
spent happy, pastoral hours in wooing their loves--the pavilion that
had been waiting so long for a new mistress. You spoke of adorning it
with beautiful hangings--of filling it full of roses. Oh you, you
Pierre, how well you understood!--Do have some black coffee made for
me! If the gardener can't do it, make it yourself! Please, please!

                                Pierre.

But, I tell you, I have to go back to mamma.

                                 Julia.

Nowadays, you always "have to go back to mamma." Shall I tell you
something--a big secret? You are tired of me! You want to get rid
of me--only you don't know how!

                                Pierre.

Your notions are offensive, my dear.

                                 Julia.

Pierre, I know my fate. I know I am doomed to the gutter. But not
yet! Don't leave me yet! Care for me a little while longer--so the
fall won't be too sudden.--Let me stay here as long as the roses
bloom--here, where _he_ can't find me! Oh, if I leave this place I
shall die of fear!--Nowhere else am I safe from those two great fists
of his!--Pierre, Pierre, you don't know his fists--they're like two
iron bolts!--You, too--beware of him!

                      Pierre (_half to himself_).

Why do you say that to me?

                                 Julia.

He was always jealous of you. When you sent the hothouse roses in
April, he became suspicious. Ever since then, he has continually had
the notion of an admirer in his head. That was the danger-signal!
Pierre, if he surmised--then you would be the first--and I would come
afterward! Pierre, if you drive me to desperation, I'll give you up to
him!----

                                Pierre.

Are you mad?

                                 Julia.

I'll write him a letter something like this: "If you want to find the
traces of my flight, search the rubbish heap behind the lover's
pavilion. Search for the faded petals of the roses upon which, night
after night, Pierre and I celebrated our union. Search the highway for
the bloody prints of my bare feet after he turned me out. Then search
the dregs of the brothels where I found a refuge. And then--then avenge
me!"

                                Pierre.

You'll do nothing of the kind, you-- (_Seizes her by the wrists._)

                          Julia (_laughing_).

Nonsense! You have no strength! (_Disengages herself without
difficulty._)

                                Pierre.

You've taken it out of me, you beast!

                                 Julia.

Beast?--You've been muttering that word now for a couple of days. This
is the first time that you have flung it in my face.--What have I done
that was bestial except to throw my young life at your feet?--And so
this is the end of our rose-fête?----

         Pierre (_in a low voice, breathing with difficulty_).

No, not yet--the end is still to come!

                                 Julia.

I dare say.

                                Pierre.

In fact--you must--leave here.

                                 Julia.

I dare say.

                                Pierre.

Do you understand?--You must leave this place--at once!

                                 Julia.

H'm--just so.

                                Pierre.

For--you must know--you are no longer safe here.

                        Julia (_turning pale_).

Not here either?--Not even here?----

                                Pierre.

I didn't tell you everything, before.

                                 Julia.

Are you up to some new trick now?

                                Pierre.

After I had accompanied him down the steps, he asked--very suddenly--to
see the park.

                                 Julia.

The park----?

                                Pierre.

Yes. And he seemed to be searching every rose-bush as if to count
the number of blossoms that had been cut from it. Then--in the linden
lane--I kept pushing to the left--he kept pushing to the right,
straight for the pavilion. And as it stood before us----

                          Julia (_terrified_).

The pavilion?

                                Pierre.

Certainly.

                         Julia (_shuddering_).

So near!

                                Pierre.

He said he'd like to see the old thing once, from the inside.

                                 Julia.

Good heavens! But he knows that's impossible--he knows your family
history!

                                Pierre.

And you may be sure that's how I put it to him.

                                 Julia.

And what did he----?

                                Pierre.

He was silent--and went back.

                                 Julia.

Went back! But he'll return!----


                                Pierre.

You've dumped me into a pretty mess, you have!

                                 Julia.

Do, for goodness' sake, stop pitying yourself, and tell me what's to be
done.

                                Pierre.

Haven't I told you?

                                 Julia.

I'll not go away! I will not go away! He can't come in here! I will not
leave this place!

                                Pierre.

Listen! I'll have a carriage here--at one o'clock in the night--behind
the park wall. Take it as far as the station.--Listen, I tell you!

                                 Julia.

No, no, no! As soon as I step into the street, I'm lost. And you, too!
You don't know him! Gentle and tractable as he seems, when once he's
angry, his blood boils over!--If I hadn't taken the cartridges out of
his revolver in those days, he-- Why, I've seen him pick up two
unmanageable boys on our place and swing them over his shoulder into
the mill stream! And they would have been ground to pieces, too, if he
hadn't braced himself against the shaft. Pierre, Pierre, never get into
his way again. He's merciless!

                   Pierre (_feigning indifference_).

Oh, nonsense! I can hit the ace of hearts at twenty paces! I'll show
him!

                                 Julia.

Yes, you'll "show him"! Do you suppose that he's going to wait until
you take a shot at him?--Devilish much he cares about your duels! He'd
make a clod of earth out of you before you'd have time to take off your
hat!--I tell you, bolt the gate, lock every room in the house, hide
behind your mother's chair,--and even there you won't be safe from him!

                                Pierre.

(_Struggling against his growing apprehension._) If that's the case,
then--h'm, then the best thing for me to do is to disappear for a time.

                   Julia (_trying to cling to him_).

Yes, let's go away together!

                        Pierre (_moving aside_).

That might suit you.

                                 Julia.

But, after all, it would do no good. We could hide among crowds of
people--in Piccadilly or in Batignolles--we could go to India or to
Texas--and yet, if he took it into his head, he would find us none the
less. Even if we should evade him--some day, sooner or later, you would
have to return--and then--you would have to pay the penalty!

                         Pierre (_stammering_).

I--would--have to----

                           Julia (_wildly_).

So stay--stay here! Go and shoot him down!--at night--from behind!--It
doesn't matter! Only--let--me--breathe--again.

                                Pierre.

Do you want to drive me mad? Don't you see that I'm trembling all over?

                                 Julia.

Because you're a cad and a coward--because----

                                Pierre.

Yes, yes--anything, for all I care! But go! Leave my property! Insult
me, spit on me,--but go!

                                 Julia.

And what then? What then?

                                Pierre.

Can't you write to him? Tell him that you have come back from your
little journey--that you have reconsidered--that you can't live without
him. Tell him to forget--and all shall be as it was before.--Now,
wouldn't that be splendid?

                                 Julia.

Now when he suspects?--When he can follow me, step by step, here to
this pavilion and back again? (_Contemptuously._) Splendid!

                                Pierre.

Then try something else!--Oh, now I have it! Now I have it!

                                 Julia.

Speak, Pierre, for God's sake, speak! I'll love you as--! Speak! Speak!

                                Pierre.

You know him. His heart is soft?

                                 Julia.

Yes, except when he's in a rage, then----

                                Pierre.

And you are sure that he loves you deeply?

                                 Julia.

If he didn't love me so much, what need we fear?

                                Pierre.

Good! Well then, take a carriage at the station and drive home; throw
yourself at his feet and tell him everything. Tell him, for all I care,
that you hate me--that you loathe me--I don't mind--grovel before him
until he raises you. And then all will be well!

                                 Julia.

Ah, if it were possible!--It would be deliverance--it would be heaven!
I should be safe once more--a human being!--I should see the sun again,
instead of these streaks of light!--I should breathe the fresh air,
instead of this musty odour of dead roses!--I shouldn't have to sink
down, down into the filth!--I shouldn't have to be a bad woman--even if
I am one!--There would be a respectable divorce--or perhaps merely a
separation. For, I no longer dare hope to live with him as his wife,
even if I were satisfied to be no better than his dog for the rest of
my days!--Ah, but it cannot be! It cannot be! You don't know him. You
don't know what he's like when the veins stand out on his forehead!--He
would kill me!--Rather than that--kill me yourself!--Here--now--this
moment!--Get your duelling pistols. Oh no! There--there--there are
plenty of weapons! (_She pulls at the weapons on the wall, several of
which fall clattering upon the floor._) Swords--daggers--here! (_Throws
an armful on the chaise-longue._) They are rusty--but that doesn't
matter.--Take one! Stab me first--then--do as you please!--Live if you
can--do!--live as happily as you can! Your life is in your hands.

                                Pierre.

Yes--I dare say. Live!--But how? Where? (_Sobs chokingly._)

                                 Julia.

Come, then--we'll die together--together! (_They sink into each other's
arms and remain motionless in mute despair. After a time_, Julia
_raises her head cautiously and looks about her._) Pierre!

                          Pierre (_troubled_).

Well?

                                 Julia.

Has it occurred to you? Perhaps it isn't so, after all!

                                Pierre.

What do you mean?

                                 Julia.

Perhaps we've just been talking ourselves into this notion, little by
little--think so?

                                Pierre.

You mean that he really wanted to do nothing but--look at the pavilion?

                                 Julia.

Well, it's possible, you know.

                                Pierre.

Yes--at least nothing very unusual occurred.

                                 Julia.

But your naughty, naughty conscience came and asserted itself. Ha! Ha!
What a silly little boy it is! A downright stupid little boy!

                                Pierre.

My imagination was always rather easily aroused. I----

                 Julia (_laughing without restraint_).

Such a stupid boy!--Pierre, let's make some coffee--for a change, eh?

                                Pierre.

But you know--I have to----

                                 Julia.

Dear me, mamma has had her tea long ago. Tell her you sat down in the
shade--and fell asleep--anything! It's growing a bit shady here now.
See there! The streaks of light have gone. (_Indicates a corner of the
room in which the streaks of light have just grown dim._) Ah! but how
hot it is! (_Tears her dress open at the throat, breathing heavily._)
Will you bring me the coffee-pot, like a good boy?

                         Pierre (_listlessly_).

Oh, well--all right. (_Carries the coffee-pot to the table._)

                                 Julia.

Pierre, you--you couldn't open the small door just a tiny bit? No one
would look into the shrubbery.

                                Pierre.

Well, out there in the shrubbery, it's even hotter than in here.

                                 Julia.

Oh, just try it--won't you?

                                Pierre.

Well, you'll see! (_Opens the door at the left._)

                                 Julia.

Whew! It's like a blast from a furnace! And that disgusting odour--a
mixture of perspiration and bad perfume--ugh!

                                Pierre.

That's from the roses of our by-gone days--they lie out there in great
heaps.

                                 Julia.

Close the door! Hurry--close it!

                          Pierre (_does so_).

I told you how it would be!

                                 Julia.

Well, perhaps you could adjust the shutters at the large door so that
we'd get more fresh air in here.

                                Pierre.

Even that would be dangerous. If some one happened to be looking this
way and saw the movement----

                      Julia (_going to the door_).

One has to do it slowly, ve-ry slow-ly-- (_She starts, uttering a low
cry of fear, and retreats to the foreground, her arms outstretched as
if she were warding off a ghost._)

                                Pierre.

What's the matter?

                                 Julia.

Sh! Sh! (_Approaches him cautiously, then softly._) There's a man--out
there.

                                Pierre.

Where?

                                 Julia.

Hush! Come here you can see it against the light. (_They cautiously
change places_. Pierre _utters a low shriek, then_ Julia, _softly,
despairingly_) Pierre!

                                Pierre.

It must be the gardener.

                                 Julia.

It's not--the--gardener.

                                Pierre.

Who is it then?

                                 Julia.

Creep around--and lock--the glass door.

                      Pierre (_weak from fright_).

I can't.

                                 Julia.

Then I will. (_She has taken but a few steps toward the door when the
streaks of light again become visible._) He's gone now!

                                Pierre.

How--gone?

                                 Julia.

There--there--nothing----

                                Pierre.

Seize the opportunity--and go.

                                 Julia.

Where?

                                Pierre.

To the gardener's house--quick--before he comes back.

                                 Julia.

In broad daylight--half dressed as I am?

                                Pierre.

Throw on a wrap--anything--hurry! (_Knocking at the door on the left.
They both stand rooted to the spot. The knocking is repeated. Then_
Pierre, _in a choking voice_) Come in.

(Wittich _enters. He is a large, burly man of about forty, whose whole
appearance betrays neglect; his sandy-coloured hair is pushed back from
his forehead in damp strands; his beard is straggling and unkempt; his
face is haggard and perspiring, his eyes lustreless. He staggers
heavily in walking. He speaks in a stammering, hesitating voice; he
gives the impression, in sum, of a man who is deathly ill, but is
making an intense effort to hold himself together._)

                                Wittich.

I beg your pardon if I am disturbing you. (_Both stare at him without
venturing to move._)

                        Pierre (_taking heart_).

Oh--p-p-please----

                                Wittich.

I see you were about to make coffee. Really--I don't want to----

                         Pierre (_stammering_).

P-p-please--th-there's no--hurry----

                                Wittich.

Well, then we may as well--settle--our affair--first. (Julia, _who has
been standing quite still, panting, utters a low groan. At the sound of
her voice_, Wittich _catches his breath as if suffocating, then sinks
into one of the chairs at the left and stares vacantly at the floor._)

              Pierre (_edging up to_ Julia _then softly_).

Can you understand this?

               Julia (_glancing back--aside to_ Pierre).

Keep near the weapons!

                     Pierre (_as_ Wittich _moves_).

Hush!

                                Wittich.

You must forgive me--I only wanted to--look after--my--wife. (_Breaks
down again._)

                       Pierre (_aside to_ Julia).

Why, he's quite out of his mind!

                                 Julia.

Keep near the weapons!

                                Wittich.

I don't care--to settle--this matter--by means of a--so-called--affair
of honour. I'm a plain man. I only know about such things from hearsay.
And any way--I don't see that they help--m-matters much. (_Breaks into
tearless sobs._)

                           Pierre (_aside_).

He won't hurt us.

                         Julia (_stammering_).

I simply--don't--understand it--at all!

                     Pierre (_pointing to_ Wittich).

Try it! Go to him!

                                 Julia.

He's not a bit like himself.

                                Pierre.

Go on! Go on!

                                 Julia.

(_Who has timidly approached her husband, bid has drawn back at a
movement of his, suddenly throws herself at his feet with great
emotion._) George! George!--I am guilty!--I have sinned before
God and you!--I acknowledge my crime!--My life is in your hands!--Crush
me--grind me to dust!--But God knows, I only obeyed a wretched impulse.
My love for you has never left my heart.--My one desire is to die. Kill
me!--Here!--Now!--But forgive me! Ah, forgive me!

                  Wittich (_staring straight ahead_).

Yes, they always talk like that--in books, at least.

                                 Julia.

Forgive me!

                                Wittich.

There is nothing to forgive. And I am not going to kill any one. What
good would it do? (Julia _sobs, hiding her face in her hands._)

                                Pierre.

Well, then--don't kneel there--like that--Julia, dear!

                                 Julia.

I shall lie here until he raises me. Raise me! Take me in your arms!
Oh, George----

                                Wittich.

Yes, that's what they always say. (_Sinks into reverie again._)

                        Pierre (_aside to her_).

Hush! Stand up! (_She does so._) Well--h'm--I suppose I may assume,
Herr Wittich, that you had some purpose in seeking this interview?

                                Wittich.

Yes--yes. (_Looking about him._) I can well imagine that my
wife--er--that the lady must find it very pleasant here.

                                Pierre.

Oh, yes--we needn't hesitate to say that, need we, Julia, dear?

                Julia (_uncertainly adopting his tone_).

No, indeed, Pierre, dear.

                                Wittich.

At least--she seems to have plenty of roses here.

                      Julia (_laughing nervously_).

Oh, yes--plenty.

                                Wittich.

May I ask whether the lady has made any arrangements for the future?

                        Julia (_still timidly_).

I was thinking of making my home in Paris, wasn't I, Pierre?

                                Pierre.

Yes. You see, Julia wants to live a life suited to her tastes and
inclinations--a life such as she cannot have even here--a life
consecrated to Beauty and Art.

                                Wittich.

They say that an existence of that sort comes high. Has my
wife--er--has the lady made any provision for her expenses?

                        Pierre (_embarrassed_).

From the moment that I become of age I shall be in a position
to--h'm--h'm----

                                Wittich.

I see. But _until_ that moment--?

                                Pierre.

I--er----

                                Wittich.

Well, I consider it my duty--and mine alone--to protect the woman
whom--until recently--I called my wife. And to save her from ruin, I am
willing to make any sacrifice whatsoever.

                                Pierre.

Oh, as for that, of course----

                                Wittich.

I intend to put no obstacle in the way of your desire to legitimize
your relations.

                                Pierre.

Very kind of you--really--very thoughtful indeed.

                                Wittich.

Not because--not that I don't dare insist upon _my_ rights in this
affair, but because I want to guard _her_ from lifelong misery.

                                Pierre.

Really, you wouldn't believe how often we have discussed this
question--would he, Julia, dear?

                                 Julia.

But I am never going to grant your wish, Pierre, dear. You shall keep
your liberty--you shall be free! Even as I ask nothing better than to
follow my own inclinations. If I am ruined because of them--well, it's
no one's concern but my own--no one's! (_Tosses her head._)

                                Wittich.

May I inquire what those inclinations are?

                                 Julia.

It's hard to say--off-hand.--You must feel it--you must-- Well, I want
to be free!--I want to hold my fate in my own hands!--I want-- Oh, why
talk about it? What is one poor, human life?--especially a life like
mine!--I am branded--doomed to the gutter!--One need use no ceremony
with me now!

                                Wittich.

Really! Well--h'm--if I had known that you felt that way about it--I
should have made you--a different proposition--Julia, dear.

                                 Julia.

Tell me! Please!

                                Pierre.

Yes--tell us--please!

                                Wittich.

I suppose I may assume that the people at the castle know nothing of
this little adventure of the young Count's?

                                Pierre.

You may rest assured, my dear sir, that I know what is due a woman's
honour.

                                Wittich.

Ah--really!--Well, I'm sure no one saw me coming here. So then, there
need be no scandal.

                                Pierre.

That would certainly be most agreeable to all parties concerned.

                                Wittich.

But--how did the lady propose to leave here without being seen?

                                Pierre.

Pray, my dear sir, let that be my concern.

                                Wittich.

That concern, however, I shall share with you--my dear sir. And it
seems to me that the best plan would be for the lady to put on a decent
dress, walk through the grounds with me, and pay a visit to the
Countess at the castle.

                                Pierre.

What!--my mother--? What's the use of that?

                                Wittich.

It will look as if she'd returned--and we'd--somehow--met here.

                                Pierre.

Do you think any one is going to believe that?

                          Wittich (_proudly_).

What else should they believe?

                       Julia (_frightened anew_).

Oh, but I don't want to! I don't want to do that! Pierre! I want to
stay with you! I am under your protection, Pierre!

                                Pierre.

See here, my dear sir, let us suppose that your plan is
successful--what then?

                                 Julia.

Yes--yes--afterward--what then?

                                Wittich.

Then?--Then-- (_Looks from one to the other, uncertainly, almost
imploringly, and breaks down again._)

                                Pierre.

Well--won't you go on with your proposition?

                                Wittich.

Yes, I suppose that when a man has acted as I have acted here, he must
have lost--his sense of pride--and honour--and all the rest of it--long
ago.--Then nothing is left him but--his duty.--And the thing that seems
to me my--duty--I am going to do.--Let the Count sneer at me--I no
longer----

                                Pierre.

Oh, please--I say!

                                Wittich.

Well, then, let me tell you something, Julia. After I had read the
letter from Brussels, I had two rooms prepared for you--in the left
wing--quite apart; so that some day, in case--you ever--came back-- Oh,
well--it doesn't matter now. But the rooms--are--still there--and if
you would like to come home with me now--straight off--well, you might
be spared--some annoyance.

                                Pierre.

H'm--so you're willing--? (_Shrugs his shoulders and laughs._) I
suppose that sort of thing is all a matter of taste--but I can
understand----

                                Wittich.

I am speaking to you, Julia.

                                 Julia.

Oh, I thank you most heartily, George. It's certainly very noble
of you--and--I deeply appreciate it. But after--this, I should
always feel ashamed before you--I should feel that I was just being
tolerated--I-- No. Thank you, George--but I couldn't stand it.

                       Pierre (_correcting her_).

That is--! (_Aside to_ Julia.) Don't be a fool!

                  Wittich (_without noticing_ Pierre).

You shall never hear a word of reproach from my lips, Julia, dear.

                                 Julia.

But--if I should actually accept--we never could go on as we did
before, you know. I must be free to do exactly as I please--to go
away--come back--just as I like. There is such a thing as the
sovereignty of the individuality, my dear George--you can't deny that.

                                Pierre.

Herr Wittich can't possibly deny that!

                                Wittich.

You shall have your own way as far as it lies in my power, Julia, dear.

                                 Julia.

And then, you must try to bring a little more--more beauty into our
life.--I surely have the right to demand that. Just look about you
here. You know how passionately fond of roses I am. My soul demands
something besides--potatoes! Well, I insist upon having roses around
me. That's not unreasonable, is it?

                                Wittich.

You shall have roses enough to smother you.

                         Pierre (_nervously_).

Well, then, Julia, dear, I see no reason why we should not accept this
proposition.

                                Wittich.

What have you got to say about it?

                                Pierre.

I beg your pardon, Herr Wittich. I certainly don't want to offend you.
But--as Julia and I have found so much in each other--haven't we,
Julia, dear?

                                 Julia.

Yes--so very, very much, Pierre, dear.--And to know that we were so
near--and yet could never see each other or talk together, or-- I, for
my part, couldn't endure it, could you, Pierre?

                                Pierre.

Oh--as for that--well, it would be hard, Julia, dear.

                                 Julia.

And what would the world say, dear George, if we should suddenly--and
apparently without any cause--break off all communication with our
neighbors? How would Pierre explain it to his mother? Why, he simply
couldn't! No; if we are to carry out your plan, then everything must
remain outwardly the same as before. Don't you agree with me, Pierre,
dear?

                                Pierre.

(_Hesitating, with an apprehensive glance toward_ Wittich.)
Outwardly--yes, Julia, dear.

                 Wittich (_losing control of himself_).

So that's your condition, is it?

              Julia (_with a sort of nervous impudence_).

Yes, that's our condition--isn't it, Pierre, dear? (Pierre _does not
reply, but looks at_ Wittich.)

                                Wittich.

Really?--Really!--Very well! (_He draws himself to his full height, his
face flushes, and he looks around the room wildly, as if searching for
something._)

                                 Julia.

What are you looking for, George?

                                Wittich.

If you-- (_Gasps as if suffocating._)

                                 Julia.

George! George! What's the matter?

                                Wittich.

There--there--there! (_With a loud cry, he falls upon the weapons and
snatches one of the daggers._)

                                 Julia.

Help! Help! Pierre! Save me!

                      Pierre (_at the same time_).

Help! Help! (_He pushes open the door and escapes, screaming_. Julia
_rushes out through the door at the left_. Wittich _dashes after her. A
piercing shriek is heard. After a short pause_, Julia _appears at the
large door in the centre. She tries to go further, fails, supports
herself against the door posts for an instant, and then reels into the
room. She attempts to lean against the small table in the centre, but
falls to the floor, dying. As she falls the small table is upset,
burying her beneath a shower of roses._

_Through the doorway at the left_, Wittich _is heard, sobbing and
groaning. In the distance_ Pierre _is shouting for help. The sound of
many voices, growing louder as the curtain falls._)
﻿                                 MARGOT

                           A PLAY IN ONE ACT





                               CHARACTERS

                  Herr Ebeling, a lawyer.
                  Frau von Yburg.
                  Margot, her daughter.
                  Doctor von Tietz.
                  Bonath, a secretary.
                  A Servant.

                            The Present Day

The scene is laid in a large German city.




                                 MARGOT


_The richly furnished office of a prosperous lawyer. Pictures, bronzes,
carved furniture, costly hangings. In the foreground, on the left, a
window; turned toward it, a writing-table with a writing-chair behind.
Near the window, a leather arm-chair. At the narrow side of the table,
in the foreground, a low seat. On the right, a sofa, table, and chairs.
In the background, a door which, when opened, reveals the clerks
working at long tables. To the right, back, another door. The backward
projection of the writing-table forms a revolving-stand for reference
books. On the writing-table, among documents and writing materials, are
photographs in standing frames and a slender vase filled with dark red
roses._

_It is winter, about six o'clock in the evening. The lamps are
lighted._

Ebeling _is seated in the writing-chair. He is a man of about forty,
attractive, winning in manner, his clothes betokening wealth and
refinement; he wears a short, dark beard, and his hair is slightly gray
at the temples_. Von Tietz, _sitting opposite him in the arm-chair, is
about thirty, very smartly dressed--in appearance a type of the
ordinary drawing-room devotee._

                Ebeling (_holding out a box of cigars_).

There! Now let's chat. Will you smoke?

                     v. Tietz (_helping himself_).

Really now--if I'm disturbing you----

                                Ebeling.

See here, my dear fellow, if you were disturbing me, I'd make short
work of you. But (_looking toward the clock_) my office hours are over.
And we'll find out immediately what else there is. (_He rings._)

               Bonath _appears with a bundle of papers_.

                                Ebeling.

Is any one still there?

                                Bonath.

No, Herr Ebeling, but a lady is expected.

                                Ebeling.

Yes, I know. Well, let me have the papers. (Bonath _lays them before
him._)

                                Ebeling.

(_To_ v. Tietz.) You can go on speaking. These are only
signatures.--Have you a light?

                               v. Tietz.

(_Who has stood up and is looking around the room._) Yes, thank you.

                                Ebeling.

See that this decision is delivered to Baron von Kanoldt at once.

                                Bonath.

Yes, Herr Ebeling.

                               v. Tietz.

You've become a collector, I see.

                          Ebeling (_signing_).

One must have some diversion.

                               v. Tietz.

What's that? Looks like a Terburg. Is it an original?

                          Ebeling (_signing_).

Would you expect it to be a copy?

                               v. Tietz.

H'm, your practice is certainly splendid.

                                Ebeling.

There are a lot of people, though, who think they are cleverer than
I--and take great pains to justify their opinion. (_To_ Bonath.) Will
it be necessary to work overtime?

                                Bonath.

Not to-day, Herr Ebeling.

                                Ebeling.

Then you can announce Frau von Yburg as soon as she comes. (v. Tietz
_listens attentively._)

                                Bonath.

Very well, Herr Ebeling. (_Goes out._)

                               v. Tietz.

The lady you are expecting is Frau von Yburg?

                                Ebeling.

Of course you know that I've been the Yburg's legal adviser for years.

                       v. Tietz (_sitting down_).

Well, really, this is quite a marvellous coincidence. It's on account
of the Yburgs that I've come to see you.

                        Ebeling (_interested_).

Is that so? What's the matter?

                               v. Tietz.

My dear friend, if you hadn't so completely drawn away from all society
since your wife l---- (_alarmed._) I beg your pardon.

                                Ebeling.

Go on! Say it! Left me! Walked out of the house! You may say it. But
then--drop it! Even our old fraternity friendship doesn't oblige us to
be everlastingly putting each other on the grill.

                               v. Tietz.

No, really--it escaped me somehow. I'm awfully sorry.

                                Ebeling.

Oh, well, never mind. You know, I speak of it quite disinterestedly.
And it's a good many years since then. Only--I'd rather not be attacked
unawares.

                               v. Tietz.

Don't worry. I'll be on my guard. But--as we've mentioned it--there's
something I wanted to ask you before--only I hadn't the courage. Tell
me, do you always keep her picture on your table?

                      Ebeling (_in a hard voice_).

Yes.

                               v. Tietz.

Then you still love her?

                                Ebeling.

No. I only keep the picture there to warn me against making a
fool of myself again. So many charming women sit there where you're
sitting, women just on the point of divorce--and therefore in
need of consolation. Every now and then one of them undertakes to
faint--um--and then I have to-- (_Holds out his arms._)

                  v. Tietz (_bursting out laughing_).

Aha! Very interesting! Very interesting!

                                Ebeling.

In short, it does no harm to keep the picture there.

                               v. Tietz.

Of course, everyone knows how much courted you are. For instance, no
matter when I come to see you, I always find those beautiful roses on
your table. They speak for themselves. Heavens! What a luxury! Roses in
January!

                                Ebeling.

Things like that come anonymously. If I knew who the sender was, I
wouldn't accept them.

                               v. Tietz.

Let me with all due modesty give you a piece of advice: you ought to
marry.

                                Ebeling.

(_Ironically, shaking his finger at him across the table._) Thank you.
But didn't you want to speak to me about the Yburgs?

                               V. Tietz.

Yes. What was I going to say?--Oh, yes. Well, if you hadn't taken it
into your head to live like a hermit, you'd know that, for some time
past, I've been a very frequent visitor at the Yburgs's.

                                Ebeling.

Oh, yes, I know. I go there myself sometimes--only not when other
people are around.

                               v. Tietz.

Well, then, to make a long story short--why should I mince matters with
you?--I am courting Margot.

                         Ebeling (_startled_).

Ah--you, too? You're also one of the crowd?

                    v. Tietz (_conceitedly_).

I trust that I stand up a bit above the crowd.

                                Ebeling.

Indeed? I thought perhaps the social glamour of the Yburgs was
attracting you. A thing like that can't help dazzling one. But
that you----

                               v. Tietz.

Is it so surprising? That girl is so bewitching--so--so entirely unlike
these forward, city-bred girls. With her, at least, one knows what one
can count on. She's so--so the essence of everything innocent and
chaste and pure.

                          Ebeling (_quoting_).

"Be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as snow,"--thy dowry shall not
escape me.

                               v. Tietz.

No, no--don't joke. It's out of place. I won't deny that, as an
official without fortune--that would also be very--h'm--but----

                                Ebeling.

Yes, but what have I got to do with it?

                               v. Tietz.

See here, my dear friend, we scattered remnants of the old college
fraternity have grown so accustomed to ask your help in times of need,
to look up to you as a sort of father confessor----

                                Ebeling.

Do you want me to go and propose for you?

                               v. Tietz.

We'll talk of that later. But first I'd like to ask you something. See
here, what rôle is Baron von Kanoldt playing in this family?

                                Ebeling.

So that's it!

                               V. Tietz.

You're his counsel in his divorce proceedings, aren't you?

                                Ebeling.

As the affair has become common talk, I need make no secret of it.

                               v. Tietz.

They say that it is the wife who has been the martyr. And yet, after
fifteen years, _he_ begins the divorce proceedings. Why should he?

                                Ebeling.

My dear fellow, you must put that question to some one who's not so
well informed as I am.

                               v. Tietz.

Oh, see here, I don't want to be indiscreet about it, but the further
the case goes, the more persistent are the rumours that he has designs
on Margot's hand--and, furthermore, that her mother is encouraging him!

                                Ebeling.

Frau von Yburg will be here in a few minutes.--Ask her!

                               v. Tietz.

What do you take me for?

                  Ebeling (_shrugging his shoulders_).

Oh, well then----

                               v. Tietz.

But just think! that man--forty, if he's a day, fat, worn out, a roué
whose amorous adventures are common gossip to every cabby on the
street!

                                Ebeling.

Pardon me, my clients are all virtuous, young, handsome, desirable--of
inestimable pulchritude.

                               v. Tietz.

See here--are you chaffing me?

                                Ebeling.

I'm only trying to make you understand that you've unwittingly walked
into the enemy's camp.

                       v. Tietz (_standing up_).

Very well--if you don't want to----

                                Ebeling.

(_Also stands up, and puts his hand on_ v. Tietz's _shoulder._) My dear
fellow, you're ten years younger than I. You're one of your country's
young hopefuls. Go ahead and do what your heart and pocket-book bid
you.

                               v. Tietz.

I didn't need you to tell me that. (_A knock at the door._)

                                Ebeling.

Come in.

                                Bonath.

Frau von Yburg and----

                                Ebeling.

Ask her in.

(Bonath _stands aside, opening the door. Enter_ Frau v. Yburg _and_
Margot. Frau v. Yburg _is a woman of about forty, dressed simply but
tastefully; her bearing is dignified, self-possessed, refined, and
betrays a natural, unaffected knowledge of the demands of convention;
but hidden behind her assurance, and scarcely noticeable, are the
traces of an old sorrow, a helpless glance, and a forced smile_. Margot
_is a lovely young girl, extremely well-bred, with a somewhat shy,
reserved manner._)

                    v. Tietz (_at sight of Margot_).

Ah!

                             Frau v. Yburg.

I brought my little girl along, Herr Ebeling, to let her catch a
glimpse of the lion's den. I hope that you won't mind.

                     Ebeling (_kissing her hand_).

A thousand times welcome, dear ladies. (_Shakes hands with_ Margot.)

                             Frau v. Yburg.

Good evening, Herr von Tietz. This is indeed a pleasure. (_Gives him
her hand._)

                               v. Tietz.

I'm very happy to meet you both--I hadn't hoped to see Fräulein Yburg
here. But our friend believes in military promptitude. I have just
received permission to take my leave.

                             Frau v. Yburg.

I hope that you will come to see us soon, Herr von Tietz.

                               v. Tietz.

That's very kind of you. (_Bowing to_ Margot.) Fräulein Yburg!

               Ebeling (_accompanying him to the door_).

Good-bye, my dear fellow. No bad feelings now----

                               v. Tietz.

Oh, I say! Of course not! (_Goes out._)

                                Ebeling.

Won't you sit down?

                             Frau v. Yburg.

Oh, no. Margot is only going to glance around a bit. Yes, my little
girl, you may well look about. Between these four walls many a fate has
been shaped.

                                Ebeling.

Let us rather say, has been mended.

                Margot (_softly, suddenly looking up_).

Mine, too?

                             Frau v. Yburg.

(_Looking at her with evident disapproval._) Perhaps Margot may call
for me again in half an hour. You won't mind?

                                Ebeling.

It will give me great pleasure.

                             Frau v. Yburg.

Then run away, dear, pay your visit, and let the carriage bring you
back again. (_Sits down, right._)

                                Margot.

(_Giving him her hand with social assurance, but a little timidly, none
the less._) Au revoir, Herr Ebeling.

                                Ebeling.

Au revoir, Fräulein Margot. (_Accompanies her to the door, and calls._)
Bonath, see to it that Fräulein Yburg finds her way out. She is coming
back later.

                           _Voice of_ Bonath.

Very well, Herr Ebeling.

(Ebeling _bows to_ Margot, _who is already out of sight, and closes the
door._)

                                Ebeling.

Well, Frau von Yburg, we've brought matters to this point.

                       Frau v. Yburg (_sighing_).

Yes.

                                Ebeling.

The divorce was granted yesterday morning.

                             Frau v. Yburg.

Yes, I know.

                                Ebeling.

Well, aren't you pleased?

                             Frau v. Yburg.

My dear Herr Ebeling, my heart is so full of gratitude--really, I don't
know how to thank you--for myself and also for my poor, dear child. But
I'm so helpless--so perplexed--I really don't know--I----

                                Ebeling.

Why, what can be wrong?

                             Frau v. Yburg.

Yes--just fancy--well, then--_she won't do it!_

                        Ebeling (_astonished_).

What's that?

                             Frau v. Yburg.

Think of the monstrosity of it! She won't do it.

                                Ebeling.

Has she been notified that the divorce has been granted?

                             Frau v. Yburg.

Yesterday--just after the proceedings--Baron von Kanoldt--came--with
his proposal.

                                Ebeling.

H'm!--quicker than I had expected.

                             Frau v. Yburg.

My husband, of course, was simply thunderstruck. One can surely
sympathise with him--von Kanoldt--a man in the forties--divorced--with
grown children--and _such_ a reputation! But when he saw that I took
the man's part--I had to do that, didn't I?

                                Ebeling.

That was our only course.

                             Frau v. Yburg.

Then his position, his wealth, his connections at court--oh, yes, and
naturally our long friendship-- Of course, my husband doesn't surmise
what this man did to her! In the end, he agreed that Margot herself
should decide.

                                Ebeling.

Well, and--? What----?

                             Frau v. Yburg.

She came, looked him quietly in the face, and asked for time to think
it over.

                                Ebeling.

It seems to me your husband was very clever. Otherwise, he might
perhaps have----

                             Frau v. Yburg.

Yes, but when we were alone, just fancy! she declared quite simply:
"No, I won't do it." I exclaimed, "Why, my dear child, you're out of
your mind! You know that we've done everything for the sake of this
day!" "Yes, I know all about it--but I won't." "You've been wishing it
for three years," I said to her. And what do you suppose she answered!
"I never wished it. You talked it into me--and he."

                                Ebeling.

"He?" Pardon me, who?

                             Frau v. Yburg.

You, Herr Ebeling.

               Ebeling (_standing up in his excitement_).

My dear lady, it was my duty to carry out what you and Fräulein Margot
desired--and what, in short, the circumstances demanded.

                             Frau v. Yburg.

Oh, I know! My God, how well I realise it! And what a task you've
accomplished! No--when I remember how much persuasion, how much subtle
reasoning, how much-- Ah, and how I've suffered these three years! See,
my hair is quite gray!--And I still can't understand it! I still look
upon the girl as if she were a stranger, a mysterious being who has
lost her way and accidentally come to me. I--I who was brought up so
strictly, watched, and carefully tended all my life, kept worlds away
from any taint of the unconventional-- And she, too-- No, on that
point, I can't reproach myself. And yet--this horror! No, I shall
never, never understand it! Ah, and to have to bear it all alone! Oh,
yes, I had to do that. My husband, with his long army training, would
have forced him to fight--and then we should all have been dragged in
the dust. Margot's life--our position in society--everything! Ah, if
you hadn't been here, Herr Ebeling! Do you remember how I came to you?
I think I was half dead from wretchedness! With the letter to him in my
hand, the letter that I had taken from her as she lay distracted in my
arms! Do you remember?

                                Ebeling.

Oh, don't speak of it! As I read that handwriting--still so
childish--and that helpless, stammering question: "What has happened to
me?"--God knows, everything turned black before my eyes! Oh! it's too
horrible!

                             Frau v. Yburg.

And then you yourself said to me, "You're right--the blackguard _must_.
I'll make him."

                                Ebeling.

I said it in the heat of the first great indignation. Please take that
into consideration. After I went to work, I religiously kept to my
programme to leave all threats and violence out of the question. Not
only because-- Ah, as I've come to feel now, such a calm method of
procedure would be impossible. But then I had to keep in mind that a
new life--I don't venture to say a happy one--was to be gained through
me. To-day, some one is grateful to me--the very one who at first
opposed me most violently--that poor, wretched wife.

                             Frau v. Yburg.

And now everything would have been forgiven. I can't understand it. I
don't know--I----

                                Ebeling.

So she won't do it?

                             Frau v. Yburg.

And that's why I've fled to you in my need! Later, when she returns, I
want to have gone. You understand? I've arranged it this way so that
you could bring her to her senses. A little heart to heart talk, you
know. But if your influence doesn't help, then I don't know--then----

                    Ebeling (_walking up and down_).

And so she won't do it.

                             Frau v. Yburg.

Yes, just explain it to me! The only possible way in which to
rehabilitate herself in her own eyes! And she throws it to the winds!
What can she be thinking of? What----

                                Ebeling.

And so she won't do it!

                             Frau v. Yburg.

What's come over you, Herr Ebeling? You're not listening!

                      Ebeling (_firmly, quietly_).

Very well, then she _shall_ not.

                             Frau v. Yburg.

For God's sake! You, too! You, too, want----

                                Ebeling.

My dear friend, I have done all that lay in my power, often against my
own convictions, I can assure you. She knows what she is doing. She
will not. Very well. I'm not here to bait her to her ruin. I am very
sorry, but this time I must refuse my assistance.

                             Frau v. Yburg.

But what will happen? Must all our work count for nothing--your work,
my work? For I have worked over her with all my powers, I need not
hesitate to say it, worked to place her again on those spiritual
heights where a young girl of family by right belongs. I have led her
back to Religion, for whoever has anything to expiate must possess
Religion. I have read with her only the most carefully selected books,
books that could never, never endanger a young girl's imagination. And
I have taken special care to see to it that when she was in the company
of young people, she should, if possible, be stricter and even more
reserved than the most timid of her friends. For her need of such
behaviour was double theirs, wasn't it? And you yourself will admit
that my efforts have been successful. No one could deny it and look
into those clear, steadfast eyes of hers. (Ebeling _nods assent._) She
has become all soul--all----

                     Ebeling (_doubtingly, sadly_).

Ah!

                             Frau v. Yburg.

Yes, indeed, Herr Ebeling. No clandestine, no unseemly wish finds its
way into her heart. I'll vouch for that. She glides through life like a
silent spirit, cleansed and purified.

                                Ebeling.

And therefore we are to throw her into the jaws of that beast.

                             Frau v. Yburg.

Is there any other way? Do you know of any?

                         Ebeling (_tormented_).

H'm! She certainly has suitors enough!

                             Frau v. Yburg.

She'll reject them all--as she has heretofore. She simply says, "I
shall not begin my new life with a lie. I think too much of myself for
that. And to confess, to tell the man, and have him turn his back on
me, or out of pure pity raise me to his own level--I think _entirely_
too much of myself for that."

                                Ebeling.

I believe one can readily appreciate her feelings.

                             Frau v. Yburg.

But what will become of her? Is she to wither and wear away--this
heavenly young creature? (Ebeling _walks about, growing more and more
excited. A pause._) Herr Ebeling, speak! Advise me!

                          Ebeling (_firmly_).

I know of only one solution: she must choose some one who knows it.

                             Frau v. Yburg.

Who could that be--except----?

                     Ebeling (_breathing heavily_).

Except that man, there is only one other.

                             Frau v. Yburg.

(_Stares at him uncomprehendingly with her hands clasped, then
stammering._) Oh! oh, God! What a joy that would be!

                                Ebeling.

What more can I say? Such things come and grow great in a man, one
knows not how. She bore _her_ sorrow, _her_ shame, I mine. At first,
perhaps, it was no more than a casual fancy--no, an interest, for my
inclinations were always involved--but to-day it has become a passion,
a passion that, lonely man as I am, gnaws me to the very core of my
being.

                             Frau v. Yburg.

But how have you managed through it all to keep so quiet, so
deliberate, so----?

                                Ebeling.

One learns, little by little, to be master of oneself. And five minutes
ago there was absolutely no hope, (_bursting out_) but if she no longer
wants him--why shouldn't I--oh! (_Hides his face in his hand, trembling
with emotion._)

                             Frau v. Yburg.

Wait! I don't see, after you've led him on to this point, how you'll
ever justify all this to Baron von Kanoldt.

                                Ebeling.

I don't know! Until now, I've led a tolerably respectable life. For, in
the disgrace that _she_ (_pointing to the picture of his wife_) brought
upon me, I played no part.

                             Frau v. Yburg.

Oh, yes, everyone in society knows that.

                                Ebeling.

But I haven't once asked myself whether what I am now going to do--or
should like to do--conforms to the prevailing standards of propriety.
One ought to think it over, to let some time elapse--in short, I don't
know! All I can say is that if she doesn't want him, if she won't take
that--(_checking himself_)--him, well, then, the path is open to
any one--to me as well as to another.

                     Frau v. Yburg (_hesitating_).

I feel that I ought to warn you of just one thing more. She has never
seemed to consider you as anything more than a fatherly sort of friend.

                                Ebeling.

H'm! (_Laughs bitterly._) Even though I'm a couple of years younger
than----, I've certainly acted more like a father to her. But you're
probably right. (_Knocking._) Come in. (Bonath _enters._)

                                Bonath.

I've let the clerks go home. Have you any further orders, Herr Ebeling?

                                Ebeling.

You can go, too, Bonath. But tell my man to answer the door.

                                Bonath.

Very well, Herr Ebeling. Good evening. (Bonath _goes out._)

                                Ebeling.

Frau von Yburg, your daughter will return in a few minutes. Meanwhile,
the scene has changed not altogether insignificantly. Do you still
approve of that little private heart to heart talk--or not?

                             Frau v. Yburg.

Ah, my dear friend, I have such boundless confidence in you. You've
been her good angel for so long. I don't hesitate for a moment to leave
her in your hands. And you'll carefully observe all the conventions? Of
course you will.

                                Ebeling.

But what can I say to her?

                             Frau v. Yburg.

You're so skilled in reading the heart. You'll have found a way to
make her confess something before she's aware of it. Only let me beg of
you--if you find nothing in what she says that gives you reason to
hope, then please don't worry her. She has already suffered so much.

                                Ebeling.

Very well, then, I'll proceed upon the assumption that I have only to
comply with the request that brought you to me to-day.

                             Frau v. Yburg.

If you would----

                                Ebeling.

Hush! (_Listens at the door, then pointing to the right._) May I ask
you to go out this door? You know your way.

                             Frau v. Yburg.

And please, please, spare her delicacy. You've no idea how pure she
is--in spite of----

                                Ebeling.

If I didn't know _that_-- (_Knocking. He opens the door, right._)
Good-bye.

                      (Frau v. Yburg _goes out._)

                                Ebeling.

Come in.

                              The Servant.

A young lady is outside. She wants to know whether her mother is still
here.

                                Ebeling.

(_Hurrying to the centre door--vivaciously._) Just fancy Fräulein
Margot, your mother thought you'd no longer be coming, and has only
just left. (Margot _appears at the centre door, and stands there,
hesitating._) But won't you come in for a few moments?

                                Margot.

Gladly, if I may. (_Looking about irresolutely._) Only I don't know
whether I----

                                Ebeling.

What, my dear child?

                                Margot.

It isn't usually mamma's way to go off without me.

                                Ebeling.

Then I'll take you home myself. You need have no fears.

                                Margot.

Oh, I'm not afraid.

                 Ebeling (_inviting her to sit down_).

Won't you----?

                                Margot.

I'd like to look around a bit first; may I? I couldn't a while ago.

                                Ebeling.

I'm only too happy to think that you take some interest in my home.

                                Margot.

Dear me, mamma has so often told me about it. Of late years her visits
to you were our principal topic of conversation. I think I've known
every tiny nook here for a long, long time.

                                Ebeling.

Really?

                                Margot.

Oh, there's the stand with the horrible law books! (_Sighing._) Ah,
Herr Ebeling, everything in life is Law--and everything is in books.

                                Ebeling.

My dear young girl, the hardest laws are never to be found in books.

                                Margot.

Yes, you are right. The laws that drag us down to destruction are the
laws that we make for ourselves. And all those beautiful women! I
suppose one must be very beautiful to join them?

                     Ebeling (_parrying lightly_).

Most of them are clients who have presented me with their pictures as a
token of gratitude.

                                Margot.

Well, but I'm your client, too--and yet I should never dare to offer
you my picture in that way.

                                Ebeling.

If you only----

                          Margot (_startled_).

Oh, and there's your-- (_Looks at him questioningly, confused._)

                                Ebeling.

Yes, that's my former wife.

                                Margot.

I saw her only once in my life. I was a mere child then. She was very
lovely.

                                Ebeling.

Yes, she was lovely.

                                Margot.

Oh, and the wonder--wonderful roses! Mamma has told me that you always
have such lovely roses.

                          Ebeling (_lightly_).

Yes, I have an agreement with a gardener. He keeps me supplied.

                    Margot (_seemingly convinced_).

Oh!

                                Ebeling.

May I present them to you, Fräulein Margot?

                                Margot.

Oh, dear me, no. The gardener who keeps you supplied might be offended.

                         Ebeling (_laughing_).

As you wish.

                                Margot.

And this is the inquisitional chair--where the poor secrets are dragged
out?

                                Ebeling.

Quite the contrary! The secrets come forth of their own accord. I
always have to say "stop."

                                Margot.

Well, then, I needn't hesitate to sit down. (_Does so._) _My_ secret
you know--(_sighing_)--only too well!

                                Ebeling.

My dear Fräulein Margot; the real secret of your life, the law that
governs your thoughts and feelings, I believe no one knows--not even
your mother.

            Margot (_smiling and shrugging her shoulders_).

My good mamma! And I'm here to give you proofs of that fact, am I?

                         Ebeling (_evasively_).

Oh!

                                Margot.

The reason for my being here isn't the one you've given me.

                                Ebeling.

Indeed! What is it?

                                Margot.

I wasn't left here alone for nothing! Please go ahead, Herr Ebeling, do
your duty and talk me nicely into marrying Baron von--(_shudders_).
See?--I've never once been able to bring his name to my lips. And yet
I'm to pass my whole life with that man! Can one picture anything more
horrible? (_Shudders again._) Do you know of any occupation for me,
Herr Ebeling?

                                Ebeling.

Occupation? Why?

                                Margot.

I want to leave home.

                                Ebeling

Is that your earnest intention?

                            Margot (_nods_).

But, unfortunately, I've learned nothing. And then--it has to be an
occupation that wouldn't humiliate me--and that wouldn't spoil my hands
(_takes off her gloves_), for I love my hands. I don't care a bit about
my face, but my hands--they're like two friends. I can keep up long
conversations with them--especially with the left. That one's so weak.
So, something that wouldn't spoil the hands--and would leave me time
for reading--and--well, I want to be alone.

                                Ebeling.

I might have suggested nursing, even though it requires the constant
use of the hands. But, of course, you'd never be alone.

                                Margot.

No. I have no love for my fellow-creatures. I don't want to do anything
for them.

                                Ebeling.

Those are hard words, Fräulein Margot.

                                Margot.

I am hard. What have my fellow-creatures ever done for me?

                                Ebeling.

And--your parents?

                                Margot.

You refer to mamma? Mamma certainly means well. But mamma has torn my
soul from my body. She has made use of the old principle of family
rule--which may have had some sense in the Stone Age--and has turned me
into a doll, a doll-creature that moves its eyes and says _ba_ when you
press its head.--Just watch, Herr Ebeling!--Now haven't I a touching
fashion of casting up my eyes when I look at you in this simple,
thoughtful, innocent way?--And when I let the lids fall again in all
the bashful piety that I still can muster--isn't it simply sweet?

                         Ebeling (_earnestly_).

My dear young girl, I really believe I must begin to say "stop" now!

                                Margot.

Dear me! You're already disgusted with me! But if you had any idea--do
you know what you'd think? "Pity that I wasted such pains on a creature
like her!"

                                Ebeling.

I should never think that, my dear child. I should only pity you and
love you the more.

                                Margot.

I don't want to be pitied! And loved? (_Shakes her head._) At least not
that way--and not the other, either. That's still stupider. When I
listen to my friends--this one loves me, and that one loves me, and
this one kept my glove, and that one kissed my handkerchief--ugh! It
reminds me of the cackling of a lot of hens. Herr Ebeling, do you
believe criminals are scornful?

                                Ebeling.

Why do you ask?

                                Margot.

Please answer.

                                Ebeling.

It's very often true of born criminals.

                                Margot.

Well, then, I've the criminal nature.

                 Ebeling (_laughing against his will_).

Tut, tut, my dear child, why so--all of a sudden?

                                Margot.

Because I inwardly shrug my shoulders at everything that goes by the
name of Innocence. I keep thinking to myself, "You silly sheep, what do
you know about it?"--Ah, and yet, I envy them! At the balls, I see
everything as through a veil. The things that the men chatter about
sound far, far away--oceans off. I always feel like saying, "Don't
trouble about me. Go to that girl over there. She's stupid enough." And
then--after I've come home--I weep, weep from sheer envy and utter
boredom, weep until I have to turn my pillow.--And mamma? Mamma drags
me from ball to ball: I mustn't be unlike the others, you know!

                                Ebeling.

My dear child, if this goes against your nature, why don't you make
some resistance? Why don't you show your mother that you have thoughts
and feelings of your own which must be respected?

                                Margot.

Ah, my dear Herr Ebeling, just be a whipped dog yourself, year in year
out! The dog doesn't resist either--but suddenly, some day--when he's
at the very end of his endurance--he bites his master's hand. I shall
bite soon!

                                Ebeling.

Oh, I'll grant you that your mother has probably made some mistakes.
But only out of love, or because she knew no better. Just ask yourself
what would have become of you if you'd been left to yourself all this
time?

                                Margot.

I should have been embittered just the same--you're right--but I should
not have let myself fall.

                                Ebeling.

Who knows?

                                Margot.

Never! And I'll tell you something to prove it. Severely as I have been
watched--and--surely there's nothing coquettish about me?

                                Ebeling.

Certainly not.

                                Margot.

You can believe me when I say that, in the general moral tone
prevailing over our society just now--and of which our mothers
naturally know nothing--there lurks a temptation which has over and
over again enticed even me. Such things are so personal, so secret--one
cannot describe them. Oh, I could have done whatever I wished! But
I said to myself: the first time, you were ignorant, you were
sacrificed--or, at least, you can talk it into yourself that you were
sacrificed--but if ever again--no, I can't say it after all!

                                Ebeling.

I understand, my child.

                                Margot.

If ever again--then you'll be lost--forever! Then there can be no more
ideals, no more poetry--nothing lofty--nothing for which to work--and,
worst of all, nothing of which to dream. For to dream--ah, one must
dream, mustn't one? When one no longer has _that_!----

                           Ebeling (_moved_).

Yes, dear child.

                                Margot.

But you mustn't think that I'm trying to make myself interesting, or
that I stand here before you beautifully whitened and purified! Oh, no!
What I'm going to say to you now has never been said to any one, to any
man before. And you are going to despise me utterly. But I must say
it--once, once in my life--and then the old hypocrisy can go on again.
Well, I don't know what it is, but it's like a fire in me. No, worse,
much worse! When I think of that frightful man, my heart fairly
shrivels up. And yet--I can never get away from it. There's always a
terror, a horror in me; and yet there is always an eternal--an eternal
hunger. Yes--a restlessness--a search--the whole day long. It's
strongest toward twilight. Then I want to go out--out into the wide
world--to fly to unknown lands. Then I think to myself--out there, no
one knows you; out there, there is no sin. Ah, it's as if I were
lashed! And I heap such reproaches upon myself because of it! Even now
you have not heard the worst. I must tell you the worst, too. Well, you
know how I hate that man--yet, sometimes it seems to me that I must go
to him and say to him--Behold, here I am again!

                 Ebeling (_jumps up, muttering to himself_).

What has he done? The scoundrel! The blackguard!

                                Margot.

There! Now you know on whom you've wasted your sympathy! Now I can go.
(_Stands up, snatches her muff, and prepares to leave._)

                                Ebeling.

(_Who has been silently walking up and down more hotly._) It appears
then that you still love that man.

                Margot (_with a short, cutting laugh_).

Oh, Herr Ebeling, if you've gathered _that_ from all I've said, then I
might just as well have addressed myself to the four walls. I've been
hoping for three long years that you would secretly manage the thing in
such a way that I'd never have to see him again in all my life--never,
never--not even from a distance.

                                Ebeling.

Why did you never confide in me before? Why to-day for the first time?

                                Margot.

_Can_ one do such a thing? Is one ever allowed to? I'm a well-bred
young girl, you know. I must observe the conventions. How I came to do
it to-day, I don't know myself. But formerly when you were alone with
me, did you ever, at any time, give me to understand, even by a glance,
that you--you knew anything--about me? Do you think such an attitude
gives one courage? Ah, and in my need I've prayed so often, "Dear God,
let him see into my soul! If _he_ doesn't free me, no one will."
Instead, you've only plunged me the deeper--pushed me before
you--always deeper into misery--into the arms of that beast--into the
filth. (_Sinks into a chair, sobbing._)

                                Ebeling.

(_Regards her confusedly, then approaches her._) Dear child! That
wasn't my intention! (_Laying his hand on her shoulder caressingly._)
My dear, dear child!

                                Margot.

(_Grasps his hand, and presses her cheek to it. As he tries to free it,
she holds it the more closely._) Oh, don't leave me. I'm so lonely!

                                Ebeling.

My dear, dear child. (_He bends down to her and kisses her on the brow.
She throws her arms about his neck and draws herself close to him. He
kisses her lips. She lets her head fall heavily upon his shoulder and
remains motionless while he caresses her gently. With a sudden impulse
she flings him from her, and sinks back in the chair._) Margot, my
darling. Have I hurt you? Are you offended at what I did? If I've
misunderstood, if I have abused your confidence, I earnestly beg you to
forgive me.

                                Margot.

Oh, I've so hungered--so hungered--for this--kiss!

                Ebeling (_turning eagerly toward her_).

Margot!

                      Margot (_warding him off_).

No! Go away! Go away!

                                Ebeling.

But you don't refuse me? And I'm not too old?

            Margot (_passionately bursting into laughter_).

Oh!

                                Ebeling.

I was never free from the fear that you might not see anything in me
except an image of that wasted, old creature. (_Instead of answering_,
Margot _stretches out her arms to him with a soft cry of longing_.
Ebeling _draws the low stool to the writing-chair on which she is
sitting, sits down upon it, and embraces her._) Margot, my youth, my
whole youth that I've squandered and frittered away comes back to me
once more through you. And now all will be well with you, too. It was
only a nightmare. Your true self had nothing to do with it. Only--you
must take heart again--you must think of yourself now.

                        Margot (_ecstatically_).

Yes, I am equal to anything now. I am not afraid to face the worst.
I can even marry that man. I shall send him my acceptance quite
calmly.--Of course. Why not?

                          Ebeling (_shocked_).

What!

                                Margot.

Why should you be astonished at that? Now that I know you love me? Only
for a year! Perhaps for two! Yes, two! Oh, please, two! Then, later,
when you've left me, let others come! It's all the same, who! For
marriage, of course, I'm entirely spoiled! But I'll be revenged on him!
On him and on Virtue and on Loyalty and on all that stuff with which
they've so long tormented me. And the evening before my wedding--then
may I--come to you again? Toward twilight! It must be on a Sunday. I'll
arrange for that, so we can be alone. Ah, I shall count the days till
then! Why do you look at me like that? (Ebeling _stands up and throws
himself on the sofa, burying his face in his hands. A long pause._)
What can I have done? (_She stands up. Another pause._) Surely I
haven't done you any wrong by loving you?

                                Ebeling.

Go home now, my child.

                                Margot.

I wanted to leave some time ago, but you made me stay. (_She buttons
her coat, throws on her boa, and is about to go out. Then she turns
around resolutely, and places herself before him._) Oh, I know--I'm
disgraced--I'm not worthy of anything better--; but I needn't have had
to endure _such_ scorn and contempt! (Ebeling _rises, looks at her,
groans, buries his face in his hands, and falls back into the chair_.
Margot _kneels beside him, weeping._) Dear--dearest--what is it? What's
wrong, my darling?

             Ebeling (_compelling himself to be composed_).

Stand up! (_She does so._) I am going to tell you. (_Stands up
himself._) I asked your mother's consent to my marrying you to-day.
There, now you know it. Good-bye. (_Sits down in the writing-chair. A
pause._)

                                Margot.

(_Does not move. Her face becomes hard and bitter._) And now that you
see what sort I am----H'm, yes. Ah, well, you'll soon console yourself.
There are so many others. Why should it be just I? Let me suggest one
of my friends--a dear--a pretty girl--with white teeth. Why take it to
heart? It hurts for the moment--but one easily forgets. Such girls as I
deserve nothing better. To them--one does this! (_Plucks the petals
from the roses which are standing before her in the vase._) And then
one throws them away--like this! (_Throws the petals in his face._)

                 Ebeling (_brushing away the petals_).

What have the roses done to you, my child?

                                Margot.

I sent them to you. I, too, may destroy them.

                       Ebeling (_springing up_).

It was you, you who all these years----?

                                Margot.

Good evening, Herr Ebeling. (_She goes out._)

                                Ebeling.

(_Pauses for a moment irresolutely, struggling with himself, then
hurries after her. His voice is heard._) Stay here! Stay here! Come in
here! (_He reappears at the centre door, pulling her by the arm._) Come
in here! Come back!

                                Margot.

What do you want of me? I'll cry for help----

                                Ebeling.

Come here! (_Drags her to the writing-table._)

                                Margot.

Leave me alone!

                                Ebeling.

Be quiet! Be quiet! (_Picks up one of the pictures standing on the
table._) There! That woman dragged my name in the gutter. Will you do
the same? Answer me! (Margot _stands motionless, the tears running down
her cheeks._) Answer, I say.

                     Margot (_slowly and heavily_).

Ah, one thinks and says so much when there's no longer a particle of
hope in one's life.

                                Ebeling.

I understand. (_He throws the picture on the ground; frame and glass
are dashed to pieces._) Let us go to your parents. We'll arrange with
them what's best to be done. (_As she doesn't move._) Well? (Margot
_shakes her head._) You don't want to?

                                Margot.

Not that way! As I am now, humiliated--mortified--disgraced--no, not
that way! I am so tired of playing Magdalen! No! When I come, I'll come
with a free step. I'll be able to look every man in the face! But I
must find out first what I am still worth, and (_looking him full in
the face_) it must be a great, great deal--to be worthy of you.

                           Ebeling (_moved_).

Give me your hands, dear.

                          Margot (_doing so_).

When we see each other again, they'll be red and ugly. (Ebeling _kisses
her hands and presses them to his face._) Good-bye. (_She turns to
go._)


                                Curtain.
﻿                             THE LAST VISIT

                           A PLAY IN ONE ACT




                               CHARACTERS

                  The Unknown Lady.
                  Lieutenant Von Wolters.
                  Mulbridge, a horse-trainer.
                  His Wife.
                  Daisy, their daughter.
                  Kellermann.
                  Tempski, an orderly.
                  A Groom.


                            The Present Day.


            _The scene is laid in a large German garrison_.




                             THE LAST VISIT


                            Frau Mulbridge.

Well, now we have seen our poor, dear captain for the last time.

                               Mulbridge.

Yes. He was a good fellow, our captain and--awfully fond of horses.

                            Frau Mulbridge.

Why, Daisy, what's the matter, dear? You've been standing here all
alone, and yet, until now, you wouldn't stir from the coffin.

                                 Daisy.

I saw him quite well from here, mother, dear.

                      Mulbridge (_caressing her_).

My girlie--my little girl. Yes--we all loved him.

                            Frau Mulbridge.

(_To_ Tempski, _who is sobbing._) There, there, Tempski, hush now. (_A
bell rings, right._) There's the bell; go and open the door. (Tempski
_goes out at the right._)

                      Mulbridge (_to the_ Groom).

And we'll be off to the stables!

                            Frau Mulbridge.

Sh! The Lieutenant!

                      Mulbridge (_to the Groom_).

Go on! (_Pushes the_ Groom _out, left._)

(Lieutenant von Wolters _enters. He is an attractive young officer,
very smart in appearance, wearing the uniform of an Uhlan_. Kellermann,
_a self-possessed, sharp-eyed man, follows him. While they are
entering_, Tempski _comes in at the right, quietly places a wreath on
one of the piles near the columns, and goes out again._)

                              v. Wolters.

Well, Herr-- (_He puts his hand to his eyes, overcome for the moment,
then stiffly, trying to conceal his emotion._) Herr--Kellermann was the
name, wasn't it?

                              Kellermann.

At your service, Lieutenant.

                              v. Wolters.

You have done everything very satisfactorily. I am much obliged to you.
You understand that the removal of the coffin to the church is to be
accomplished as secretly as possible.

                              Kellermann.

I'm silent as the grave, Lieutenant. My business sort of carries that
with it, don't you know.

                              v. Wolters.

It will be dark about half past five. I have ordered the troops that
are to accompany the casket to be here at half past six. At the
church--the catafalque and the rest--I can confidently leave all that
to you?

                              Kellermann.

Most assuredly, Lieutenant. I shall see that everything is of the
finest.

                              v. Wolters.

But remember your instructions: all superfluous ostentation is to be
rigorously avoided--to-morrow at the funeral procession, also.

                              Kellermann.

I understand, Lieutenant--because of the way he met his death.

                              v. Wolters.

The reason does not concern you. (_Turns to go._)

                               Mulbridge.
Beg pardon, Lieutenant, but may I speak to you? I've been in the
captain's service seven years. I've been in Germany nearly eighteen
years--have a German wife and daughter. I'm not as young as I used to
be. What's going to become of the horses and the racing-stable, and--
the rest?

                            Frau Mulbridge.

Yes, it's really too bad about him, Lieutenant. He's so fond of his
horses. Why, if ever you want to speak to him, you have to go and stay
at the stable. That's the only way I can manage to see him.

                               Mulbridge.

And she's a great help to me, too, Lieutenant.

                              v. Wolters.

I can understand your anxiety, Mulbridge. The captain spoke about you
on our last journey together. He especially commended you and your
family to my care. But, of course, everything will depend upon the
heir.

                            Frau Mulbridge.

And who is the heir, Lieutenant?

                              v. Wolters.

No one knows. He had no relatives. But be assured that whoever it is, I
will do my best to----

                               Mulbridge.

Thank you, Lieutenant! Thank you! (_He says a few words aside to his
wife and goes out, left._)

                              v. Wolters.

Have you anything else to do here, Herr Kellermann?

                              Kellermann.

Yes, indeed, a great many things, Lieutenant. (_Goes out at the centre,
carrying several wreaths, and then returns for more_. Frau Mulbridge
_helps him._)

                              v. Wolters.

Oh, by the way, may I have a word with you, Daisy? (Daisy _comes
forward_, v. Wolters _continues aside to her._) My dear child, I know
that the captain had a great deal of confidence in you.

                                 Daisy.

Yes, he had.

                              v. Wolters.

Well then, listen. Some one wishes to come here before the casket is
removed some one who must not be seen.

                                 Daisy.

Very well. She may.

                         v. Wolters (_amazed_).

What----? She----?

                                 Daisy.

Why, it must be the lady.

                              v. Wolters.

What lady?

                                 Daisy.

The lady for whom he let himself be shot.

                              v. Wolters.

What! You know----?

                                 Daisy.

She had to come, of course. Who else should it be?

                              v. Wolters.

H'm! Well then, listen carefully. If the undertaker--or any other
stranger--should still be here when it begins to grow dark, throw on a
wrap and wait at the door downstairs until a carriage stops. Will you?

                                 Daisy.

Certainly I will. And Tempski?

                              v. Wolters.

Yes, Tempski, faithful as he is----

                                 Daisy.

Tempski was never around in those days.

             v. Wolters (_looking at her in astonishment_).

Oh--so Tempski--was never--around--in those days! H'm! Well then, I'll
undertake to get rid of Tempski myself. Thank you, my child. (_Gives
her his hand, then aloud._) I have another errand, but I'll be back
soon. (_Goes out at the right._)

                            Frau Mulbridge.

What did the lieutenant want of you?

                                 Daisy.

Nothing in particular--something about the wreaths.

                Kellermann (_coming in from the back_).

Yes, with all those wreaths, we'll have to have an extra carriage for
the flowers. He was a fine man, he was--a highly respected man! And on
horseback! Why, I've won every time I bet on him! Ah, yes, but sooner
or later they all have to come to me!

                            Frau Mulbridge.

And he was such a kind master! He was just like a child sometimes--so
light-hearted and happy--like a little boy! Lately, to be sure,
he-- (_The bell rings._) Well, Daisy!

                                 Daisy.

(_Who has stood without moving, lost in thought._) I guess Tempski will
go.

                            Frau Mulbridge.

Yes, yes, you're right. Tempski is outside.

                Tempski (_brings in a wreath, sobbing_).

F-from--our--major.

                            Frau Mulbridge.

Why, Tempski, it's perfectly natural that the major----

                                Tempski.

From--our--major.

                            Frau Mulbridge.

Take the wreath from him, Daisy.

                                 Daisy.

Yes, mother, dear. (_She does so_. Tempski _goes out, crying._)

                Kellermann (_reaching for the wreath_).

From his major that must go on the coffin!

                                 Daisy.

I'll do it.

                        Kellermann (_in doubt_).

Don't you think----?

                            Frau Mulbridge.

Yes, let her; she looks after everything.

                              Kellermann.

But nail it tightly, little lady--else it'll fall off when they're
carrying him to the church.

                                 Daisy.

Yes, yes. (_Goes out back with the wreath. During the following
conversation, the strokes of a hammer are heard._)

                            Frau Mulbridge.

Everything is so well arranged here. I don't see why they've got to
take him to the church.

                              Kellermann.

The official statement is that it will prevent any demonstration in the
street. You know, the town folks haven't taken very kindly to this
murdering business of late. But, of course, that's not the real reason.
The truth of the matter is that several very influential ladies would
like to attend the funeral without being seen. H'm!--love never dies,
they say. Ah, the captain was no saint, I can tell you!

                            Frau Mulbridge.

What do you know about it?

                              Kellermann.

Oh, well, there's a lot of talk about the veiled figures that used to
go in and out of here at twilight. And if these mirrors could speak--!
That reminds me--I'd almost forgotten--we must cover the mirrors.
(Daisy _appears in front of the curtain. She is staring into space._)

                            Frau Mulbridge.

But since the casket is to be taken away in less than an hour--what's
the use?

                              Kellermann.

That doesn't make any difference. The mirrors have got to be draped. It
would be a blemish on my art--and I wouldn't answer for it.

                            Frau Mulbridge.

Daisy!

                                 Daisy.

Yes, mother, dear.

                            Frau Mulbridge.

Go get a pair of lace curtains to hang over the mirrors.

                                 Daisy.

Yes, mother, dear. (_She does not stir._)

                            Frau Mulbridge.

Daisy! You're not listening.

                                 Daisy.

Yes I am, mother, dear. You asked me to-- (_Falters._)

                            Frau Mulbridge.

I asked you to fetch a pair of lace curtains.

                                 Daisy.

Yes, mother, dear. (_Goes out, left._)

                            Frau Mulbridge.

Now that the child isn't here--tell me, Herr Kellermann, do you know
anything about the cause of the duel? We're all groping in the dark
here at the house.

                              Kellermann.

Well, they're saying all sorts of things. But the dead are my friends.
I never say anything against them. It's a business principle with me.

                            Frau Mulbridge.

Yes--but the man who shot him, is he still walking around free as air?

                              Kellermann.

Yes, that's the way with these fine folks. They fall upon one another
like highwaymen. Your honour or your life! The man who survives can
laugh. The man who falls--well, he falls into my arms. But, see here,
getting into a duel with that fellow, that Baron Renoir--why it was
nothing short of suicide! I tell you, where that man goes, no grass
grows! On the turf, at the card-table, with the women--always the same
story. That man shot him down like a rabbit. Oh, of course, it's
always a fine thing to lay down your life for a woman. That's a phrase
that----

                            Frau Mulbridge.

Do you really think that a woman----?

                              Kellermann.

Sh! Here comes your little girl. (Daisy _enters with two vases, which
she is carrying very carefully._)

                            Frau Mulbridge.

What's that you're bringing?

                                 Daisy.

I stopped and filled them first.

                            Frau Mulbridge.

But you were to get a pair of lace curtains!

                                 Daisy.

Oh, forgive me, mother, dear. I thought you said vases. I'll go (_Exit
with the vases._)

                            Frau Mulbridge.

I don't know what's come over the child! Why, she's been such a help
these days--thought of everything, wanted to do everything herself.

                              Kellermann.

A nice little girl--how old is she?

                            Frau Mulbridge.

Seventeen, her last birthday.

                              Kellermann.

Is she at school?

                            Frau Mulbridge.

She's been going to the Art Institute. She wants to teach drawing.

                              Kellermann.

I suppose the captain thought a lot of her?

                            Frau Mulbridge.

Oh, dear me, yes. She was always around him from the time that she was
a mere child. They used to play together out in the yard like two
little kittens! Of course, when she grew older, that sort of thing
stopped. But lately, when he seemed so worried, I----

                              Kellermann.

So he seemed worried, did he?

                            Frau Mulbridge.

Yes, indeed. I've had my suspicions for the last two months. Well, when
he seemed so worried, I used to manage to send her in to him pretty
often. She read aloud to him--and so on. (Daisy _enters with a couple
of curtains, and a dark coat on her arm._)

                              Kellermann.

Thanks, thanks, little lady. (_Takes the curtains from her and stands
on a chair under one of the mirrors._) What lovely Venetian lace! Ah,
yes, every mirror comes to this sooner or later!

                                 Daisy.

I'd like to get a breath of fresh air, would you mind, mother, dear? I
feel so----

                            Frau Mulbridge.

Yes, yes, dear. Go out for a little while. (Daisy _puts on her coat._)

              Kellermann (_in front of the other mirror_).

Why, here's a little bunch of flowers!

                           Daisy (_eagerly_).

Oh, please, please, let me have it.

                  Kellermann (_blowing off the dust_).

If it doesn't fall to pieces. (_Hands it to her._) Ah, yes, many, many
loved him! He had a beautiful life, he had a beautiful death, and, as
for a beautiful funeral--just leave that to Kellermann! (_Takes his
hat._) I'll be back again for the procession. Good evening, ladies.

                            Frau Mulbridge.

Good evening. (_To_ Daisy, _seeing her take off her coat._) I thought
you said you were going out?

                                 Daisy.

Oh, well, I've changed my mind now.

                            Frau Mulbridge.

I'm glad, because one feels so--so alone in here.

                   Daisy (_with a glance backward_).

But we are not alone yet.

                Frau Mulbridge (_shuddering slightly_).

That's just it.

                 Daisy (_staring straight before her_).

I'm not afraid.

                            Frau Mulbridge.

Tell me something, Daisy, dear. Weren't you in there last night?

                           Daisy (_alarmed_).

Last night? I?

                            Frau Mulbridge.

Yes, at the coffin.

                                 Daisy.

What should I be doing at the coffin?

                            Frau Mulbridge.

Well, I thought I heard some one go past the door.

                                 Daisy.

You must have been dreaming, mother, dear.

                            Frau Mulbridge.

Very likely. I haven't been sleeping well these nights. See here,
Daisy, perhaps he's left us something--you, at least--tell me, haven't
you been thinking about that sometimes?

              Daisy (_apart, with a glance at the clock_).

If she doesn't come soon----!

                            Frau Mulbridge.

What's that you were saying? (_The bell rings_. Daisy _starts._) Why,
what's the matter with you? (v. Wolters _enters._)

                        v. Wolters (_calling_).

Tempski!

          Tempski (_at the threshold, in military attitude_).

Here, Lieutenant!

                              v. Wolters.

Hurry over to the garrison church and see if everything is ready.

                            Frau Mulbridge.

Why, Kellermann will see----

                              v. Wolters.

And then go--or no--stay there until the casket arrives. Do you
understand?

                                Tempski.

At your command, Lieutenant. (_He goes out._)

                              v. Wolters.

That's attended to. And now, my dear Frau Mulbridge, there's something
that I want to confide to you. A visitor is coming here presently--a
lady. (Frau Mulbridge _glances anxiously at_ Daisy, _who nods._) She is
not to be seen by any one--except Daisy. Daisy, it appears, used to
open the door for her sometimes in former days.

                            Frau Mulbridge.

Daisy--? What does this mean?

                                 Daisy.

Oh, Tempski might have gossiped, you know.

                            Frau Mulbridge.

And so he let _you_ open the door?

                                 Daisy.

I never gossip, mother.

                            Frau Mulbridge.

I'm finding things out now! Why did I never hear of this before?

                                 Daisy.

Oh, you were always in the stables with father in the evening.

                            Frau Mulbridge.

And there I was trying to keep this child from any knowledge of the
things that went on in here--and he----

                              v. Wolters.

We've no time for that now, Frau Mulbridge. Daisy, you will watch
outside, won't you?

                     Frau Mulbridge (_protesting_).

Oh, that's too----

                           Daisy (_firmly_).

Yes, I'll watch. (_The bell rings softly._) Should I----? (v. Wolters
_nods._)

                  Frau Mulbridge (_calling her back_).

Daisy! (Daisy _goes out without noticing her mother._)

                              v. Wolters.

May I ask, Frau Mulbridge, that you----

                            Frau Mulbridge.

Very well. We have served him faithfully, and I'll not start making any
trouble now at the end. (_Exit, left_. v. Wolters _goes to the door at
the right, listens, and then opens it cautiously_. The Unknown Lady
_enters. She is heavily veiled, dressed entirely in black, and carries
a spray of white roses. As she enters, she staggers slightly and leans
against the writing-table for support._)

             v. Wolters (_who has softly locked the door_).

May I show you the way, Countess? (The Lady _shakes her head and
motions questioningly toward the back_. v. Wolters _nods, and she goes
out through the curtained doorway. After a short pause_, v. Wolters
_opens the door at the right._)

                        v. Wolters (_calling_).

Daisy! (Daisy _appears at the threshold._) Kindly see that no one
enters the house while this lady is here--no one, do you understand?

                                 Daisy.

Oh, yes, I understand very well.

                              v. Wolters.

It may be that she has something else to say to me. If the men should
come for the casket before she has left, take them around the other
way. Keep the main entrance clear.

                                 Daisy.

No, that wouldn't be safe.

                              v. Wolters.

Well, what shall we do?

                      Daisy (_breathing heavily_).

I'll--think of something.

                              v. Wolters.

His death grieves you, too, dear child?

                                 Daisy.

Me? Oh, yes--me too. (_She goes out_. v. Wolters _walks to and fro,
pauses to listen in front of the curtain, turns on the electric lamp,
again walks to and fro, etc. At a slight movement of the curtain, he
stops, expectant_. The Lady, _still veiled, comes forward slowly until
she has reached one of the chairs on the left. A pause._)

                               The Lady.

Ah, Herr von Wolters--to let them close the coffin before I--I had seen
him--I must confess, I had not expected that of you, Herr von Wolters.

                              v. Wolters.

I didn't dare prevent it, Countess--just because of your coming. It was
the only way to have the house to ourselves.

                               The Lady.

Don't call me countess, Herr von Wolters. I am not a countess here.
(_Glancing toward the door._) I am only an unhappy woman whom no one in
this house knows, whom no one is to know.

                              v. Wolters.

Wouldn't you care to rest for a moment?

                               The Lady.

Are we quite safe here?

                              v. Wolters.

Quite. The little girl who, you say, is not unknown to you, is outside
at the entrance. I have told her mother of your visit and she will not
enter the house. If you wish, however, we can lock the door.

                               The Lady.

Yes, do. Or, no, perhaps it would be better not to--in case any one----

                              v. Wolters.

Very well.

                               The Lady.

(_Throws back her veil, revealing a very beautiful face, which is
deathly pale and wears an expression of the deepest affliction. She
sinks into the chair. A pause._) I wanted to lay my roses on his
breast. Ah, Herr von Wolters, I loved that man with an infinite love.
Perhaps grief will give my life a new and holier meaning--who knows? We
seek beauty--and find grief. Tell me, Herr von Wolters, you were his
best friend, did you never suspect----?

                              v. Wolters.

Never, never.

                               The Lady.

And when you received my letter early this morning asking you to come
at once--not even then?

                              v. Wolters.

I could draw--various conclusions--from that.

                               The Lady.

For instance----?

                              v. Wolters.

Oh, please--really, you must excuse me----

                               The Lady.

No, Herr von Wolters. We are here--but why don't you sit down? (_He
does so._) We are here together, you and I, to hold the last rites over
our sainted dead. His friend and his beloved who else has any right to
be here? Herr von Wolters, I have given you my full confidence--I have
made a strange confession to you. You will not betray me?

                              v. Wolters.

Ah!

                               The Lady.

And so, in this sacred hour, there must be no concealment between us.
Answer me now. What does the world say?

                      v. Wolters (_embarrassed_).

The world says so many things, Countess.

                               The Lady.

Tell me, to what extent has my name been associated with this affair?

                              v. Wolters.

I can't conceal the fact from you, Countess. Your name is mentioned.

                       The Lady (_thoughtfully_).

Yes, that's what my husband says.

                              v. Wolters.

But please let me add that not a shadow, not the slightest suspicion,
has ever----

                               The Lady.

But what else can they think?

                              v. Wolters.

My dear Countess, when a woman is as beauti-- I mean, that when a woman
is the centre of so much interest, it's not surprising that some notice
was taken of the attentions which he--

                   The Lady (_somewhat impatiently_).

Yes--but----?

                              v. Wolters.

It naturally was observed that my friend----

                               The Lady.

Our friend had a--what shall I say--a susceptible heart. We knew that,
who knew him so well. This was not the first time he had--been
interested in a woman. And that was why I arranged to have him seen in
our house as little as possible--lately, not at all.

                              v. Wolters.

That fact did not escape notice, Countess. And as Baron Renoir was
frequently seen with you--instead of----

                     The Lady (_somewhat excited_).

Don't mention that name, Herr von Wolters! I can't stand it! What could
have possessed that man Renoir--? But do tell me the rest. I've heard
only the merest details. They've only told me what they thought
necessary.

                              v. Wolters.

No one knows what actually occurred between the two men. He begged me
to ask no questions. You know, he was so reserved of late. It may
be that certain expressions which passed between them a few days
ago--after they had been drinking--had something to do with it--no one
knows. Perhaps there was some insult which was given in private--and
which neither of them would make public. The assurance that the injury,
whatever it may have been, was irreparable, must satisfy us.

                               The Lady.

Oh, how I hate that man Renoir!--quite apart from the trouble which he
has gotten me into! My husband warned me against him long ago. "That
scoundrel will compromise you some day," he said, "and then I'll have
to fight a duel with him." Instead--this! Oh, you poor, poor darling!
And now, when all was so quiet and peaceful between us!

                              v. Wolters.

My dear Countess, if you think that the change which came over him in
the last few months betokened peace and quiet----

                        The Lady (_nervously_).

I don't know anything about that! It wasn't my fault! Was I to blame if
he insisted on having notions? Tell me one thing, Herr von Wolters, did
he die easily?

                              v. Wolters.

No one dies easily, Countess.

                               The Lady.

Was he still living when they reached the house?

                              v. Wolters.

No, he died on the field.

                               The Lady.

Do you know my first name, Herr von Wolters?

                              v. Wolters.

Certainly.

                        The Lady (_hesitating_).

Did he--by any chance--speak--that name?

                              v. Wolters.

That would have betrayed his secret, Countess.

                               The Lady.

I only meant--at the very last--when he was no longer--conscious.

                              v. Wolters.

No, Countess. But--pardon me, I don't want to be indelicate--but did he
ever call you by some little--little term of endearment--some--
(_Stops, embarrassed._)

                               The Lady.

Why do you ask?

                              v. Wolters.

At the very end, he kept murmuring something that sounded like
"Girlie"--or----

                       The Lady (_indignantly_).

My dear Herr von Wolters, our intimacy was of a different sort.

                              v. Wolters.

Pardon me, Countess, but you yourself asked. (_She nods. A short
pause._)

                               The Lady.

Good heavens--these curtains over the mirrors! They make me feel as if
I were looking a blind man in the eyes!

                              v. Wolters.

Would you like to have me remove them?

                               The Lady.

No, no. Never mind. I want to ask you something, Herr von Wolters. Tell
me, what do you think of me?

                        v. Wolters (_confused_).

What do you mean, Countess?

                               The Lady.

I want to know what I have done that I should be doomed to bring so
much sorrow into the lives of others. I had only just left school when
a strange young man shot himself under my window. It was on my account
that my husband was transferred here from his former garrison. Tell me,
what mark of Cain do I bear that all men follow me? I dress as simply
as I can. I never go out without a double veil. Sometimes I have
actually been tempted to throw vitriol in my face!

                        v. Wolters (_candidly_).

Oh, that would have been a shame, Countess!

                         The Lady (_severely_).

Herr von Wolters!

                              v. Wolters.

Yes, Countess, to mar that image of divinity would be a sin--and I do
not hesitate to repeat it beside the coffin of my friend.

                               The Lady.

Don't! (_Reaches him her hand, which he kisses respectfully._) Dear me,
how strange it seems! Yesterday we scarcely knew one another--those few
visits at my house don't count. To-day--this short conversation--and
here we are, sitting side by side, the guardians of a secret which will
be buried forever with him. It will, Herr von Wolters?

                              v. Wolters.

Ah, my dear Countess, please do not offend me.

                               The Lady.

Very well, I shall not worry. Did you love him very dearly?

                              v. Wolters.

I thought a great deal of him, Countess. He took care of me when I was
a young fellow quite alone in the world. He was so-- Really, I don't
know how I shall-- (_breaking down._)

                               The Lady.

Courage, dear friend! We must both try to be brave.

                         v. Wolters (_firmly_).

Thank you, Countess. You will not have to reprove me again.

                               The Lady.

You evaded my question before. Do you consider me very guilty, Herr von
Wolters?

                              v. Wolters.

He loved you, Countess. That makes you holy in my eyes.

                               The Lady.

I thank you for that word--little as I deserve it. It has never been my
way to undervalue myself. But your opinion meant so much to me----

                        v. Wolters (_puzzled_).

What difference could my humble opinion----

                               The Lady.

Don't say that, my dear friend. There are few people--perhaps not even
my own husband--who have ever seen me as you see me at this moment--so
weak, so helpless, so--I had almost said--unguarded. Remember that--and
spare me.

                              v. Wolters.

I hope that I have not been inconsiderate, Countess.

                               The Lady.

(_Putting her hand to her brow, stammering._) No, no, no; it's--it's
grieving for him that makes me lose my wits. The world had so long set
me on a pedestal that I thought I belonged there. Now I feel as if I
were torn down. Now I lie there-- Herr von Wolters, pay no attention to
me!

                              v. Wolters.

If I could only help you, Countess!

                   The Lady (_smiling sorrowfully_).

Help me--you? And yet, why not? His friend and his beloved! It is we,
you and I, who are paying the last honours to the dead. Who could know
his worth better than we? Whose grief could be more eloquent than ours?
No, no, no--I must not talk. Ah, I see him before me now with his
bright, careless smile--his conqueror's smile! I suppose you never were
courted by women as he was?

                              v. Wolters.

My dear Countess, I lead a fairly quiet, uneventful life.

                               The Lady.

But you're not--you're not a Puritan, are you?

                              v. Wolters.

I must let others judge of that, Countess.

                               The Lady.

Oh! I should like to cry out my sorrow to the whole world--say to them
all, "You sordid souls, you couldn't know how much I loved him! What do
I care if you damn me, if you----" (_The bell rings. She starts._)
There's the bell!

                      v. Wolters (_reassuringly_).

Probably just a wreath.

                               The Lady.

And if it's not--a----?

                              v. Wolters.

Why, Daisy is outside. But to make sure-- (_Listens at the door, then
opens it cautiously._) Daisy! (The Lady _drops her veil_. Daisy
_appears at the threshold._)

                                 Daisy.

What is it, Herr von Wolters?

                              v. Wolters.

Who rang?

                                 Daisy.

It was a wreath.

                      v. Wolters (_to_ The Lady).

Just as I supposed.

                               The Lady (_to_ Daisy).

Come here, dear. (Daisy _comes forward._) You used to open the door for
me, didn't you?

                                 Daisy.

Yes.

                               The Lady.

But you don't know who I am?

                                 Daisy.

No.

                               The Lady.

You'll not try to find out?

                                 Daisy.

Oh, no.

                               The Lady.

Was he fond of you?

                                 Daisy.

Oh, yes.

                               The Lady.

And have you been crying since he died?

                                 Daisy.

No.

                               The Lady.

You're a pretty little girl.

                            Daisy (_going_).

Has my lady any more questions?

                               The Lady.

(_Taking out a gold purse, to_ v. Wolters.) Do you think one might give
her anything? (v. Wolters _shakes his head._) Thank you, dear. We shall
see each other again. (_As_ Daisy _lingers._) What is it?

                                 Daisy.

Very well--since I shall see my lady again. (_Goes out._)

                               The Lady.

It did seem though, as if she were waiting for something.

                              v. Wolters.

If you will pardon me for the suggestion, it was surely not--not for
money.

                               The Lady.

By the way, this incident reminds me of something I was just about
to-- Herr von Wolters, are you my friend?

                              v. Wolters.

If you consider me worthy of that distinction, Countess.

                               The Lady.

Most assuredly. Well, Herr von Wolters, there is something that
troubles me--something that desecrates my grief, if I may use the
word. There's the anxiety--the fear that-- Yes, yes--I must tell you
all. Herr von Wolters, he has my letters. Do you understand? (_He
nods._) Didn't he give you something for me--a small, sealed package,
perhaps--nothing?

                              v. Wolters.

You are forgetting, Countess, that I was ignorant of all this until a
short time ago.

                               The Lady.

Yes, that's true. H'm--it's really too bad. Who has the keys?

                              v. Wolters.

Why, he gave them to me just before the duel. I have them with me.

                               The Lady.

You've looked through the writing-table?

                              v. Wolters.

Yes, I had to hand over his papers to the legal authorities. I didn't
consider myself entitled to touch his private correspondence at
present.

                               The Lady.

Why not?

                              v. Wolters.

He made a will the day before the duel.

                               The Lady.

Really? In whose favor?

                              v. Wolters.

I don't know.

                               The Lady.

What! Didn't he make any allusion--nothing----?

                              v. Wolters.

The only thing he said was that he had named me as executor.

                               The Lady.

But he had no relatives. Who is to inherit his large fortune?

                              v. Wolters.

As I've said, I don't know. However, he made a remark that I didn't
quite understand, and that I--pardon me--would rather not repeat, if
you don't mind.

                               The Lady.

Oh, please!

                              v. Wolters.

It might give you pain, Countess.

                          The Lady (_sadly_).

Nothing can give me pain after _this_.

                              v. Wolters.

Well, he said with a decided emphasis--though perhaps he did not intend
that I should notice it--he said, "The one who loved me best shall be
my heir."

                               The Lady.

What! He said that? Who could have loved him best if not I?
(_Terrified._) For God's sake, Herr von Wolters!

                              v. Wolters.

Don't be alarmed, Countess. That would be too grotesque.

                               The Lady.

Perhaps this is his revenge.

                              v. Wolters.

Revenge? On you? What for?

                               The Lady.

No, no--I'm quite out of my senses, I-- But, as you have the keys, you
won't mind doing me this slight favour.

                              v. Wolters.

What favour, Countess?

                               The Lady.

Search for the letters with me--now. It seems to me your duty, not only
as a friend but as a gentleman.

                              v. Wolters.

Pardon me, my dear Countess, you were certainly his last--perhaps his
only great love. But his life was varied--and if we were to open his
desk now--I really don't know what we might find there.

                               The Lady.

You mean there would be letters from other----?

                              v. Wolters.

I must say no more.

                               The Lady.

Well, I'll shut my eyes. I'll only look for my own handwriting.

                              v. Wolters.

The will is to be opened in a few days, Countess. He has doubtless
inserted a clause authorising me as executor to return certain papers
to their owners--or destroy them.

                               The Lady.

Ah, I see you're a Puritan, after all.--No, no, I'll not trouble your
conscience. This loyalty which you bear him to the very grave is
so beautiful, so poetical, and I feel so near to you because of
it--(_Putting her hand over her eyes._) Oh, those curtains in front of
the mirrors! They make me feel as if I were dead myself, (v. Wolters
_is about to tear them down._) No, no--don't. Thanks. Tell me, how long
will it be before the will is opened?

                              v. Wolters.

Unfortunately, the day is not yet appointed.

                               The Lady.

I shall not sleep a moment until then. Not even my love, my grief, can
outweigh this terrible fear. My honour, my future, my life--everything
is at stake!

                         v. Wolters (_amazed_).

Countess!

                               The Lady.

Please stop calling me Countess.

                              v. Wolters.

Forgive me. What should I----?

                               The Lady.

Call me your friend. I want to be that. From this day you become closer
to me than any other being in all the world. Are you not the legacy, as
it were, that our dear dead has left me?--Ah, you and I must become
like brother and sister, two beings who have--nothing--to conceal from
one another. Herr von Wolters, will you be my guide, my confidant--my
friend?

                              v. Wolters.

Countess! My dear, dear Countess!

                          The Lady (_softly_).

But you're not to----

                              v. Wolters.

Forgive me. Your kindness to me makes me feel so--confused--I----

                               The Lady.

Why should it? I feel certain that if he could see us at this moment,
he himself would join our hands together.

                              v. Wolters.

Countess, if you ever need a man who would let himself be torn to
pieces for you----

                               The Lady.

No, not that. I only want you to take this great weight from my soul.

                              v. Wolters.

Ah, Countess, I am a man of my word.

                               The Lady.

And that's what you call being torn to pieces for me?

                       v. Wolters (_trembling_).

Whether I can answer for this to him and to my own conscience--whether
I can ever again think of him--without shame--will depend upon what we
shall find in there.

                               The Lady.

But you will open it? (_A pause._) Herr von Wolters, you'll not let me
die of fear and distraction?

                              v. Wolters.

I'll open it.

                The Lady (_laying her hand on his arm_).

Thanks, thanks! Ah, you are good----

                   v. Wolters (_taking out the key_).

Don't thank me. I feel as if he could hear it in there.

                 The Lady (_shuddering involuntarily_).

No--no! (v. Wolters _turns the key in the keyhole unavailingly._) Won't
it work?--Heavens, why your hand is trembling. Let me have it.

           v. Wolters (_with a last attempt at resistance_).

The keys were entrusted to _me_, Countess.

                        The Lady (_coaxingly_).

Oh, do let me have it. (_Sits at the writing-table and opens the
drawer. With a low cry of surprise._) Empty!

                    v. Wolters (_bending over her_).

Empty?

                               The Lady.

Are you sure that this was----?

                              v. Wolters.

Yes, that was the drawer in which he kept his private papers. I'm sure
of it.

                  The Lady (_staring straight ahead_).

Well, how can you explain----?

                              v. Wolters.

Perhaps he burned everything.

                  The Lady (_springing to her feet_).

And perhaps not!--Who knows?--This is the way he played with the honour
of the woman who gave him all! This is my thanks! This is the action of
a gentleman!

                              v. Wolters.

No gentleman, Countess, can do more than let himself be shot for a
woman.

                               The Lady.

Who asked him to do it? Was it my fault if jealousy of Renoir drove him
mad? And perhaps this is really his revenge! Perhaps we'll live to see
even more interesting disclosures!--This is my reward! This-- (Daisy
_appears at the door in the centre._) What do you want?

                                 Daisy.

I beg your pardon. My lady is looking for--letters?

                               The Lady.

So you've been in there eavesdropping, have you?

                                 Daisy.

I brought in a wreath.

                               The Lady.

Well, what do you know about my letters?

                                 Daisy.

Here they are. (_Takes a small package of letters from her dress and
hands it to_ The Lady.) I intended to give them to you _secretly_ when
you left.

                               The Lady.

(_Snatches the letters from her hand and looks at them._) How do you
happen to have these letters?

                         Daisy (_wonderingly_).

Why, how should I happen to have them? He gave them to me.

                               The Lady.

To you? Who are you? Why to you?

                                 Daisy.

Because he knew that I would do exactly what he told me to do.

                      The Lady (_to_ v. Wolters).

Can you understand this?

                         v. Wolters (_gently_).

What did he tell you to do, Daisy?

                                 Daisy.

He said to me, "These letters belong to the lady who used to come to
see me sometimes. No one is to know about her--not even Herr von
Wolters.--When I am dead, the lady will----

                              v. Wolters.

Did he say that?

                                 Daisy.

Yes. "When I am dead, the lady will probably come here again. If she
does, give her these letters. If she doesn't, then burn them with the
others."

                              v. Wolters.

What others?

                                 Daisy.

Those over there in the stove.

                  The Lady (_examining the letters_).

Look at this! Unsealed! Unwrapped!

                           Daisy (_smiling_).

He knew that I wouldn't read them.

                               The Lady.

I suppose from now on I shall be at _your_ mercy!

                                 Daisy.

I don't know you, my lady. And even if I did, you need have no fear.

                      The Lady (_to_ v. Wolters).

Isn't she kind!

                     Daisy (_always respectfully_).

But I should like to ask you a favour, my lady.

                               The Lady.

By all means. What could I deny you, my dear?

                                 Daisy.

(_Goes into the room behind and returns with the flowers that_ The Lady
_had brought._) Oh please, please take these roses--away--with you.

                               The Lady.

What does this mean?

                         Daisy (_imploringly_).

Oh, please take them!

                               The Lady.

What right have you to make such a shameless request of me?

                                 Daisy.

I heard--forgive me, I didn't want to--I heard the way you spoke about
him before. And it seems to me that your flowers no longer belong upon
his coffin.

                               The Lady.

What do you say to that, Herr von Wolters? This person acts as if she
were the mistress of the house!

                           Daisy (_proudly_).

I am.

                               The Lady.

(_Stares at her through her lorgnette and smiles._) Oh, really!

                 Daisy (_her bearing pure and proud_).

The night before he died I became--his wife. (_A long pause._)

                               The Lady.

I hope you'll come and take tea with me in the near future, Herr von
Wolters.

                              v. Wolters.

Pray, excuse me, but official duties will make it impossible for me
to----

                               The Lady.

(_Taken aback, but quickly recovering herself._) Thank you just the
same. (_A loud ring._)

                Daisy (_starts and looks at the clock_).

There are the troops already.--Would you be so kind, Herr von
Wolters--? Please let no one come in here. (v. Wolters _bows and
hurries out at the right._) May I take you out the back way, my lady?
No one will see you--or at least, only my mother. (_As the heavy steps
of the soldiers are heard, to herself, in suppressed agony._) And
meanwhile--they will--take the coffin--away! (_Regaining possession of
herself._) But wouldn't it be better to drop your veil? (The Lady _does
so._) And your roses--do take them! (The Lady _snatches the roses from
her hand._) This way, please. (_She opens the door at the left and goes
out slowly behind_ The Lady, _her eyes turned longingly toward the room
behind._)


                                Curtain.
﻿                         THE FAR-AWAY PRINCESS

                          A COMEDY IN ONE ACT




                               CHARACTERS


      The Princess von Geldern.
      Baroness von Brook, her maid of honour.
      Frau von Halldorf.
      Liddy      \
                  > her daughters
      Milly      /
      Fritz Strübel, a student.
      Frau Lindemann.
      Rosa, a waitress.
      A Lackey.


                            The Present Day.


_The scene is laid at an inn situated above a watering-place in central
Germany._





                         THE FAR-AWAY PRINCESS


_The veranda of an inn. The right side of the stage and half of the
background represent a framework of glass enclosing the veranda. The
left side and the other half of the background represent the stone
walls of the house. To the left, in the foreground, a door; another
door in the background, at the left. On the left, back, a buffet and
serving-table. Neat little tables and small iron chairs for visitors
are placed about the veranda. On the right, in the centre, a large
telescope, standing on a tripod, is directed through an open window_.
Rosa, _dressed in the costume of the country, is arranging flowers on
the small tables_. Frau Lindemann, _a handsome, stoutish woman in the
thirties, hurries in excitedly from the left_.


                            Frau Lindemann.

There! Now she can come--curtains, bedding--everything fresh and clean
as new! No, this honour, this unexpected honour--! Barons and counts
have been here often enough. Even the Russian princes sometimes come
up from the Springs. I don't bother my head about them--they're just
like--that!--But a princess--a real princess!

                                 Rosa.

Perhaps it isn't a real princess after all.

                    Frau Lindemann (_indignantly_).

What? What do you mean by that!

                                 Rosa.

I was only thinking that a real princess wouldn't be coming to an inn
like this. Real princesses won't lie on anything but silks and velvets.
You just wait and see; it's a trick!

                            Frau Lindemann.

Are you going to pretend that the letter isn't genuine;--that the
letter is a forgery?

                                 Rosa.

Maybe one of the regular customers is playing a joke. That student,
Herr Strübel, he's always joking. (_Giggles._)

                            Frau Lindemann.

When Herr Strübel makes a joke, he makes a decent joke, a real, genuine
joke. Oh, of course one has to pretend to be angry sometimes--but as
for writing a forged letter--My land!--a letter with a gold crown on
it--there! (_She takes a letter from her waist, and reads._) "This
afternoon, Her Highness, the Princess von Geldern, will stop at the
Fairview Inn, to rest an hour or so before making the descent to the
Springs. You are requested to have ready a quiet and comfortable room,
to guard Her Highness from any annoying advances, and, above all, to
maintain the strictest secrecy regarding this event, as otherwise the
royal visit will not be repeated. Baroness von Brook, maid of honour to
Her Highness." Now, what have you got to say?

                                 Rosa.

Herr Strübel lent me a book once. A maid of honour came into that, too.
I'm sure it's a trick!

            Frau Lindemann (_looking out toward the back_).

Dear, dear, isn't that Herr Strübel now, coming up the hill? To-day of
all days! What on earth does he always want up here?

                          Rosa (_pointedly_).

He's in such favour at the Inn.--He won't be leaving here all day.

                            Frau Lindemann.

That won't do at all. He's got to be sent off. If I only knew how I
could--Oh, ho! I'll be disagreeable to him--that's the only way to
manage it!

(Strübel _enters. He is a handsome young fellow without much polish,
but cheerful, unaffected, entirely at his ease, and invariably
good-natured._)

                                Strübel.

Good day, everybody.

                   Frau Lindemann (_sarcastically_).

Charming day.

                 Strübel (_surprised at her coolness_).

I say! What's up? Who's been rubbing you the wrong way? May I have a
glass of beer any way? Glass of beer, if you please!--Several glasses
of beer, if you please.--(_Sits down._) Pestiferously hot this
afternoon.

                   Frau Lindemann (_after a pause_).

H'm, H'm!

                                Strübel.

Landlady Linda, dear, why so quiet to-day?

                            Frau Lindemann.

In the first place, Herr Strübel, I would have you know that my name is
Frau Lindemann.

                                Strübel.

Just so.

                            Frau Lindemann.

And secondly, if you don't stop your familiarity----

                                Strübel.

(_Singing, as_ Rosa _brings him a glass of beer._)
"Beer--beer!"--Heavens and earth, how hot it is! (_Drinks._)

                            Frau Lindemann.

If you find it so hot, why don't you stay quietly down there at the
Springs?

                                Strübel.

Ah, my soul thirsts for the heights--my soul thirsts for the heights
every afternoon. Just as soon as ever my sallow-faced pupil has thrown
himself down on the couch to give his red corpuscles a chance to grow,
"I gayly grasp my Alpine staff and mount to my beloved."

                     Frau Lindemann (_scornfully_).

Bah!

                                Strübel.

Oh, you're thinking that _you_ are my beloved? No, dearest: my beloved
stays down there. But to get nearer to her, I have to come up here--up
to your telescope. With the aid of your telescope I can look right into
her window--see?

                           Rosa (_laughing_).

Oh, so that's why----

                            Frau Lindemann.

Perhaps you think I'm interested in all that?--Besides, I've no more
time for you.--Moreover, I'm going to have this place cleaned right
away. Good-bye, Herr Strübel. (_Goes out._)

                         Strübel (_laughing_).

I certainly caught it that time! See here, Rosa, what's got into her
head?

                         Rosa (_mysteriously_).

Ahem, there are crowned heads and other heads--and--ahem--there are
letters _with_ crowns and letters _without_ crowns.

                                Strübel.

Letters--? Are you----?

                                 Rosa.

There are maids of honour--and other maids! (_Giggles._)

                                Strübel.

Permit me. (_Tapping her forehead lightly with his finger._) Ow! Ow!

                                 Rosa.

What's the matter?

                                Strübel.

Why, your head's on fire! Blow! Blow! And while you are getting some
salve for my burns, I'll just-- (_Goes to the telescope._)

(_Enter_ Frau Von Halldorf, Liddy, _and_ Milly. Frau Von Halldorf _is
an aristocratic woman, somewhat supercilious and affected._)

                                 Liddy.

Here's the telescope, mother. Now you can see for yourself.

                           Frau v. Halldorf.

What a pity that it's in use just now.

                       Strübel (_stepping back_).

Oh, I beg of you, ladies--I have plenty of time. I can wait.

                 Frau v. Halldorf (_condescendingly_).

Ah, thanks so much. (_She goes up to the telescope, while Strübel
returns to his former place._) Waitress! Bring us three glasses of
milk.

           Liddy (_as_ Milly _languidly drops into a chair_).

Beyond to the right is the road, mother.

                           Frau v. Halldorf.

Oh, I have found the road, but I see no carriage--neither a royal
carriage nor any other sort.

                                 Liddy.

Let me look.

                           Frau v. Halldorf.

Please do.

                                 Liddy.

It has disappeared now.

                           Frau v. Halldorf.

Are you quite sure that it was a royal carriage?

                                 Liddy.

Oh, one has an instinct for that sort of thing, mother. It comes to one
in the cradle.

                           Frau v. Halldorf.

(_As_ Milly _yawns and sighs aloud._) Are you sleepy, dear?

                                 Milly.

No, only tired. I'm always tired.

                           Frau v. Halldorf.

Well, that's just why we are at the Springs. Do as the princess does:
take the waters religiously.

                                 Milly.

The princess oughtn't to be climbing up such a steep hill either on a
hot day like this.

                   Frau v. Halldorf (_more softly_).

Well, you know why we are taking all this trouble. If, by good luck, we
should happen to meet the princess----

                                 Liddy.

(_Who has been looking through the telescope._) Oh, there it is again!

                     Frau v. Halldorf (_eagerly_).

Where? Where? (_Takes_ Liddy's _place._)

                                 Liddy.

It's just coming around the turn at the top.

                           Frau v. Halldorf.

Oh, now I see it! Why, there's no one inside!

                                 Liddy.

Well, then she's coming up on foot.

                     Frau v. Halldorf (_to_ Milly).

See, the princess is coming up on foot, too. And she is just as anæmic
as you are.

                                 Milly.

If I were going to marry a grand-duke, and if I could have my own
carriage driven along beside me, I wouldn't complain of having to walk
either.

                           Frau v. Halldorf.

I can't see a thing now.

                                 Liddy.

You have to turn the screw, mother.

                           Frau v. Halldorf.

I have been turning it right along, but the telescope won't move.

                                 Liddy.

Let me try.

                                Strübel.

(_Who has been throwing little wads of paper at_ Rosa _during the
preceding conversation._) What are they up to?

                                 Liddy.

It seems to me that you've turned the screw too far, mother.

                           Frau v. Halldorf.

Well, what shall we do about it?

                          Strübel (_rising_).

Permit me to come to your aid, ladies. I've had some experience with
these old screws.

                           Frau v. Halldorf.

Very kind indeed. (Strübel _busies himself with the instrument._)

                                 Liddy.

Listen, mother. If the carriage has almost reached the top the princess
can't be far off. Wouldn't it be best, then, to watch for them on the
road?

                           Frau v. Halldorf.

Certainly, if you think that would be best, dear Liddy.

                                Strübel.

This is not only an old screw, but it's a regular perverted old screw!

                           Frau v. Halldorf.

Ah, really?--(_Aside to her daughters._) And if she should actually
speak to us at this accidental meeting--and if we could present
ourselves as the subjects of her noble fiancé, and tell her that we
live at her future home--just imagine what an advantage that would give
us over the other women of the court!

                                Strübel.

There, ladies! We have now rescued the useful instrument to which the
far-sightedness of mankind is indebted.

                           Frau V. Halldorf.

Thanks, so much.--Pardon me, sir, but have you heard anything about the
report that the princess is going to make the journey up here to-day?

                                Strübel.

The princess? The Princess of the Springs? The Princess of the lonely
villa? The Princess who is expected at the iron spring every morning,
but who has never been seen by a living soul? Why, I am enormously
interested. You wouldn't believe how much interested I am!

                  Liddy (_who has looked out, back_).

There--there--there--it is!

                           Frau v. Halldorf.

The carriage?

                                 Liddy.

It's reached the top already. It is stopping over there at the edge of
the woods.

                           Frau v. Halldorf.

She will surely enter it there, then. Come quickly, my dear children,
so that it will look quite accidental.--Here is your money. (_She
throws a coin to_ Rosa _and unwraps a small package done up in tissue
paper which she has brought with her._) Here is a bouquet for you and
here's one for you. You are to present these to the princess.

                                 Milly.

So that it will look quite accidental--oh, yes! (_All three go out._)

                                Strübel.

Good heavens! Could I--? I don't believe it! Surely she sits--Well,
I'll make sure right away-- (_Goes up to the telescope and stops._) Oh,
I'll go along with them, anyhow. (_Exit after them._)

                      Frau Lindemann (_entering_).

Have they all gone--all of them?

                                 Rosa.

All of them.

              Frau Lindemann (_looking toward the right_).

There--there--two ladies and a lackey are coming up the footpath. Mercy
me! How my heart is beating!--If I had only had the sofa re-covered
last spring!--What am I going to say to them?--Rosa, don't you know a
poem by heart which you could speak to the princess? (Rosa _shrugs her
shoulders._) They're coming through the court now!--Stop putting your
arms under your apron that way, you stupid thing!--oh dear, oh dear----

(_The door opens_. A Lackey _in plain black livery enters, and remains
standing at the door. He precedes_ The Princess _and_ Frau Von Brook.
The Princess _is a pale, sickly, unassuming young girl, wearing a very
simple walking costume and a medium-sized leghorn hat trimmed with
roses_. Frau Von Brook _is a handsome, stately, stern-looking woman, in
the thirties. She is well dressed, but in accordance with the simple
tastes of the North German nobility._)

                             Frau v. Brook.

Who is the proprietor of this place?

                            Frau Lindemann.

At your command, your Highness.

                     Frau v. Brook (_reprovingly_).

I am the maid of honour.--Where is the room that has been ordered?

                Frau Lindemann (_opens the door, left_).

Here--at the head of the stairs--my lady.

                             Frau v. Brook.

Would your Highness care to remain here for a few moments?

                             The Princess.

Very much, dear Frau von Brook.

                             Frau v. Brook.

Edward, order what is needed for Her Highness and see that a room next
to Her Highness is prepared for me. I may assume that these are your
Highness's wishes?

                             The Princess.

Why certainly, dear Frau von Brook. (The Lackey, _who is carrying
shawls and pillows, goes out with_ Rosa, _left._)

                             The Princess.

Mais puisque je te dis, Eugenie, que je n'ai pas sommeil. M'envoyer
coucher comme une enfant, c'est abominable.

                             Frau v. Brook.

Mais je t'implore, chérie, sois sage! Tu sais, que c'est le médecin,
qui----

                             The Princess.

Ah, ton médecin! Toujours cette corvée. Et si je te dis----

                             Frau v. Brook.

Chut! My dear woman, wouldn't it be best for you to superintend the
preparations?

                            Frau Lindemann.

I am entirely at your service. (_About to go out, left._)

                             Frau v. Brook.

One thing more. This veranda, leading from the house to the
grounds--would it be possible to close it to the public?

                            Frau Lindemann.

Oh, certainly. The guests as often as not sit out under the trees.

                             Frau v. Brook.

Very well, then do so, please. (Frau Lindemann _locks the door._) We
may be assured that no one will enter this place?

                            Frau Lindemann.

If it is desired, none of us belonging to the house will come in here
either.

                             Frau v. Brook.

We should like that.

                            Frau Lindemann.

Very well. (_Exit._)

                             Frau v. Brook.

Really, you must be more careful, darling. If that woman had understood
French-- You must be careful!

                             The Princess.

What would have been so dreadful about it?

                             Frau v. Brook.

Oh, my dear child! This mood of yours, which is due to nothing but
your illness--that reminds me, you haven't taken your peptonised milk
yet--this is a secret which we must keep from everyone, above all from
your fiancé. If the Grand-Duke should discover----

               The Princess (_shrugging her shoulders_).

Well, what of it?

                             Frau v. Brook.

A bride's duty is to be a happy bride. Otherwise----

                             The Princess.

Otherwise?

                             Frau v. Brook.

She will be a lonely and an unloved woman.

          The Princess (_with a little smile of resignation_).

Ah!

                             Frau v. Brook.

What is it, dear? (The Princess _shakes her head._) And then think of
the strain of those formal presentations awaiting you in the autumn!
You must grow strong. Remember that you must be equal to the most
exacting demands of life.

                             The Princess.

Of life? Whose life?

                             Frau v. Brook.

What do you mean by that?

                             The Princess.

Ah, what good does it do to talk about it?

                             Frau v. Brook.

Yes, you are right. In my soul, too, there are unhappy and unholy
thoughts that I would rather not utter. From my own experience I know
that it is best to keep strictly within the narrow path of Duty.

                             The Princess.

And to go to sleep.

                             Frau v. Brook.

Ah, it isn't only that.

                             The Princess.

Look out there! See the woods!--Ah, to lie down on the moss, to cover
oneself with leaves, to watch the clouds pass by high above----

                      Frau v. Brook (_softening_).

We can do that, too, sometime.

                    The Princess (_laughing aloud_).

Sometime!

                  (The Lackey _appears at the door_).

                             Frau v. Brook.

Is everything ready? (The Lackey _bows._)

                   The Princess (_aside to_ Frau v. Brook).

But I simply cannot sleep.

                             Frau v. Brook.

Try to, for my sake. (_Aloud._) Does your Highness command----

                 The Princess (_smiling and sighing_).

Yes, I command. (_They go out, left._)

(_The stage remains empty for several moments. Then_ Strübel _is heard
trying the latch of the back door._)

                            Strübel's Voice.

Hullo! What's up! Why is this locked all of a sudden? Rosa!--Open up!
I've got to look through the telescope! Rosa! Won't you?--Oh, well,
I know how to help myself. (_He is seen walking outside of the
glass-covered veranda. Then he puts his head through the open window at
the right._) Not a soul inside?-- (_Climbs over._) Well, here we are.
What on earth has happened to these people? (_Unlocks the back door and
looks out._) Everything deserted. Well, it's all the same to me.
(_Locks the door again._) But let's find out right away what the
carriage has to do with the case. (_Prepares to look through the
telescope_. The Princess _enters cautiously through the door at the
left, her hat in her hand. Without noticing_ Strübel, _who is standing
motionless before the telescope, she goes hurriedly to the door at the
back and unlocks it._)

                                Strübel.

(_Startled at the sound of the key, turns around._) Why, how do you do?
(The Princess, _not venturing to move, glances back at the door through
which she has entered._) Wouldn't you like to look through the
telescope a while? Please do. (The Princess, _undecided as to whether
or not she should answer him, takes a few steps back toward the door at
the left._) Why are you going away? I won't do anything to you.

                      The Princess (_reassured_).

Oh, I'm not going away.

                                Strübel.

That's right. But--where have you come from? The door was locked.
Surely you didn't climb through the window as I did?

                      The Princess (_frightened_).

What?--You came--through the window?----

                                Strübel.

Of course I did.

                   The Princess (_frightened anew_).

Then I had rather (_About to go back._)

                                Strübel.

Oh, my dear young lady, you just stay right here. Why, before I'd drive
you away I'd pitch myself headlong over a precipice!

                  The Princess (_smiling, reassured_).

I only wanted to go out into the woods for half an hour.

                                Strübel.

Oh, then you're a regular guest here at the Inn?

                       The Princess (_quickly_).

Yes--yes, of course.

                                Strübel.

And of course you drink the waters down below?

                  The Princess (_in a friendly way_).

Oh, yes, I drink the waters. And I'm taking the baths, too.

                                Strübel.


Two hundred metres up and down every time! Isn't that very hard on you?
Heavens! And you look so pale! See here, my dear young lady, don't you
do it. It would be better for you to go down there--that is-- Oh,
forgive me! I've been talking without thinking. Of course, you have
your own reasons-- It's decidedly cheaper up here. _I_ know how to
value a thing of that sort. I've never had any money in all my life!

               The Princess (_trying to seem practical_).

But when one comes to a watering-place, one must have money.

               Strübel (_slapping himself on the chest_).

Do I look to you as if I drank iron? Thank Heaven, I can't afford such
luxuries! No; I'm only a poor fellow who earns his miserable pittance
during vacation by acting as a private tutor--that's to say,
"miserable" is only a figure of speech, for in the morning I lie abed
until nine, at noon I eat five, and at night seven, courses; and as for
work, I really haven't a thing to do! My pupil is so anæmic--why,
compared to him, _you're_ fit for a circus rider!

               The Princess (_laughing unrestrainedly_).

Oh, well, I'm rather glad I'm not one.

                                Strübel.

Dear me, it's a business like any other.

                             The Princess.

Like any other? Really, I didn't think that.

                                Strübel.

And pray, what did you think then?

                             The Princess.

Oh, I thought that they were--an entirely different sort of people.

                                Strübel.

My dear young lady, all people are "an entirely different sort." Of
course _we_ two aren't. We get along real well together, don't we? As
poor as church mice, both of us!

                 The Princess (_smiling reflectively_).

Who knows? Perhaps that's true.

                          Strübel (_kindly_).

Do you know what? If you want to stay down there--I'll tell you how one
can live cheaply. I have a friend, a student like myself. He's here to
mend up as you are. I feed him up at the house where I'm staying.
(_Frightened at a peculiar look of_ The Princess's.) Oh, but you
mustn't be-- No, I shouldn't have said it. It wasn't decent of me.
Only, let me tell you, I'm so glad to be able to help the poor fellow
out of my unexpected earnings, that I'd like to be shouting it from the
housetops all the time! Of course, you understand that, don't you?

                             The Princess.

You like to help people, then?

                                Strübel.

Surely--don't you?

                      The Princess (_reflecting_).

No. There's always so much talk about it, and the whole thing
immediately appears in the newspapers.

                                Strübel.

What? If you help some one, that appears----?

              The Princess (_quickly correcting herself_).

I only mean if one takes part in entertainments for charity----

                                Strübel.

Oh, yes, naturally. In those things they always get some woman of rank
to act as patroness, if they can, and she sees to it, you may be sure,
that the newspapers make a fuss over it.

                       The Princess (_demurely_).

Oh, not every----

                                Strübel.

Just try to teach me something I don't know about these titled women!
Besides, my dear young lady, where is your home--in one of the large
cities, or----?

                             The Princess.

Oh, no. In quite a small town--really more like the country.

                                Strübel.

Then, I'm going to show you something that you probably never saw
before in all your life.

                             The Princess.

Oh do! What is it?

                                Strübel.

A princess! H'm--not a make-believe, but a real, true-blue princess!

                             The Princess.

Oh, really?

                                Strübel.

Yes. Our Princess of the Springs.

                             The Princess.

And who may that be?

                                Strübel.

Why, Princess Marie Louise.

                             The Princess.

Of Geldern?

                                Strübel.

Of course.

                             The Princess.

Do you know her?

                                Strübel.

Why, certainly.

                             The Princess.

Really? I thought that she lived in great retirement.

                                Strübel.

Well, that doesn't do her any good. Not a bit of it. And because you
are such a jolly, good fellow, I'm going to tell you my secret. I'm in
love with this princess!

                             The Princess.

Oh!

                                Strübel.

You can't imagine what a comfort it is. The fact is, every young poet
has got to have a princess to love.

                             The Princess.

Are _you_ a poet?

                                Strübel.

Can't you tell that by looking at me?

                             The Princess.

I never saw a poet before.

                                Strübel.

Never saw a poet--never saw a princess! Why, you're learning a heap of
things to-day!

                      The Princess (_assenting_).

H'm--And have you written poems to her?

                                Strübel.

Why, that goes without saying! Quantities of 'em!

                             The Princess.

Oh, please recite some little thing--won't you?

                                Strübel.

No, not yet. Everything at the proper time.

                             The Princess.

Ah, yes, first I should like to see the princess.

                                Strübel.

No, first I am going to tell you the whole story.

                             The Princess.

Oh, yes, yes. Please do. (_Sits down._)

                                Strübel.

Well, then--I had hardly heard that she was here before I was dead in
love with her. It was just as quick as a shot, I tell you. Just as if I
had waited all my life long to fall in love with her. Besides, I also
heard about her beauty--and her sorrow. You see, she had an early love
affair.

                     The Princess (_disconcerted_).

What? Are they saying that?

                                Strübel.

Yes. It was a young officer who went to Africa because of her--and died
there.

                             The Princess.

And they know that, too?

                                Strübel.

What don't they know?--But that's a mere detail--it doesn't concern
me. Even the fact that in six months she will become the bride of a
grand-duke--even that can make no difference to me. For the present she
is _my_ princess.--But you're not listening to me!

                             The Princess.

Oh, yes I am!

                                Strübel.

Do you know what that means--_my_ princess? I'll not give up _my_
princess--not for anything in all the world!

                             The Princess.

But--if you don't even know her----?

                                Strübel.

I don't know her? Why, I know her as well as I know myself!

                             The Princess.

Have you ever met her, then?

                                Strübel.

I don't know of any one who has ever met her. And there's not a soul
that can tell what she looks like. It is said that there were pictures
of her in the shop-windows when she first came, but they were removed
immediately. In the morning a great many people are always lurking
around the Springs trying to catch a glimpse of her. I myself have
gotten up at six o'clock a couple of times--on the same errand--and if
you knew me better, you'd realise what that meant. But not a sign of
her! Either she has the stuff brought to her house, or she has the
power of making herself invisible. (The Princess _turns aside to
conceal a smile._) After that, I used to hang around her garden--every
day, for hours at a time. Until one day the policeman, whom the
managers of the Springs have stationed at the gates, came up to me and
asked me what on earth I was doing there. Well, that was the end of
those methods of approach! Suddenly, however, a happy thought struck
me. Now I can see her, and have her near to me as often as I wish.

                             The Princess.

Why, that's very interesting. How?

                                Strübel.

Yes, that's just the point. H'm, should I risk it? Should I take you
into my confidence?

                             The Princess.

You promised me some time ago that you would show her to me.

                                Strübel.

Wait a second. (_Looks through the telescope._) There she is. Please
look for yourself.

                             The Princess.

But I am-- (_She, too, looks through the telescope._) Actually, there
is the garden as plain as if one were in it.

                                Strübel.

And at the corner window on the left--with the embroidery-frame--that's
she.

                             The Princess.

Are you absolutely certain that that is the princess?

                                Strübel.

Why, who else could it be?

                             The Princess.

Oh, 'round about a princess like that--there are such a lot of people.
For instance, there is her waiting-woman, there's the seamstress and
her assistants, there's----

                                Strübel.

But my dear young lady, if you only understood anything about these
matters, you would have been certain at the very first glance that it
was she--and no one else. Observe the nobility in every motion--the
queenly grace with which she bends over the embroidery-frame----

                             The Princess.

How do you know that it's an embroidery-frame?

                                Strübel.

Why, what should a princess be bending over if not an embroidery-frame?
Do you expect her to be darning stockings?

                             The Princess.

It wouldn't hurt her at all!

                                Strübel.

Now, that's just one of those petty, bourgeois notions which we ought
to suppress. It's not enough that we have to stick in this misery, but
we'd like to drag her down, too--that being far above all earthly
care----

                             The Princess.

Oh, dear me!

                                Strübel.

What are you sighing about so terribly?

                             The Princess

Tell me, wouldn't you like to have a closer acquaintance with your
princess, sometime?

                                Strübel.

Closer? Why should I?--Isn't she close enough to me, my far-away
princess?--for that's what I call her when I talk to myself about her.
And to have her _still_ closer?

                             The Princess.

Why, so that you could talk to her and know what she really was like.

                         Strübel (_terrified_).

Talk to her! Heaven forbid! Goodness gracious, no! Just see here--how
am I to face a princess? I'm an ordinary fellow, the son of poor folks.
I haven't polished manners--I haven't even a decent tailor. A lady like
that--why, she'd measure me from top to toe in one glance.--I've had my
lessons in the fine houses where I've applied as tutor. A glance from
boots to cravat--and you're dismissed!

                             The Princess.

And you think that I--(_correcting herself_)--that this girl is as
superficial as that?

                                Strübel.

"This girl"! Dear me, how that sounds! But, how should I ever succeed
in showing her my real self? And even if I should, what would she
care?--Oh, yes, if she were like you--so nice and simple--and with such
a kindhearted, roguish little twinkle in her eye----!

                             The Princess.

Roguish--I? Why so?

                                Strübel.

Because you are laughing at me in your sleeve. And really I deserve
nothing better.

                             The Princess.

But your princess deserves something better than your opinion of her.

                                Strübel.

How do you know that?

                             The Princess.

You really ought to try to become acquainted with her sometime.

                                Strübel.

No, no, no--and again no! As long as she remains my far-away princess,
she is everything that I want her to be--modest, gracious, loving. She
smiles upon me dreamily. Yes, she even listens when I recite my poems
to her--and that can't be said of many people! And as soon as I have
finished, she sighs, takes a rose from her breast, and casts it down to
the poet.--I wrote a few verses yesterday about that rose, that flower
which represents the pinnacle of my desires, as it were.

                       The Princess (_eagerly_).

Oh, yes. Oh, please, please!

                                Strübel.

Well, then, here goes. H'm--"Twenty roses nestling close----"

                             The Princess.

What? Are there twenty now?

                         Strübel (_severely_).

My princess would not have interrupted me.

                             The Princess.

Oh please--forgive me.

                                Strübel.

I shall begin again.

            Twenty roses nestling close
              Gleam upon thy breast,
            Twenty years of rose-red love
              Upon thy fair cheeks rest.

            Twenty years would I gladly give
              Out of life's brief reign,
            Could I but ask a rose of thee
              And ask it not in vain.

            Twenty roses thou dost not need
              --Why, pearls and rubies are thine!--
            With nineteen thou'dst be just as fair,
              And _one_ would then be _mine_!

            And twenty years of rose-wreathed joy
              Would spring to life for me--
            Yet twenty years could ne'er suffice
              To worship it--and thee!

                             The Princess.

How nice that is! I've never had any verses written to me b----

                                Strübel.

Ah, my dear young lady, ordinary folks like us have to do their own
verse-making!

                             The Princess.

And all for one rose!--Dear me, how soon it fades! And then what is
left you?

                                Strübel.

No, my dear friend, a rose like that never fades--even as my love for
the gracious giver can never die.

                             The Princess.

But you haven't even got it yet!

                                Strübel.

That makes no difference in the end. I'm entirely independent of such
externals. When some day I shall be explaining Ovid to the beginners,
or perhaps even reading Horace with the more advanced classes--no, it's
better for the present not to think of reaching any such dizzy heights
of greatness--well, then I shall always be saying to myself with a
smile of satisfaction, "You, too, were one of those confounded artist
fellows--why, you once went so far as to love a princess!"

                             The Princess.

And that will make you happy?

                                Strübel.

Enormously!--For what makes us happy after all? A bit of happiness?
Great heavens, no! Happiness wears out like an old glove.

                             The Princess.

Well, then, what does?

                                Strübel.

Ah, how should I know! Any kind of a dream--a fancy--a wish
unfulfilled--a sorrow that we coddle--some nothing which suddenly
becomes everything to us. I shall always say to my pupils--"Young men,
if you want to be happy as long as you live, create gods for yourselves
in your own image; these gods will take care of your happiness."

                             The Princess.

And what would the god be like that you would create?

                                Strübel.

_Would be? Is, my dear young lady, is!_--A man of the world, a
gentleman, well bred, smiling, enjoying life--who looks out upon
mankind from under bushy eyebrows, who knows Nietzsche and Stendhal by
heart, and--(_pointing to his shoes_) who isn't down at the heels--a
god, in short, worthy of my princess. I know perfectly well that all my
life long I shall never do anything but crawl around on the ground like
an industrious ant, but I know, too, that the god of my fancy will
always take me by the collar when the proper moment comes and pull me
up again into the clouds. Yes, up there I'm safe.--And your god, or
rather your goddess--what would she look like?

                     The Princess (_thoughtfully_).

That's not easy to say. My goddess would be--a quiet, peaceful woman
who would treasure a secret, little joy like the apple of her eye, who
would know nothing of the world except what she wanted to know, and who
would have the strength to make her own choice when it pleased her.

                                Strübel.

But that doesn't seem to me a particularly lofty aspiration, my dear
young lady.

                             The Princess.

Lofty as the heavens, my friend.

                                Strübel.

My princess would be of a different opinion.

                             The Princess.

Do you think so?

                                Strübel.

For that's merely the ideal of every little country girl.

                             The Princess.

Not her ideal--her daily life which she counts as naught. It is my
ideal because I can never attain it.

                                Strübel.

Oh. I say, my dear young girl! It can't be as bad as that! A young girl
like you--so charming and--I don't want to be forward, but if I could
only help you a bit!

                             The Princess.

Have you got to be helping all the time? Before, it was only a cheap
lunch, now it's actually----

                                Strübel.

Yes, yes, I'm an awful donkey, I know, but----

                       The Princess (_smiling_).

Don't say any more about it, dear friend! I like you that way.

           Strübel (_feeling oppressed by her superiority_).

Really you are an awfully strange person! There's something about you
that--that--

                             The Princess.

Well?

                                Strübel.

I can't exactly define it.--Tell me, weren't you wanting to go into the
woods before? It's so--so oppressive in here.

                             The Princess.

Oppressive? I don't find it so at all--quite the contrary.

                                Strübel.

No, no--I'm restless. I don't know what--at all events, may I not
escort you--? One can chat more freely, one can express himself more
openly--if one-- (_Takes a deep breath._)

                       The Princess (_smiling_).

And you are leaving your far-away princess with such a light heart?

                        Strübel (_carelessly_).

Oh, she! She won't run away. She'll be sitting there tomorrow
again--and the day after, too!

                             The Princess.

And so that is your great, undying love?

                                Strübel.

Yes, but when a girl like you comes across one's path----

                           Frau v. Halldorf.

(_Hurrying in and then drawing back in feigned astonishment._) Oh!

                     Liddy and Milly (_similarly_).

Oh!

                                Strübel.

Well, ladies, didn't I tell you that you wouldn't find her? Princesses
don't grow along the roadside like weeds!

                           Frau v. Halldorf.

(_Disregarding him ceremoniously._) The infinite happiness with which
this glorious event fills our hearts must excuse in some measure the
extraordinary breach of good manners which we are committing in daring
to address your Highness. But, as the fortunate subjects of your
Highness's most noble fiancé, we could not refrain from----

                                Strübel.

Well, well! What's all this?

                           Frau v. Halldorf.

--from offering to our eagerly awaited sovereign a slight token of our
future loyalty. Liddy! Milly! (Liddy _and_ Milly _come forward, and,
with low court bows, offer their bouquets._) My daughters respectfully
present these few flowers to the illustrious princess----

                                Strübel.

I beg your pardon, but who is doing the joking here, you or----?

(Frau v. Brook _enters_. The Princess, _taken unawares, has retreated
more and more helplessly toward the door at the left, undecided whether
to take flight or remain. She greets the arrival of_ Frau v. Brook
_with a happy sigh of relief._)

                       Frau v. Brook (_severely_).

Pardon me, ladies. Apparently you have not taken the proper steps
toward being presented to Her Highness. In matters of this sort one
must first apply to me. I may be addressed every morning from eleven to
twelve, and I shall be happy to consider your desires.

                   Frau v. Halldorf (_with dignity_).

I and my children, madame, were aware of the fact that we were acting
contrary to the usual procedure; but the impulse of loyal hearts is
guided by no rule. I shall be glad to avail myself of your very kind
invitation.

        (_All three go out with low curtsies to_ The Princess.)

                             Frau v. Brook.

What forwardness!--But how could you come down without me?--And what is
that young man over there doing? Does he belong to those people?

(The Princess _shakes her head_. Strübel, _without a word, goes to get
his hat which has been lying on a chair, bows abruptly, and is about to
leave._)

                             The Princess.

Oh, no! That wouldn't be nice. Not that way----

                       Frau v. Brook (_amazed_).

What?--What!--Why, your Highness----!

                             The Princess.

Let me be, Eugenie. This young man and I have become far too good
friends to part in such an unfriendly, yes, almost hostile, fashion.

                             Frau v. Brook.

Your Highness, I am _very_ much----

                      The Princess (_to_ Strübel).

You and I will certainly remember this hour with great pleasure, and I
thank you for it with all my heart. If I only had a rose with me so as
to give you your dear wish!--Eugenie, haven't we any roses with us?

                             Frau v. Brook.

Your Highness, I am _very_ much----

                             The Princess.

(_Examining herself and searching among the vases._) Well, how are we
going to manage it?

                                Strübel.

I most humbly thank--your Highness--for the kind intention.

                             The Princess.

No, no--wait! (_Her glance falls upon the hat which she is holding in
her hand with a sudden thought._) I have it!--But don't think that I'm
joking.--And we'll have to do without scissors! (_She tears one of the
roses from the hat._) I don't know whether there are just twenty
(_Holding out one of the roses to him._) Well?--This rose has the
merit of being just as real as the sentiment of which we were speaking
before--and just as unfading.

                                Strübel.

Is this--to be--my punishment? (The Princess _smilingly shakes her
head._) Or does your Highness mean by it that only the Unreal never
fades?

                             The Princess.

That's exactly what I mean--because the Unreal must always dwell in the
imagination.

                                Strübel.

So that's it! Just as it is only the _far-away_ princesses who are
always near to us.

                             Frau v. Brook.

Permit me to remark, your Highness that it is _high_ time----

                             The Princess.

As you see, those who are near must hurry away. (_Offering him the rose
again._) Well?

                                Strübel.

(_Is about to take it, but lets his hand fall._) With the far-away
princess there--(_pointing down_) it would have been in harmony, but
with the-- (_Shakes his head, then softly and with emotion._) No,
thanks--I'd rather not. (_He bows and goes out._)

                             The Princess.

(_Smiling pensively, throws away the artificial flower._) I'm going to
ask my fiancé to let me send him a rose.

                             Frau v. Brook.

Your Highness, I am _very_ much--surprised!

                             The Princess.

Well, I told you that I wasn't sleepy.



                                Curtain.
