  Maternity

  [Maternité]

  Translated by Mrs. Bernard Shaw


Cast of the original production before the Stage Society at the King’s
Hall, London, on April 8, 9 and 10, 1906.


  Lucie Brignac                           SUZANNE SHELDON
  Julien Brignac                             DENNIS EADIE
  Lioret                                      ROBERT GREY
  Annette                                 MURIEL ASHWYNNE
  Catherine                                  BETTY CASTLE
  Mme. Bernin                            LILIAN M. REVELL
  Pierre Poiret                                FRED GROVE
  Laurent                               CHARLES DODSWORTH
  Le Sous-Intendant                    MICHAEL SHERBROOKE
  Le Colonel                              FRANK H. DENTON
  M. Chevillot                          VINCENT STERNROYD
  Jacques Poiret                              TREVOR LOWE
  Mme. Chevillot                      Mrs. CHARLES MALTBY
  Le Président                            KENYON MUSGRAVE
  L’Avocat                            C. HERBERT HEWETSON
  Mme. Thomas                                 CLARE GREET
  Marie Gaubert                              ITALIA CONTI
  Tupin                                       BLAKE ADAMS
  Mme. Tupin                                  EILY MALYON
  Le Procureur                           CHARLES A. DORAN




ACT I


  _Brignac’s drawing-room. Doors right, left, and at the back.
  Furniture of a government official. When the curtain rises Lucie,
  a woman of about thirty, is alone. Brignac, a man of thirty-eight,
  opens a door outside and calls gaily from the anteroom._

BRIGNAC. Here I am. [_He takes off his cloak, gives it to a
maid-servant, and enters_].

LUCIE [_gaily_] Good morning, sous-préfet.

BRIGNAC [_he is in the uniform of a sous-préfet. A tunic or dolman,
with simple embroidery and two rows of buttons; a cap with an
embroidered band, a sword with a mother o’ pearl handle and a
silver-plated sheath. His belt is of silk; his trousers blue with a
silver stripe; and he wears a black cravat. He comes forward, taking
off his sword and belt during the following conversation. He is
finishing a large cigar_] Have you been bored all alone?

LUCIE. With three children one hasn’t time to be bored.

BRIGNAC [_taking his sword into the anteroom_] By Jove, no!

LUCIE. Well, how did the luncheon go off?

BRIGNAC [_throwing away his cigar-end_] Very well. I’ll tell you all
about it in a minute. [_Going to the door to the right and calling
through_] Has M. Mouton come?

A VOICE [_from outside_] Yes, monsieur le sous-préfet. Shall I tell him
he’s wanted?

BRIGNAC. No. Bring me my letters. [_He closes the door and comes back_]
Shall I never catch that fellow out?

LUCIE. Why do you want to?

BRIGNAC. I want to get rid of him, of course, and get a young chap. An
unmarried man wouldn’t ask half the salary I give this one.

  _A clerk enters bringing letters._

CLERK. The letters, monsieur le sous-préfet.

BRIGNAC. All right.

  _The clerk goes out. Brignac glances at the addresses and sorts the
  letters into several piles without opening the envelopes._

LUCIE. That little ceremony always amuses me.

BRIGNAC. What ceremony? Sorting my letters?

LUCIE. Without opening them.

BRIGNAC. I know what’s inside by looking at them.

LUCIE. Nonsense!

BRIGNAC. Don’t you believe it? Well, look. Here’s one from the mayor of
St. Sauveur. Something he asks me to forward to the préfet. [_He opens
it and hands the letter to his wife, who does not take it_] There!

LUCIE. Why doesn’t he send it direct to the préfet?

BRIGNAC. What would be the use of _us_ then?

LUCIE [_laughing_] That’s true.

BRIGNAC. Now I suppose you’ll make some more jokes about sous-préfets
and their work. It’s easy, and not particularly clever. Perhaps some
of us don’t take our jobs very seriously, but I’m not like that. If we
_are_ useless, our business is to make ourselves indispensable. Just
take to-day for example and see if I’m not busy enough. This morning
I signed thirty documents; afterwards I went to the meeting of the
Council of Revision.[A] Then came this luncheon of the mayor’s to all
these gentlemen. Now I shall have an hour of office-work, and then I
shall have to go and meet our guests and bring them here, to our own
dinner. [_Pause_] Oh! and I forgot—after dinner there will be that
reception at the Club that they put off to suit me. That’s a fairly
full official day, isn’t it?

[Footnote A: The Board appointed to inspect conscripts, and see if they
are fit for military service.—_Note by the Translator._]

LUCIE. Yes.

BRIGNAC. We shall only have part of the Committee at dinner. Some of
the members have refused. [_With interest_] Hullo! I didn’t see this. A
letter from the Minister of the Interior.

LUCIE. Perhaps it’s your promotion.

BRIGNAC [_opening the letter_] One never knows—No, it’s a circular
[_pause_] upon the decline of the population. [_He runs his eye through
the paper_] Most important. [_He goes to the door on the right_] M.
Lioret!

  _A clerk comes in._

CLERK. Yes, monsieur le sous-préfet?

BRIGNAC [_giving him papers_] Give that to M. Mouton. It must be done
by five o’clock, and _well_ done. This for M. Lamblin—M. Rouge—And put
this upon my desk. I will see to it myself and give it the attention it
requires.

  _The clerk goes out._

LUCIE. Perhaps it’s not worth attention.

BRIGNAC. It needs an acknowledgment anyway; and the terms used in the
original must be most carefully reproduced in the acknowledgment.

LUCIE. Now tell me how the luncheon went off.

BRIGNAC. I _have_ told you. It went off very well. Too well. The mayor
wanted to be even with us. All the same, our dinner to-night will be
better. [_He takes a cigar out of his pocket_] I brought away a cigar
to show it to you. Are ours as big?

LUCIE. Pretty much the same.

BRIGNAC. He doesn’t give you cigars like that at his big receptions.
There’s the menu.

LUCIE [_glancing at it_] Oh! I say!

BRIGNAC. The champagne was decanted!

LUCIE. Well, we’ll have ours decanted. [_Brightly_] Only, you know,
it’ll cost money. We shouldn’t have much left if we had to give many
dinners to Councils of Revision.

BRIGNAC. Don’t worry about that. You know very well that when Balureau
gets back into power he’ll have us out of this dead-alive Châteauneuf,
and give us a step up.

LUCIE. Yes; but _will_ he get back into power?

BRIGNAC. Why shouldn’t he?

LUCIE. He was in such a short time.

BRIGNAC. Precisely. They hadn’t time to find him out.

LUCIE [_laughing_] If he heard you!

BRIGNAC. You misunderstand me. I have the greatest respect for—

LUCIE [_interrupting_] I know, I know. I was only joking.

BRIGNAC. You’re always worrying about the future; now what makes me the
man I am is my persistent confidence in the future. If Balureau doesn’t
get into office again we’ll stay quietly at Châteauneuf, that’s all.
_You_ can’t complain, as you were born here.

LUCIE. But it’s _you_ who complain.

BRIGNAC. I complain of the want of spirit in the people. I complain
that I cannot get them to love and respect our political institutions.
I complain above all of the society of Châteauneuf: a set of officials
entertaining one another.

LUCIE. Society in Châteauneuf doesn’t open its arms to us, certainly.

BRIGNAC. It doesn’t think us important enough.

LUCIE. To have a larger acquaintance we ought to entertain the
commercial people. You won’t do that.

BRIGNAC. I have to consider the dignity of my position.

LUCIE. As you often say, we are in the enemy’s camp.

BRIGNAC. That’s true. But the fact that people hate me shows that I am
a person of some importance. We must look out for the unexpected. How
do you know some great opportunity won’t come in my way to-morrow, or
next month, or in six months? An opportunity to distinguish myself and
force the people in Paris to pay attention to me.

LUCIE. Yes; you’ve been waiting for that opportunity for eleven years.

BRIGNAC. Obviously then it is so much the nearer.

LUCIE. And what will it be?

BRIGNAC. Some conflict, some incident—trouble.

LUCIE. Trouble at Châteauneuf?

BRIGNAC. I’m quite aware that Châteauneuf is most confoundedly
peaceable. One gets no chance. I count more upon Balureau than on
anything else. [_Pause_] Is Annette with her friend Gabrielle?

LUCIE. No.

BRIGNAC. But this is Tuesday.

LUCIE. It’s not time for her to go yet.

BRIGNAC. Yes, but if she puts it off till too late.

LUCIE. I’ve wanted for some time to speak to you about Annette. Don’t
you think she goes to the Bernins a little too often?

BRIGNAC. Not at all. They’re very influential people and may be useful
to me. Call her. [_He goes to the door to the left and calls himself_]
Annette! [_Coming back_] Annette goes three times a week to practise
with Mademoiselle Bernin, who goes everywhere. That’s an excellent
thing for us, and may be of consequence. [_Annette comes in_] Annette,
don’t forget how late it is. It’s time you were with your friend.

ANNETTE [_going out_] Yes, yes. I’ll go and put on my hat.

LUCIE [_to Brignac_] They want Annette to spend a few days with them in
the country. Ought we to let her?

BRIGNAC. Why not? She wants to go. You know how fond she is of
Gabrielle.

LUCIE. Yes; but Gabrielle has a brother.

BRIGNAC. Young Jacques. But he’s going to be married, my dear.

LUCIE. Is he?

BRIGNAC. Yes, yes, of course. [_Annette comes in from the left_] Make
haste, Annette.

LUCIE. What does it matter if she’s five minutes late?

ANNETTE. No—no—Where _is_ my music?

LUCIE. You look quite upset. Would you rather not go?

ANNETTE. Yes, yes, I’ll go—Good-bye. [_She hurries off, forgetting her
music_].

LUCIE [_calling_] Your music! [_she holds out the music-case_].

ANNETTE. Oh, thank you. Good-bye. [_She goes out_].

LUCIE. Don’t you think Annette has been a little depressed lately?

BRIGNAC. Eh? Yes—no—has she? Have you found a new parlor-maid?

LUCIE. Yes.

BRIGNAC. There, you see! You were worrying about that.

LUCIE. I had good reason to worry. I’ve been without a parlor-maid for
a week. I liked a girl who came yesterday very much; but she wouldn’t
take the place.

BRIGNAC. Why not?

LUCIE. She said there were too many children here.

BRIGNAC. Too many children! Three!

LUCIE. Yes: but the eldest is three years old and the youngest two
months.

BRIGNAC. There’s a nurse.

LUCIE. I told her that, of course.

BRIGNAC. Well, I declare! And when you consider that it meant coming to
the sous-préfet!

LUCIE. I suppose she’s not impressed by titles.

BRIGNAC. And what about the one you have engaged?

LUCIE. She’s elderly. Perhaps she’ll be steady.

BRIGNAC. Yes, and have other vices. Still—

LUCIE. The unhappy woman has two children out at nurse, and two older
ones at Bordeaux. Her husband deserted her.

BRIGNAC. Too bad of Céline to force us to turn her out of doors.

LUCIE. Her conduct was bad, certainly. All the same—

BRIGNAC. Oh, it was not her _conduct_! She might have conducted herself
ten times worse if only she had had the sense to keep up appearances.
Outside her duty to me her life was her own. But we have to draw the
line at a confinement in the house. You admit that, don’t you? [_A
pause. Lucie does not answer_] It was getting quite unmistakable—you
know it was. Those wretched grocer’s boys are a perfect scourge to
decent houses. [_He takes up a paper_] This circular is admirable.

LUCIE. Is it?

BRIGNAC. And of the greatest importance. Such style, too. Listen. [_He
reads_] ‘Our race is diminishing! Such a state of affairs demands the
instant attention of the authorities. The Legislature must strenuously
endeavour to devise remedial measures against the disastrous phenomenon
now making itself manifest in our midst.’ The Minister of the Interior
has done this very well. The end is really fine—quite touching.
Listen. ‘Truth will triumph: reason will prevail: the noble sentiment
of nationality and the divine spirit of self-sacrifice will bear us
on to victory. We who know the splendid recuperative power of our
valiant French race look forward with confidence and security to the
magnificent moral regeneration of this great and ancient people.’ [_He
looks at his wife_].

LUCIE. It’s well written, certainly.

BRIGNAC [_continuing to read_] ‘Let each one, in his own sphere of
action and influence, work with word and pen to point out the peril and
urge the immediate necessity of a remedy. Committees must be formed
all over France to evolve schemes and promote measures by which the
birth-rate may be raised.’

LUCIE. Does it suggest any scheme?

BRIGNAC. Yes. The rest of the circular is full of the ways and means. I
shall read it aloud this evening.

LUCIE. This evening!

BRIGNAC. Yes. [_He goes to the right hand door and calls_] Monsieur
Lioret!

CLERK [_coming in_] Monsieur le sous-préfet.

BRIGNAC. Make me two copies of this circular _yourself_; you will
understand its great importance. And bring the original back _yourself_
and place it upon this table.

CLERK. Yes, monsieur le sous-préfet. [_He goes out_].

BRIGNAC [_returning to Lucie_] The covering letter from my official
superior ends with these words: ‘Have the goodness, M. le sous-préfet,
to send me at once a statistical schedule of all committees or
associations of this nature at present existing in your district,
and let me know what measures you think of taking in response to the
desiderata of the Government.’ Well, I shall take advantage of the
dinner we give to-night to the members of the Council of Revision to
set on foot some associations of the sort, and then I can write up to
the authorities, ’There were no associations: _I_ created them’!

LUCIE. But is the dinner a suitable—

BRIGNAC. Listen to me. This morning there was a Council of Revision at
Châteauneuf.

LUCIE. Yes.

BRIGNAC. The mayor invited the members to luncheon and we have invited
them to dinner.

LUCIE. Well?

BRIGNAC. The Council of Revision is composed of a Councillor to the
Prefecture, a general Councillor, a district Councillor—I leave out
the doctor—and the mayors of the communes concerned—_the mayors of
the communes concerned_. I shall profit by the chance of having
them all together after dinner to-night—after a dinner where the
champagne will be decanted, mind you—to impress them with my own
enthusiasm and conviction. _They_ shall create local committees, and
_I_ shall presently announce the formation of those committees to the
authorities. So even if Balureau doesn’t get into power, I shall sooner
or later force the Minister to say, ’But why don’t we give a man like
Brignac a really active post?’ This is a first-rate opening for us: I
saw it at a glance. After dinner I shall shew them my diagram. You must
make my office into a cloak-room, and—

LUCIE [_interrupting_] Why? There’s room in the hall.

BRIGNAC. I can’t put the diagram in the hall, and I want an excuse for
bringing them all through the office. Some day the Colonel may meet the
Minister of the Interior and say to him: ‘I saw in the sous-préfecture
at Châteauneuf’—

LUCIE [_interrupting again_] All right. As you like.

BRIGNAC. You trust to me. You don’t understand anything about it. You
didn’t even know how a Council of Revision was made up,—you, the wife
of a sous-préfet. And yet every year we give them a dinner. And we’ve
been married four years.

LUCIE [_gently and pleasantly_] Now think for a minute. We’ve been
married four years, that’s true. But this time three years was just
after Edmée was born: two years ago I was expecting little Louise;
and last year after weaning her I was ill. Remember too that if I had
nursed the last one myself I could not be at dinner tonight, as she is
only two months old.

BRIGNAC. You complain of that?

LUCIE [_laughing_] No: but I am glad to be having a holiday.

BRIGNAC [_gaily_] You know what I said: as long as we haven’t a boy—

LUCIE [_brightly_] We ought to have a trip to Switzerland first.

BRIGNAC. No, no, no. We have only girls: I want a boy.

LUCIE [_laughing_] Is it the Minister’s circular that—

BRIGNAC. No, it is _not_ the Minister’s circular.

LUCIE. Then let me have time to breathe.

BRIGNAC. You can breathe afterwards.

LUCIE. Before.

BRIGNAC. After.

LUCIE. Wouldn’t you rather have a holiday?

BRIGNAC. No.

LUCIE [_gently_] Listen, Julien, since we’re talking about this. I
wanted to tell you—I haven’t had much leisure since our marriage. We’ve
not been able to take advantage of a single one of your holidays. And
if you don’t agree to let—[_tenderly_] Maurice—wait another year it
will be the same thing this time. [_Smiling_] I really have a right to
a little rest. Consider. We’ve not had any time to know one another,
or to love one another. Besides, remember that we already have to find
dowries for three girls.

BRIGNAC. I tell you this is going to be a boy.

LUCIE. A boy is expensive.

BRIGNAC. We are going to be rich.

LUCIE. How?

BRIGNAC. Luck may come in several ways. I may stay in the Civil Service
and get promoted quickly. I may go back to the Bar: I was a fairly
successful barrister once. I may have some unexpected stroke of luck.
Anyway, I’m certain we shall be rich. [_Smiling_] After all, it’s not
much good you’re saying no, if I say yes.

LUCIE [_hurt_] Evidently. My consent was asked for before I was given a
husband, but my consent is not asked for before I am given a child.

BRIGNAC. Are you going to make a scene?

LUCIE. No. But all the same—this slavery—

BRIGNAC. What?

LUCIE. Yes, _slavery_. After all you are disposing of my health,
my sufferings, my life—of a year of my existence, calmly, without
consulting me.

BRIGNAC. Do I do it out of selfishness? Do you suppose I am not a most
unhappy husband all the time I have a future mother at my side instead
of a loving wife? ’A father is a man all the same.’

LUCIE [_ironically_] Oh, you are _most_ unhappy, aren’t you?

BRIGNAC. Yes.

LUCIE. Rubbish!

BRIGNAC. Rubbish?

LUCIE. You evidently take me for a fool.

BRIGNAC. I don’t understand.

LUCIE. I know what you do at those times. _Now_ do you understand?

BRIGNAC. No.

LUCIE [_irritated_] Don’t deny it. You must see that I know all about
it. The best thing you can do is to be silent, as I have pretended so
far to know nothing.

BRIGNAC [_coming off his high-horse_] I assure you—

LUCIE. Do you want me to tell you the name of the person you go to see
over at Villeneuve, while I am nursing, or a ‘future mother’ as you
call it?

BRIGNAC. If you’re going to believe all the gossip you hear—

LUCIE. We had better say no more about it.

BRIGNAC. I beg to observe that it was not I who started the subject.
There, there—you’re in a bad temper. I shall go and do some work, and
then I must join those gentlemen. Only, you know, you’re mistaken.

LUCIE. Oh, yes, of course.

  _He goes out to the right, shrugging his shoulders. Lucie rings.
  Catherine comes in._

LUCIE. Are Nurse and Josephine out with the children?

CATHERINE. Yes, madame.

LUCIE [_beaming_] Were my little ones well and happy?

CATHERINE. Oh, yes, madame.

LUCIE [_sincerely_] Aren’t my little girls pretty?

CATHERINE. Yes: pretty and clever.

LUCIE. The other day Edmée was talking about playing horses, and Louise
said ‘’orses’ quite distinctly. It’s wonderful at her age.

CATHERINE. I’ve seen lots of children, but I never saw such nice ones
before.

LUCIE. I’m so glad. You’re a good creature, Catherine.

  _Annette comes in. She pulls off her hat, wild with joy._

ANNETTE. Lucie! Sister! News! Great news! Good news!

LUCIE. What is it?

ANNETTE [_giving her hat to Catherine_] Take this, Catherine, and go.
[_She pushes her out gently_].

LUCIE [_laughing_] Well!

ANNETTE. I must kiss you, _kiss_ you! I wanted to kiss the people in
the street. [_She bursts into a laugh which ends in a sob_].

LUCIE. Little sister Annette, you’ve gone quite mad.

ANNETTE. No—not mad—I’m so happy.

LUCIE. What is it, little girl?

ANNETTE [_in tears_] I’m happy! I’m happy!

LUCIE. Why, what’s the matter with the child?

ANNETTE. No, no. It’s all right—don’t speak to me. I shall soon be
better. It’s nervous. [_She laughs and cries at the same time_]. I tell
you I’m happy—only—only—How stupid it is to cry like this. I can’t help
it. [_She puts her arms round Lucie’s neck_]. Oh, little mother, I love
you—I _do_ love you. [_She kisses Lucie: another little sob_]. Oh, I
_am_ silly. There now, it’s all right—I’ve done. [_She wipes her eyes_]
There: now I’m going to tell you. [_With great joy and emotion, and
very simply_] I am going to be married. Monsieur and Madame Bernin are
coming to see you about it.

LUCIE. Why?

ANNETTE. Because Jacques has told them to.

LUCIE. Jacques!

ANNETTE [_very fast, tumbling out the words_] Yes, it was when I
was practising with Gabrielle. He had guessed—it happened this
way—practising—he sings a little—oh, nothing very grand—once—[_she
laughs_] but I’ll tell you about that afterwards—it’s because of
that—We shall be married soon. [_Fresh tears. Then she says gravely,
embracing Lucy_] I _do_ love him so, and if he hadn’t asked me to marry
him—You don’t understand?

LUCIE [_laughing_] I guess a little.

ANNETTE. Do you want me to tell you all about it, from the beginning?

LUCIE. Yes.

ANNETTE. I want to so much. If it won’t bore you. It would make me so
happy.

LUCIE. Go on.

ANNETTE. Well, when I was playing duets with Gabrielle—I must tell you
that I began by detesting him because he will make fun of everybody.
But he’s most kind, _really_. For instance—

LUCIE. Now keep to the point. When you played duets—

ANNETTE. Yes, I was telling you. When I played duets with Gabrielle
he used to come and listen to us. He stood behind us to turn over the
leaves: once he put his hand upon my shoulder—

LUCIE. You let him?

ANNETTE. He had his other hand on Gabrielle’s shoulder—it would have
been priggish to say anything.

LUCIE. Yes, but with Gabrielle it’s different.

ANNETTE. That’s what I was going to say. My heart began beating so—I
got so red, and I had no idea what I was playing. And then, another
time—he couldn’t see the music—he stooped right down. But that’s all
nothing. We love each other, that’s the whole thing.

LUCIE. And has he told you that he loves you?

ANNETTE [_gravely_] Yes.

LUCIE. And you hid all that from me? I’m sorry, Annette.

ANNETTE. I’m so, _so_ sorry. But it all came so gradually. I can hardly
tell now exactly when it began. I even thought I was mistaken. And
then—then—when we first dared to speak to one another about what we had
never spoken of, though we both knew it so well—I knew I’d done wrong.
But I was so ashamed I _couldn’t_ tell you about it then.

LUCIE [_tenderly_] All the same it was very naughty of you, darling.

ANNETTE. Oh, don’t scold me! Please, please don’t scold me. If you only
knew how I’ve repented—how unhappy I’ve been. Haven’t you noticed?

LUCIE. Yes. Then he’s spoken to his father and mother?

ANNETTE. Some time ago.

LUCIE. And they consent?

ANNETTE. They are coming this afternoon.

LUCIE. Why didn’t they come sooner?

ANNETTE. Well—Jacques begged them to, but they didn’t want it at first.
They wanted Gabrielle to be married first. It was even arranged that I
should pretend I didn’t know they had been told. Then, to-day, I met
Jacques in the street—

LUCIE. In the street?

ANNETTE. Yes. Lately he has not been coming to our practices—so I meet
him—

LUCIE. In the street!

ANNETTE. Generally we only bow to one another, and that’s all. But
to-day he said to me as he passed, ‘My mother is going to your house.
She’s there behind me.’ Then I hurried in to tell you. [_With a happy
smile_] He was quite pale. Please don’t scold me, I am so happy.
Forgive me.

LUCIE [_kissing her_] Yes: I forgive you. Then you’re going away from
me, you bad thing.

ANNETTE. Yes, I am _bad_. Bad and ungrateful. That’s true.

LUCIE. Marriage is a serious thing. Are you sure you will suit one
another?

ANNETTE. Oh, I’m certain of it. We’ve quarrelled already.

LUCIE. What about?

ANNETTE. About a book he lent me.

LUCIE. What book?

ANNETTE. Anna Karenina. He liked Vronsky better than Peter Levin.
He talked nonsense. He said he didn’t believe in Madame Karenina’s
suicide. You remember, she throws herself under the wheels of the train
Vronsky is going away in. Don’t you remember? It doesn’t matter.

LUCIE. And then?

ANNETTE. And then—there’s a ring—perhaps that’s the Bernins.

  _A silence. Catherine appears with a card._

LUCIE. Yes. It’s Madame Bernin.

ANNETTE. Oh! [_Going to her room_] You’ll come and fetch me presently.

LUCIE. Yes. [_To Catherine_] Show the lady in.

ANNETTE. Don’t be long.

  _She goes out. Lucie tidies herself before a glass. Madame Bernin
  comes in._

MME. B. How do you do, Madame Brignac?

LUCIE. How do you do, madame?

MME. B. Are you quite well?

LUCIE. Very well, madame. And you?

MME. B. I need not ask after M. Brignac.

LUCIE. And M. Bernin?

MME. B. He’s very well, thank you.

LUCIE. Won’t you sit down?

MME. B. Thank you. [_Sits_] What lovely weather.

LUCIE. Yes, isn’t it? How lucky you are to be able to get into the
country. Annette is so looking forward to her visit to you.

MME. B. Well, I came to-day—first of all to have the pleasure of seeing
you—and then to have a chat with you about that very matter.

LUCIE. And about another matter, too, I think.

MME. B. Another matter?

LUCIE. Not about another?

MME. B. No, I don’t quite understand—

LUCIE. Oh, then I beg your pardon. Tell me what it is about Annette’s
visit.

MME. B. My daughter has just got an invitation to spend some time with
her cousins the Guibals, and we can’t possibly refuse to let Gabrielle
go to them. So I’ve come to beg you to excuse us, because—as Gabrielle
won’t be there—

LUCIE. Oh, of course, madame. Will Mademoiselle Gabrielle make a long
stay with her cousins?

MME. B. Well, that’s just what’s so annoying. We don’t know exactly: it
might be a week, or it might be a month. And she _may_ stay there all
the time we are away from Châteauneuf.

LUCIE. Poor little Annette!

MME. B. But I thought you were going away somewhere yourselves this
Easter?

LUCIE. Yes.

MME. B [_kindly_] That relieves my mind a little, and I hope it will
make up to Mademoiselle Annette for the disappointment I am obliged to
cause her—to my very great regret.

LUCIE [_after a silence_] Will you excuse me, madame. [_Hesitating_]
Perhaps this is indiscreet.

MME. B. Oh, I am sure not, Madame Brignac.

LUCIE. I only wanted to ask you if it is long since Mademoiselle
Gabrielle got this invitation from her cousins?

MME. B. About a week.

LUCIE. A week!

MME. B. Why does that surprise you?

LUCIE. Because she did not mention it to Annette.

MME. B. She was afraid of disappointing her.

LUCIE. Only yesterday Annette was telling me about all sorts of
excursions your daughter was planning for them both. Madame, this
invitation is an excuse: please tell me the whole truth. Annette is
only my sister, but I love her as if she was my own child, and I speak
as a mother to a mother. I’m not going to try to be clever or to stand
on my dignity. This is how it is: Annette believes your son loves her,
and when you were announced just now she thought you came to arrange
her marriage with him. Now you know all that I know. Tell me the truth,
and let us do what we can to prevent unhappiness.

MME. B. As you speak so simply and feelingly I will tell you candidly
exactly what is in my mind. As a matter of fact this invitation to
Gabrielle is only a device of ours to prevent Jacques and Annette
seeing any more of one another.

LUCIE. Then you don’t want them to see any more of one another?

MME. B. No, because I don’t want them to marry.

LUCIE. Because Annette is poor?

MME. B [_after some hesitation_] Well—since we’re speaking
plainly—yes, because she is poor. Ah, dear Madame Brignac, we have both
been very much to blame for not foreseeing what has happened.

LUCIE. _We_ have been to blame?

MME. B. I know Annette, and I like her very much. I know you too,
better than you think, and I have the greatest respect and esteem for
you; it has never even occurred to me that in seeking our acquaintance
you had any other motive than friendship. But you ought to have feared
and foreseen what has happened?

LUCIE. What should I fear? Annette went to see Gabrielle. How could
I know that you let your son be with them? You knew it because it
happened at your house, and it is you who have been wanting in prudence
and foresight. You invited this poor child, you exposed her to danger,
you let her take a fancy to your son, you allowed them to fall in love
with one another, and you come to-day and calmly tell me that this
marriage is impossible, and you are going off to the country leaving it
to me to break the poor child’s heart.

MME. B. How do you know I foresaw nothing? And how can one tell the
right moment to interfere to prevent playmates becoming lovers? While
I was uncertain didn’t I run the risk of causing the very thing I was
anxious to prevent, by separating them without a good reason? When I
really felt sure there was danger I spoke to Jacques. I said to him
‘Annette is not a suitable match for you: you must be very careful how
you behave to her: don’t forget to treat this girl as a sister.’

LUCIE. And he said ‘It is too late: we love each other.’

MME. B. On the contrary, he said: ‘You needn’t worry, mother. I have
been thinking the same thing myself, and I am a man of honor. Besides,
though Annette is charming, she’s not the sort of woman I mean to
marry.’

LUCIE. How long ago did he tell you that?

MME. B. About two months ago.

LUCIE. Well, at that time he had already spoken of marriage to Annette;
or at least he had spoken of love, which from him to her is the same
thing.

MME. B. I can only tell you what I know.

LUCIE. Well, madame, all this is beside the question. You are opposed
to this marriage?

MME. B. Yes.

LUCIE. Finally? Irrevocably?

MME. B. Finally. Irrevocably.

LUCIE. Because Annette has no money?

MME. B. Yes.

LUCIE. Your son knew she had no money when he made her love him.

MME. B. Believe me, he didn’t mean to do the harm he has done. A young
girl of his own age was his sister’s constant companion, and at first
he treated her as he treated his sister. At first, I’m sure, it was
without any special intention that he saw so much of her. Afterwards
probably he made some pretty speeches to your little Annette, and
no doubt he was greatly taken with her. As Annette is more innocent
and simple and affectionate, and of course more ignorant than he is,
she has been more quickly and more deeply touched. But my son is not
the worthless fellow you think him, and the proof of that is that he
himself came and told me all about it.

LUCIE. And when you told him he must give up Annette, he agreed?

MME. B. Yes, he agreed. He’s reasonable and sensible, and he saw the
force of my arguments. He saw that this parting, though it will be
painful, was an absolute necessity. He will certainly suffer; but they
are both so young. At that age love troubles don’t last.

LUCIE. I understand. In a week your son will have forgotten all about
it. But Annette—

MME. B. She will soon forget it, too.

LUCIE. I don’t know—I don’t know. Oh, my poor darling! If you had seen
her just now when she came to tell me about it! It’s not for joy she
will cry now. Oh!—[_she begins to cry_].

MME. B [_moved_] Don’t cry—oh, don’t cry. I assure you I am most
deeply sorry. Oh, if it were only possible, how happy it would make
me that my boy should marry Annette. The girl he is engaged to is an
affected little thing who annoys me, and I really love your sister.

LUCIE. But if that is true you can afford to let your son marry a girl
without fortune.

MME. B. No: we’re not so well off as people think. There’s Gabrielle to
be provided for. There will be next to nothing left for Jacques.

LUCIE. But he might work.

MME. B. He has not been brought up to that.

LUCIE. That was a mistake.

MME. B. The professions are overcrowded. Would you have him go into
an office and get 200 francs a month? They wouldn’t be able to keep a
servant.

LUCIE. He could earn more than that.

MME. B. If he got 500—could he keep up his position? Could he remain in
his present set? It would be a come-down for him; a come-down he would
owe to his wife; and sooner or later he would reproach her for it. And
think of their children! They would have just enough to send their son
to a board school, and make their daughter a post office clerk. And
even then they would have to pinch and screw to provide for her until
she got in.

LUCIE. It’s true.

MME. B. You see that I’m right. I can’t say I’m proud of having to
say such things—of belonging to a society that forces one to do such
things. But we’re not in a land of romance. We live among vain,
selfish, hard-headed people.

LUCIE. You despise them, and yet you sacrifice everything to their
opinion.

MME. B. Yes: because everything depends upon their opinion. Social
position depends upon it. One must be a very exceptional person to be
able to defy public opinion. And Jacques is not exceptional.

LUCIE. That’s nothing to be proud of. If he was exceptional, I mean
if he was different to all these people about, he would find his love
would prevent him from troubling about the sneers of worthless idlers.

MME. B. His love! Love goes: poverty stays: it is a proverb. Beauty
passes: want remains.

LUCIE. But you, madame, yourself—you and your husband are a proof that
one can marry poor and make a fortune. Your story is well known. Your
husband began in an office, then he started his own business; and if
riches make happiness, you are happy now—you and he—aren’t you?

MME. B. No, no, _no_; we are not happy, because we have worn ourselves
out hunting after happiness. We wanted to ‘get on,’ and we got on. But
_what_ a price we paid for it! First, when we were both earning wages,
our life was one long drudgery of petty economy and meanness. When
we set up on our own account we lived in an atmosphere of trickery,
of enmity, of lying; flattering the customers, and always in terror
of bankruptcy. Oh, I know the road to fortune! It means tears, lies,
envy, hate; one suffers—and one makes other people suffer. I’ve had
to go through it: my children shan’t. We’ve only had two children:
we meant only to have one. Having two we had to be doubly hard upon
ourselves. Instead of a husband and wife helping one another, we have
been partners spying upon one another; calling one another to account
for every little expenditure or stupidity; and on our very pillows
disputing about our business. That’s how we got rich; and now we can’t
enjoy our money because we don’t know how to use it; and we aren’t
happy because our old age is made bitter by the memories and the rancor
left from the old bad days: because we have suffered too much and hated
too much. My children shall not go through this. I endured it that they
might be spared. Good-bye, madame.

LUCIE. Good-bye.

  _Madame Bernin goes out. After a moment Lucie goes slowly to
  Annette’s door and opens it._

ANNETTE [_coming in_] You’ve been crying! It’s because I’m going away,
isn’t it? Not because there’s anything in the way of—[_with increasing
trouble_] Tell me, Lucie!

LUCIE. You love him so much then?

ANNETTE. If we were not to be married—I should die.

LUCIE. No, you wouldn’t die. Think of all the girls who have said that:
did they die?

ANNETTE. Is there anything to prevent?

LUCIE. No, no.

ANNETTE. And when is it to be? Did you talk about that?

LUCIE. What a state of excitement you are in! Annette, dear, you must
try to control yourself a little.

ANNETTE [_making an effort_] Yes. You’re right. I’m a little off my
head.

LUCIE. You are really.

ANNETTE [_still controlling herself_] Well, tell me. What did Madame
Bernin say?

LUCIE. What a hurry you are in to leave me! You don’t care for me any
more, then?

ANNETTE [_gravely_] Ah, my dear! If I hadn’t you what would become of
me! [_A silence_] But you’re telling me _nothing_. You don’t seem to be
telling me the truth—you’re hiding something from me—there _is_ some
difficulty, I’m certain of it. If there wasn’t you’d say there wasn’t,
you wouldn’t put me off—you’d tell me what Madame Bernin said.

LUCIE. Well—there is something.

ANNETTE [_bursting into tears_] Oh, my God!

LUCIE. You are both very young. It would be better to wait a little—a
year—perhaps more.

ANNETTE [_crying_] Wait—a year!

LUCIE. Come, come, stop crying. There’s really no reason for all this.
I am not quite pleased with you, Annette. You’re barely nineteen. If
you waited to marry until you are twenty it would be no harm.

ANNETTE. It’s not possible!

LUCIE. Not possible? [_She looks searchingly at her_]. Annette, you
frighten me. If it wasn’t you—[_tenderly and gravely_] Have I been
wrong to trust you?

ANNETTE. No! No! What can you be thinking of—Oh, _indeed_—

LUCIE. What is it, then?

ANNETTE. Well, I’ve been such a fool as to tell some friends I was
engaged.

LUCIE. Before speaking to me about it?

ANNETTE [_confused_] Don’t, _please_, ask me any more questions.

LUCIE. Annette, I must scold you a little. You’ve hurt me very much
by keeping me in the dark about all this. Nothing would have made me
believe that you’d do such a thing. I thought you were too fond of
me not to tell me at once about anybody—any man—you were interested
in. I find I was mistaken. We see one another every day, we are never
parted, and yet you have managed to conceal from me the one thing your
heart was full of. You ought to have told me. Not because I am your
elder sister, but because I take mother’s place towards you. And for
a better reason still—because I am your friend. It’s been a kind of
treason. A little more, and I should have heard that you were engaged
from strangers and not from you. Well, my dear, you’ve been wrong:
these people are not worth crying about. Now be brave and remember your
self-respect: I am going to tell you the whole truth. They don’t want
you, my poor little girl: you are not rich enough for them.

ANNETTE [_staring blindly at her sister_] They don’t want me! They
don’t want me! But Jacques! Jacques! Does _he_ know?

LUCIE. Yes, he knows.

ANNETTE. He means to give me up if they tell him to?

LUCIE. Yes.

ANNETTE [_beside herself_] I must see him. I will write to him. I
_must_ see him. If they don’t want me there is nothing left but to kill
myself.

LUCIE [_obliging Annette to look her in the face_] Annette, look at me.
[_Silence. Then tenderly and gravely_] I think you have something to
tell me.

ANNETTE [_tearing herself away_] Don’t ask me—don’t [_very low_] or I
shall die of shame.

  _Lucie forces her to sit down beside her and takes her in her arms._

LUCIE. Come—into my arms. Put your head on my shoulder as you used when
you were little. There now, tell me what the trouble is. [_Speaking
low_]. My darling—my little darling—I’m afraid you’re most unhappy. Try
and think that it’s mother.

ANNETTE [_very low, crying piteously_] Oh, mother! If you knew what I
have done!

LUCIE [_rocking her gently_] There—tell me. Whisper it to me. Whisper—

  _Annette whispers. Lucie rises and separates herself from her sister.
  She hides her face in her hands._

LUCIE. Oh, Annette! _You!_

ANNETTE [_kneeling and stretching out her arms_] Forgive me! Forgive
me! Forgive me! I deserve it all. But I’m almost mad.

LUCIE. You, Annette! _You!_

ANNETTE. Are you going to make me sorry I didn’t kill myself before I
told you! Forgive me—

LUCIE. Get up. It’s too awful. I must forgive you. [_She sits down_].

ANNETTE [_still kneeling_] I didn’t know—I understood nothing. He took
me by surprise. I had loved him for a long time. When he was with his
regiment I used to look forward for weeks to his coming home on leave.
Just the thought of seeing him used to make me tremble. Before I even
knew myself that I was in love with him, he guessed it. He made me
tell him so when he asked me to marry him. Then one day—his father and
mother were away, and someone came and called Gabrielle, I don’t know
why. When we were alone—I didn’t understand—I thought he had suddenly
gone mad. But when he kissed me like that I was stunned—I couldn’t do
any thing—happy, and afraid, and ashamed. That was three months ago.
The next day I met him in the street. I was in such a state that he
said, quite of himself ‘I shall speak at once to my people about our
marriage.’ I know he meant it, because really he is honest and good.
Only, I suppose he hadn’t courage. Then, when I found they were going
away so soon, I said to him yesterday ‘You _must_ speak.’ And now they
don’t want me!

LUCIE. And he knows that—?

ANNETTE. No. No. Since that day—O, that day!—I’ve never been alone with
him. We say ‘monsieur’ and ’mademoiselle’ when we meet and [_in an
awestruck tone_] he is the father of my child.

LUCIE [_after a silence_] It’s not a question now of a girl not to be
married because she is poor. It’s a question of atoning for a crime.
Julien must speak to M. Bernin.

ANNETTE. You’re going to tell him?

LUCIE. I must. Go back to your room. You’re in no fit state to come
to dinner. [_She looks at the clock_] I have only just time to dress.
Directly the people are gone I shall speak to Jules. When do they go
away?

ANNETTE. In a fortnight.

LUCIE. It’s no matter. Jules shall see M. Bernin tomorrow.

ANNETTE. He won’t. He’ll have nothing more to do with me.

LUCIE. No. He will do all he can to save you.

ANNETTE. I don’t think so. Dearest, you are mistaken.

LUCIE. No, I’m not mistaken. I am _certain_. Go. [_Annette goes out_].
I’m _not_ mistaken. But if I were! If there were no one but me to
defend this child and her baby! [_A knock at the office door_]. Come
in. [_The clerk enters_] What is it?

CLERK [_laying a paper on the table_] It is the circular from the
Minister of the Interior. M. le sous-préfet told me to put it here.




ACT II

  _Same scene._


  _Lucie, the colonel, Madame Chevillot, Chevillot, the sous-intendant,
  Brignac, Jacques Poiret, Pierre Poiret, and Laurent. The last three
  are provincial mayors._

  _Lucie and Madame Chevillot are in smart evening gowns; the colonel
  and the sous-intendant in uniform; Chevillot and Brignac are in
  evening dress; Jacques Poiret in a frock coat, and Laurent and Pierre
  Poiret in morning coats._

  _It is after dinner. They are drinking coffee._

PIERRE [_a tall, thin peasant, embarrassed by his coffee cup, speaks
aside to Laurent in a strong provincial accent_] A fine thing, ain’t
it, to be so rich and not have enough tables to go round.

LAURENT [_formerly a working man, to Pierre Poiret_] At lunch ’twas
just the same.

JACQUES [_a crafty farmer, putting his cup down upon the centre table,
and speaking generally_] As for me, I—

LAURENT [_passing his cup to Jacques_] M. le maire, would you mind?

PIERRE [_the same_] M. le maire, would you—?

  _They get rid of their cups, passing them from one to the other._

BRIGNAC [_to the mayors_] Will you take liqueurs? [_He points to a
bottle and small glasses on a tray_].

ALL THREE [_making too much fuss about it_] Thank you, thank you, M. le
sous-préfet.

BRIGNAC. Delighted. [_He passes behind the centre table and pours out
liqueur_].

SOUS-IN [_he is small and thin and wears spectacles: a professor
disguised as a soldier_] Yes, ladies: it is an eccentricity. I
acknowledge it and beg you to excuse it: I am a collector. But you must
confess that I have not bored you with it.

COLONEL [_very much the fine gentleman_] Indeed, no, it was I who let
out the secret. But I said also that you are a learned man.

SOUS-IN. A dabbler only, colonel.

BRIGNAC [_pretending to find upon the table the circular mentioned in
the first act_] Hullo! what’s this? [_No one hears him. He puts the
circular back again upon the table_].

LUCIE [_to the sous-intendant_] And are you also a literary man?

SOUS-IN. The Intelligence Department is the literary section of the
army.

LAURENT [_to Jacques Poiret, passing him his glass_] M. le maire—?

PIERRE [_same thing_] M. le maire—?

BRIGNAC [_again taking up the circular: in a louder voice_] Hullo!
What’s this? [_They all look at him_]. It’s that very circular I was
talking about at dinner: the one from the Minister of the Interior.

COL. About the decline of the population?

BRIGNAC. Yes, colonel. This is an important official document. It
came to-day, and I have been carefully considering what can be done
to advance this movement in my own humble sphere of influence.
[_To Chevillot_] As I said to you a short time ago, M. le maire
of Châteauneuf, the Minister desires to see the whole of France
covered with associations having the increase of the population for
their object; I am certain that you will desire that this town of
Châteauneuf, of which you are the chief magistrate and in which I am
the representative of the Republic, should have the honor of being
among the first to set out upon the road indicated to us.

CHEV. I’m with you. I am a manufacturer: I am all for large populations.

BRIGNAC. You are the very man to be president of the Châteauneuf
association.

COL. I am a soldier: I also am for large populations.

LUCIE. And you, M. l’intendant?

SOUS-IN. I, madame, am a bachelor.

COL [_joking_] More shame for you!

BRIGNAC [_also joking_] It’s a scandal, monsieur, a perfect scandal.

MME. CHEV. You don’t regret it?

SOUS-IN. Ah, I don’t say that, madame.

BRIGNAC [_to the three mayors_] You have heard, messieurs les maires:
commerce and the army require the increase of the population, and the
Government commands you, therefore, to further this end to the best of
your ability, each one of you in his own commune.

  _The three mayors seem annoyed. They look at one another._

PIERRE [_nervelessly_] All right, M. le sous-préfet.

LAUR [_in the same tone_] I’ll mention it.

JACQUES [_the same_] I’ll think it over.

BRIGNAC. Oh, but gentlemen, I want something more definite than that.
I am a man of action: I am not to be put off with words. ‘Acta non
verba.’ May I depend on you to set to work?

LAUR. You see, M. le sous-préfet, this’ll take a bit of thinking over.

JACQUES. Don’t be in a hurry.

BRIGNAC. We must be men of action. M. Pierre Poiret, now is your
chance, won’t you give them a lead?

PIERRE. _Me_—M. le sous-préfet?

BRIGNAC. Yes, _you_, M. le maire!

PIERRE. No—oh, no—not _me_. If you knew—no—not me. [_Pointing to his
neighbor_] My brother, Jacques Poiret: he’s your man. Ask Jacques, M.
le sous-préfet, he can’t refuse. But _me_—not me!

BRIGNAC. Then it is to be you, M. Jacques Poiret?

JACQUES. If they want to start an association in my commune, M. le
sous-préfet, they must get Thierry to see to it.

BRIGNAC. Who is Thierry?

JACQUES. My opponent at the next election.

BRIGNAC. Why?

JACQUES. Why—if he goes in for this I’m certain to get in. But about
the next commune, I can’t understand why my brother Pierre won’t.

PIERRE. Me?

JACQUES. Yes, you’re the very man.

BRIGNAC. Why?

JACQUES. Why? Because he has eight children.

BRIGNAC. You, M. Pierre Poiret, you have eight children, and you said
nothing about it! Let these ladies congratulate you.

PIERRE [_resisting_] It’s not civil, M. le sous-préfet, it’s not civil.

BRIGNAC. What d’you mean?

PIERRE. When you ask people to dinner it’s not to make fun of them.

BRIGNAC. But I’m not making fun of you.

PIERRE. You’d be the first that didn’t. _I_ can’t help it! It’s real
bad luck, that’s what it is. But it’s no reason why I should always be
made fun of.

BRIGNAC. But—

PIERRE. Yes, it’s always the same. In my commune—

BRIGNAC [_interrupting_] But I assure you—

PIERRE. In my commune they’re always joking about me. They say ‘Hey,
Pierre Poiret, there’s a prize for the twelfth!’ Or they say ‘Pierre
Poiret’—and there isn’t a single day they don’t say it, and everyone
thinks it’s funny, and they split with laughing—they say ‘Pierre
Poiret’—only—hum—not before the ladies. [_Jacques Poiret is holding his
sides_] Just look at that fool! I’m sure he brought the talk round to
that a’ purpose.

BRIGNAC. No, no.

PIERRE. I bet you he did. Whenever we’re in company it’s the same
thing. I won’t go about with him any more.

BRIGNAC. But your position is most honorable.

PIERRE. And the worst of it is that he’s right. I call myself a fool
myself when I’m alone. [_Jacques Poiret goes on laughing_] Look at
him—grinning—look!—because he’s only got two. [_To his brother_] You
puppy!

COL [_to Pierre Poiret_] You deserve the greatest credit, M. Pierre
Poiret.

BRIGNAC. You do.

CHEV. You do, indeed, monsieur.

COL [_to Pierre Poiret_] In comparing your conduct with your brother’s
all men of real worth will blame him and congratulate you, as I do,
most sincerely. [_He shakes him by the hand_].

CHEV [_to Pierre Poiret_] Bravo, monsieur! You are helping us in our
great work. [_He shakes him by the hand_].

JACQUES [_looking at his brother_] They _seem_ as if they meant it!

BRIGNAC [_to Jacques Poiret_] You, monsieur, have chosen the easier and
more agreeable life; don’t be surprised if we look upon your brother as
the more meritorious, though you may be cleverer.

PIERRE [_striking his thigh_] That’s the talk. [_To his brother_] Put
that in your pipe, M. Jacques.

JACQUES. All right. You are the most meritorious. Is that what you’re
going to pay your baker with?

PIERRE. Shut up! I’m the best citizen! I’m the most meritorious!

JACQUES. H’m—yes. What does that bring you in?

SOUS-IN. _I_ will tell you that, monsieur. It brings in to your
brother, as the poet says, ‘The joy of duty done.’

JACQUES. H’m. _That_ won’t put butter on his bread.

SOUS-IN. That is true. But one can’t have everything.

PIERRE [_to Brignac, pointing to his brother_] He’s right, monsieur.
For the once that I’ve been complimented, I’ve had to go through some
bad times.

BRIGNAC. You mustn’t think of that.

PIERRE. Oh—mustn’t I? Go along! _He’s_ right.

BRIGNAC. He’s not.

PIERRE. Yes, he is.

CHEV. and COL. No, no.

PIERRE. Yes, he is.

BRIGNAC. No. It’s possible that some people might think so now; but in
ten years the tables will be turned. He may die lonely, while you will
have a happy old age with your children and your grandchildren.

PIERRE. Perhaps it was like that once; but nowadays as soon as the
children can get along by themselves, off they go!

CHEV. Even so they will send you help if you need it.

JACQUES. They couldn’t help him, even if they wanted to.

COL. Why not?

JACQUES. Because as there were eight he couldn’t do anything for them,
so they’ll only be struggling, hand-to-mouth creatures; not earning
enough to keep themselves, much less help him.

PIERRE. And he’s been able to bring up his well. He’s only one girl:
he gave her a fortune and she made a fine marriage. He’s only one
boy: he was able to send him to Grignon and he’ll earn big money like
his father. No: it’s no use your talking. They’re right when they say
’Well, Poiret,’—h’m—not before the ladies.

  _He goes to the table, pours himself out a glass of cognac and drinks
  it._

COL. I regret to say we have become too far-seeing a nation. Everyone
thinks of his own future: no one thinks of the good of the community.

BRIGNAC. In former times people troubled less about the future. They
had faith, and remembered the words of the Scriptures, ‘Consider the
lilies of the field, how they grow; they toil not, neither do they
spin: and yet I say unto you, that even Solomon in all his glory was
not arrayed like one of these.’

LUCIE. And yet there are little children going about in rags.

SOUS-IN. God must be less interested in them than in the lilies of the
field.

COL [_to Jacques Poiret_] But, monsieur, you need hands, too, in
harvest-time.

JACQUES. I have a cutting-and-binding machine. It does the work of
twelve men, and only cost a thousand francs. A child costs more.

CHEV. We must have workmen to make machines.

JACQUES. We buy the machines ready-made in America much cheaper than we
can make them in France.

CHEV. If there were a greater number of workmen we might cut down wages
and produce at lower prices.

JACQUES. Cut down wages! The workmen are complaining already that they
can’t live on their wages.

CHEV. Bah! give them twenty francs a day, and they’ll still complain.

SOUS-IN. You have not tried that yet.

COL. My dear fellow, remember that, as a bachelor, you are out of this
discussion.

SOUS-IN. I withdraw.

CHEV. I didn’t mean that for you, Laurent. [_To the Colonel_] M.
Laurent, the mayor of Ste. Geneviève, was formerly a workman of mine,
but he came into a little money, and went back to his native place.
[_To Laurent_] No—I didn’t mean it for you; but they’re not all like
you, you know.

BRIGNAC [_to Laurent_] So you refuse to form an association too?

LAUR. Refuse, M. le sous-préfet? No.

BRIGNAC. At last! Here’s a mayor who understands his duties. He’ll
start the thing among his people, and before long we shall have the
commune of Ste. Geneviève setting an example to the whole of France.

LAUR. Don’t get that into your head, monsieur; you’ll be disappointed.

BRIGNAC. No, no.

LAUR. Whether you form your association or don’t form your association,
the people at home are too sensible to have more children than they’ve
cradles for. They know too well they must put a bit by.

BRIGNAC. If you think that an association will make no difference why
do you agree to form one?

LAUR. Because I want you to get me what you promised me.

BRIGNAC. What was that?

LAUR. You know.

BRIGNAC. No, I don’t.

  _Laurent touches his buttonhole._

BRIGNAC [_angrily_] Is that what we’ve come to? We were speaking of the
good of the community.

CHEV [_the same_] It’s most discouraging. We point out to you that the
trade of the country is in danger.

BRIGNAC. And you only think of yourself.

CHEV. You only think of yourself.

BRIGNAC. What a want of public spirit!

CHEV. Bad citizenship!

LAUR [_getting excited_] Oh, yes! Making the poor do everything! Go
and talk to the middle classes, who’ve money enough to rear children by
the dozen, and who’ve fewer than the workmen. Here’s M. Chevillot: he
has twenty thousand francs a year, I have two thousand. When he has ten
children, then I’ll have one. That’ll be fair and square, won’t it now?

CHEV. These personalities—

LAUR. Is it true that you’ve only one son?

CHEV. It’s true. But if I had several my works would have to be sold at
my death, and—

LAUR. There we are. These gentlemen are too precious careful about the
fortunes they leave their own children; but when it’s a question of the
workmen’s children, they think it don’t matter if there ain’t enough
victuals to go round.

CHEV. It is to the interest of the workmen that my works should be
prosperous.

LAUR. But you only take unmarried men.

CHEV. I beg your pardon—I—

LAUR. Is it true?

CHEV. It’s because of the Employers’ Liability Bill. Let me
explain—[_Laurent turns his back on him. He addresses himself
to Brignac_] Allow me to—[_Brignac does not listen. To the
sous-intendant_] If I was allowed to explain you would understand. I’m
perfectly consistent.

LAUR. Are we to do as you say, or are we to do as you do? If you
believed what you say you’d act accordingly.

CHEV. But—

BRIGNAC. We shouldn’t indulge in these personalities. We must look
higher. Lift up your hearts. Sursum corda. You have just heard,
gentlemen, that commerce and the army protest against the decline of
the population. And I, the representative of the Government of this
country, tell you, in concert with commerce and the army, that there
must be more births.

LAUR. And what’s the Government doing?

BRIGNAC. What is it doing!—well—and this circular?

SOUS-IN. We must be just. Besides this circular, the Government has
appointed a Commission to enquire into the matter.

BRIGNAC. Various measures are being brought up.

LAUR. When they’re passed—we’ll see.

BRIGNAC. Those who have a large family will be exempted from taxation.

LAUR. From what taxes?

BRIGNAC. What taxes! The taxes you pay to the collector, of course.

LAUR. Listen, M. le sous-préfet. The poor pay next to nothing of those
taxes. They pay the _real_ taxes: the taxes upon bread, wine, salt,
tobacco: and they’ll go on paying them. The more children you have, the
more money the State takes from you.

SOUS-IN. Pray do not forget that the State proposes to confer a
decoration upon every mother of seven children.

PIERRE [_to Laurent_] There you are!

JACQUES. M. le sous-préfet, we must be off. We’ve a long way to go.

BRIGNAC [_to Jacques_] Good night, M. le maire.

PIERRE [_tipsy_] I’m all right here. Why go ’way?

LAUR. I’m a fool, M. Brignac. I’m afraid I’ve been setting you against
me. I’ll start an association—trust me. Good night. Good night, madame.

JACQUES. Good night, madame.

LUCIE. Good night, good night.

PIERRE. Good night, ladies, gents, and—hic—the company.

  _They go out, accompanied by Brignac._

COL [_to Lucie and Madame Chevillot_] I’m afraid we’ve bored you,
ladies, with our discussion.

LUCIE. Not at all.

COL. I notice that women are usually a little impatient if we talk of
these questions.

SOUS-IN. As impatient as we should be if they discussed the recruiting
laws without consulting us.

MME. CHEV. Precisely.

COL [_to Lucie_] Perhaps, too, you don’t agree with us.

LUCIE. You’ll never make women understand why children must be created
to be killed in your battles.

COL [_to the sous-intendant_] There, that’s how the military ruin of a
country is brought about.

SOUS-IN. You’re right, colonel, if it be true that power is a function
of number.

COL. Well, isn’t it?

SOUS-IN. Those who believe the contrary say ‘There is no evidence in
history that supremacy, even military supremacy, has ever belonged to
the most numerous peoples.’ I quote M. de Varigny. General von der
Gotz shares this opinion, and our own General Serval says, ’All great
military operations have been performed by small armies.’

  _Brignac comes in._

COL. Oh, ho, Mr. Bachelor, you’ve got all the arguments on your side at
your finger-ends.

BRIGNAC. We shall make laws against you and your like, M. le
sous-intendant. We shall make it impossible for you to receive money
by will, as the Romans did. We shall make you pay fines, as the Greeks
did. And we’ll invent something new, if necessary.

SOUS-IN. Compulsory paternity!

COL. One may fairly ask whether people have the right to shirk these
obligations.

SOUS-IN. Some people think it is their duty.

BRIGNAC. Their duty!

SOUS-IN. Are you sure that all men who don’t marry are bachelors from
pure selfishness?

COL. Of course, we’re not speaking of you personally.

SOUS-IN. Do so, by all means. It was not out of mere lightness of heart
that I deprived myself of the tenderness of a wife and the caresses of
a child. When I was young I was poor and sickly. I did not choose to
bring children into the world when I had nothing to leave them but my
bad constitution. I said, in the words of a great poet:

                            Remain
  In the elusive realm of might-have-been,
  O son more loved than any ever born!

I thought it better to be lonely than let the stock go from bad to
worse. I believe it is a crime to bring a child into the world if
one cannot give it health and bring it up well. We saw one hundred
conscripts this morning, colonel, and we passed sixty. Would it not
have been better if there had only been eighty and we could have passed
them all?

COL. Perhaps you are right. I said what I said because I’ve heard it so
constantly repeated.

SOUS-IN. When there are healthy houses and food and clothing for
everyone it will be time to think of adding to the number.

LUCIE. That is very true.

CHEV. You evidently don’t share M. Brignac’s ideas, madame.

BRIGNAC. Oh, indeed she does. Madame Brignac and I have three children,
and we don’t mean to stop there: so my wife may qualify for that
decoration some day.

LUCIE [_to Chevillot_] As far as I can see, M. le maire, when children
are born now society does not always make them welcome.

BRIGNAC. I think, my dear, that you had better leave the discussion of
this important question to the gentlemen.

LUCIE. But surely it has some interest for us women! I hear everyone
else consulted about it—political people and business people—but nobody
ever thinks of consulting us.

BRIGNAC. Far from not welcoming the children that are born, society—

LUCIE [_to Brignac_] Stop! Do you remember what happened lately, not a
hundred miles from here? I mean about the servant who was turned out
into the street because she was going to have a baby. She will have
to go to some hospital for her confinement. And after that what will
happen to her and her child?

BRIGNAC [_to the others_] Madame Brignac speaks of something which
took place recently in a most respectable family. The incident has
nothing whatever to do with the principles we are defending. It is
clear that one cannot have a servant in that condition in a well-kept
house. And there are higher considerations which will always prevent
a respectable citizen from even appearing to condone immorality by
sheltering it. One must not offer a premium to evil-doing.

CHEV. Very true.

LUCIE. And the unfortunate girl, who is very likely only the victim of
another person, is condemned by everyone.

BRIGNAC [_timidly_] No, no, I don’t say that. I myself am very liberal,
and I confess that in—exceptional circumstances—one should be indulgent
to her.

LUCIE. Very well. Don’t forget you have said that.

COL. Good night, madame. I must be going. Thank you for a charming
evening.

CHEV. I also, madame—charming.

BRIGNAC [_pointing to the door into his office_] This way. As you go
out I want to shew you a diagram I have had done, by which you can make
yourself acquainted at a single glance with the political conditions of
the division. There is an arrangement of pins—[_They hesitate_]. One
minute. It will only take a minute. You can go out through the office.
One minute—while you are putting on your coats. The coats are in there.
I’m going out with you to a reception at the club. You’ll see—it’s
rather curious. [_To Lucie, aside_] You come too. [_Aloud_] I think the
idea is ingenious.

  _He talks them all off. When they are gone there is a short pause,
  and then Catherine opens the door at the back and steps forward._

CATHERINE [_to Annette, who has come into the anteroom_] Yes,
mademoiselle, they are all gone.

  _Annette comes in. She takes off her hat and cloak and hands them to
  Catherine, who takes them into the anteroom and comes back to turn
  out the principal electric lights and to take away the tray. Annette,
  with fixed, staring eyes, sits rigidly upon the couch. Lucie comes
  in._

LUCIE. Annette! Where have you been?

ANNETTE. I have been to see Jacques Bernin.

LUCIE. You have seen him? You have spoken to him?

ANNETTE. I went to his father’s house.

LUCIE. Well?

ANNETTE. There is no hope.

LUCIE. What did they say to you?

ANNETTE. I oughtn’t ever to tell anyone about the two hours I have just
lived through. It’s too shameful. Too vile. What I can’t believe is
that all that really happened to _me_, and that I am alive still.

LUCIE [_tenderly_] Tell me all about it.

ANNETTE. What’s the good of my telling you? It’s all over. There’s
nothing left. He didn’t love me: he never loved me. He’s gone. He’s
going to marry another woman.

LUCIE. He’s _gone_?

ANNETTE. He went this evening. They all went. M. and Madame Bernin and
Gabrielle dined at the station; Jacques dined at a restaurant with some
friends. I went there. I sent up for him. From where I was standing, in
the vestibule, I heard their jokes when the waiter gave him my message.

LUCIE [_in gentle reproach_] Annette!

ANNETTE. I wanted to know. I was certain his people were taking him
away by force, and I was making excuses for him. I was certain he
loved me. I should have laughed if anyone had told me he wouldn’t be
horrified when he heard what had happened to me. I thought that when he
knew, he’d take my hand, and go with me to his people, and say ‘Whether
you wish it or not, here is my wife.’ As I was sure it would end like
that, I thought it was better it should be over at once. I expected to
come back here to beg your pardon—to kiss you and comfort you.

LUCIE. And what did he say?

ANNETTE [_without listening_] I think I’ve gone mad. All _that_
happened, and I’m here. I’m quiet: I’m not crying: it’s as if I was
paralysed.

LUCIE. You said you sent a message to him at the restaurant?

ANNETTE. Yes.

LUCIE. Did he come?

ANNETTE. Yes. He said he thought some chorus-girl wanted him.

LUCIE. Oh! And when he found it was you?

ANNETTE. He took me out into the street for fear I should be
recognized, and I had to explain it to him in the street. [_A pause_].
People passing by stared at us, and some of them laughed. [_With
passion and pain_] Oh! if I only had no memory!

LUCIE. Tell me, darling, tell me.

ANNETTE [_with violence_] Oh, I’ll tell you. You’ll despise me a
little more; but what can that matter to me now? First he pretended not
to understand me: he forced me to say it quite plainly: he did it on
purpose—either to torture me, or to give himself time to think. You’ll
never guess what he said—that it wasn’t true.

LUCIE. Oh!

ANNETTE. Yes, that it wasn’t true. He got angry, and he began to
abuse me. He said he guessed what I was up to; that I wanted to make
a scandal to force him to marry me—oh, he spared me nothing—to force
him to marry me because he was rich. And when that made me furious,
he threatened to call the police! I ought to have left him, run away,
come home, oughtn’t I? But I couldn’t believe it of him all at once,
like that! And I couldn’t go away while I had any hope. You see, as
long as I was with him, nothing was settled: as long as I was holding
to his arm it was as if I was engaged. When he was gone I should
only be a miserable ruined girl, like dozens of others. Then—I was
afraid of making him angry: my life was at stake: and to save myself
I went down into the very lowest depths of vileness and cowardice. I
cried, I implored. I lost all shame and I offered to go with him to a
doctor to-morrow to prove that what I told him was true. And what he
said then I cannot tell you—not even you—it was too much—_too_ much—I
didn’t understand at first. It was only afterwards, coming back, going
over all his words, that I made out what he meant. He didn’t believe
what he said. He _couldn’t_ have believed what he said. At any rate he
knows that I am not a girl out of the streets. But at first I didn’t
understand. Then—where was I? I don’t remember—At last he looked at
his watch and said he had only just time to catch the train. He said
good-bye and started off at a great pace to the station. I followed
him imploring and crying. I was so ashamed of my cowardice. It was
horrible and absurd! I couldn’t believe it was the end of everything.
I was all out of breath—almost running—and I prayed him for the sake
of his child, for the sake of my love, of my misery, of my very life;
and I took hold of his arm to keep him back. My God! what must I have
looked like! At the station entrance he said, ‘Let go your hold of
me.’ I said, ‘You shall _not_ go.’ Then he rushed to the train, and
jumped into a carriage, and almost crushed my fingers in the door;
and he went and hid behind his mother, and she threatened too to have
me arrested. And Gabrielle sat there looking white and pretending not
to know me. I came back. I haven’t had courage enough to kill myself,
but I wish I was dead! [_Breaking into sobs, and in a voice of earnest
supplication_] Lucie, dear, I don’t want to go through all that’s
coming—I’m too little, I’m too weak, I’m too young to bear it. Really,
I haven’t the strength.

LUCIE. Annette—don’t say that. Hush, my darling, hush. In the first
place, everything hasn’t been tried. You have entreated these people;
now we must threaten.

ANNETTE. It’ll be no use.

LUCIE. It _will_ be of use. The way they’re hurrying away shews how
afraid they are of scandal. As soon as my husband comes in I will tell
him all about it.

ANNETTE. Oh, my God!

LUCIE. He will go down and see them. He will threaten them with an
action. They will give in.

ANNETTE. We can’t bring an action against them. He told me so.

LUCIE. Then there are other ways of defending you. Believe me, I’m sure
of it.

ANNETTE. There are _not_.

LUCIE. There are. And even if there weren’t, you mustn’t talk of dying
at your age. Am I not here? Annette, Annette, my little one, I will
help you through this trouble! You believe me, don’t you? You know how
I love you? You know that mother left you in my care? I’ll help you and
comfort you and love you so well that you’ll forget.

ANNETTE. Forget!

LUCIE. Yes, yes; people forget. If it weren’t for that no one would be
alive.

ANNETTE. I feel as if I had lived a hundred years. Life is hard, hard;
too hard.

LUCIE. Life is hard for all women.

ANNETTE. It’s worse for me than for anyone else.

LUCIE. Oh, Annette! If you only knew!

ANNETTE. When I’ve seen mothers with their little children I’ve had
such dreams.

LUCIE. If you only knew! Those mothers had their own troubles. Nearly
every woman carries about with her the corpse of the woman she might
have been.

ANNETTE. Ah, Lucie, dear, it’s easy for you to talk.

LUCIE. Darling, you mustn’t think you’re alone in your sorrow. I seem
to you to be happy with my children and my husband, and you think my
happiness makes light of your distress. But you’re wrong. Your misery
makes me so weak, I must tell you what I wanted always to hide from
you. My husband does not love me. I don’t love him. Can you realize the
loneliness of that? If you knew what it means to live with an enemy and
to have to endure his caresses!

ANNETTE. My poor dear!

LUCIE. So you see, Annette, you mustn’t think about dying, because
perhaps I shall want your help as much as you want mine. I heard the
door shut. It’s Julien.

ANNETTE. Don’t tell him: please don’t. Spare me the shame.

LUCIE. Go away, now.

ANNETTE. You’ve given me back a little hope. Dearest sister help me, I
have nobody else.

LUCIE. Go!

  _She goes: Brignac comes in._

BRIGNAC [_making for the door of his office_] Not gone to bed yet? I
had a stroke of luck at the club. I met the editor of the ‘Independent’
and I promised to write him an article about the minister’s circular
for to-morrow’s paper. An official’s day is sometimes pretty full, eh?

LUCIE. Julien, I have something very important to tell you. A great
misfortune has happened to us.

BRIGNAC. Good heavens, what is it? The children?

LUCIE. No, it has to do with Annette.

BRIGNAC. You said she didn’t come to dinner because of a headache. Have
you been concealing something?

LUCIE. She is not ill, but she is cruelly and grievously unhappy.

BRIGNAC. Nonsense! Unhappiness at her age! A love affair. Some marriage
she had set her heart on.

LUCIE. Yes, a marriage she had set her heart on.

BRIGNAC. Ouf! I breathe again. What a fright you gave me! _That’s_ not
of much consequence.

LUCIE. Yes, it’s of the greatest consequence. Julien, I appeal to your
heart, to your kindliness, to your best feelings.

BRIGNAC. But what’s the matter?

LUCIE. Annette made the mistake of trusting entirely to the man she
loved, who had promised to marry her. He took advantage of the child’s
innocent love. She has been seduced. [_In a low voice_] Understand me,
Julien, she’s going to have a baby in six months.

BRIGNAC. Annette!

LUCIE. Annette.

BRIGNAC. It’s impossible. It’s—

LUCIE. She is certain of it. She told me about it herself.

BRIGNAC [_after a silence_] Who is it?

LUCIE. Jacques Bernin.

BRIGNAC [_furious_] Jacques Bernin! Well, _this_ is a nice piece of
work! She goes it, this little sister of yours, with her innocent airs!

LUCIE. Don’t accuse her. Don’t.

BRIGNAC. I really cannot compliment her! I’m nicely repaid for all I’ve
done for her, and you may thank her from me for her gratitude.

LUCIE. Oh, don’t be angry.

BRIGNAC. Well, if you are able to hear news like this perfectly calmly,
you are certainly endowed with unusual self-control.

LUCIE. It was the child’s innocence that made the thing possible.

BRIGNAC. I daresay. Go and tell that to the Châteauneuf people!
Besides, if she was so innocent, why didn’t you look after her better?

LUCIE. But it was _you_ who were always urging her to go to the Bernins.

BRIGNAC. In another minute it’s going to be all my fault! I was glad
she should go to their house because I thought old Bernin might be
useful to us. How should I know that the girl couldn’t behave herself?

LUCIE [_indignantly_] Oh, hush! I tell you Annette is the victim of
this wretch. If you are going to do nothing but insult her, we had
better stop discussing the matter.

BRIGNAC. I’m in a nice fix now! There’s nothing left for us but to pack
our trunks and be off. I’m done for, ruined! smashed!

LUCIE. You exaggerate.

BRIGNAC. I exaggerate! I tell you if she was caught red-handed
_stealing_, the wreck wouldn’t be more complete. I even think that
would have been better. I should be less definitely compromized, and
less disqualified.

LUCIE. You can abuse her by and by: the business now is to save her.
The Bernins have gone away this evening; find them to-morrow; and,
if you speak to them as you ought, they’ll understand that their son
_must_ marry Annette.

BRIGNAC. But Jacques Bernin is engaged.

LUCIE. He must break it off, that’s all.

BRIGNAC. He won’t break it off, because it means lots and lots of
money, and because he is the most ferocious little fortune-hunter I
ever met. Yes, he is; I know him, I see him at the club. I’ve heard him
holding forth about women and money; his opinions are edifying. By the
way, has Annette any letters from him connecting him with this business?

LUCIE. No.

BRIGNAC. He’s not such a fool as to compromize himself. He’ll deny
everything.

LUCIE. You must threaten them with a scandal.

BRIGNAC. We should be the first to suffer from that.

LUCIE. But we must do something. We must bring an action.

BRIGNAC. There is no affiliation law in France.

LUCIE. You refuse to go and see what can be done with the Bernins?

BRIGNAC. Not at all. I say that it would be a useless journey.

LUCIE. Then what are we to do?

BRIGNAC. Not a soul in Châteauneuf must know what has happened.
Fortunately we have a little time.

LUCIE. What are you going to do?

BRIGNAC. We’ll see. We’ll think it over. One doesn’t come to a decision
of this importance in ten minutes.

LUCIE. I want to know what you are going to do. Your point of view
surprises me so much that I wish to understand it completely.

BRIGNAC. Understand this, then: if the matter is kept secret, it is
only our misfortune; if it becomes public, it will be a scandal.

LUCIE. How can it be kept secret?

BRIGNAC. We must pack Annette off before anyone suspects.

LUCIE. Where is she to go?

BRIGNAC. Ah! that’s the devil. Where—where? If only we had some friends
we could trust, in some out-of-the-way place, far away. But we haven’t.
Still, we _must_ send her somewhere.

LUCIE. Oh, my God! [_She sobs_].

BRIGNAC [_irritated_] For Heaven’s sake don’t cry like that. That
doesn’t mend matters. We must make some excuse. We’ll invent an aunt or
a cousin who’s invited her to stay. I will find a decent house in Paris
for her to go to. She’ll be all right there. When the time comes she
can put the child out to nurse in the country, and come back to us. I
shall certainly have got my promotion by that time: we shall have left
this place, and the situation will be saved—as far as it can be saved.

LUCIE. You propose that to me and you think I shall consent to it!

BRIGNAC. Why not?

LUCIE. You’ve not stopped to think. That’s your only excuse.

BRIGNAC. I must say, I don’t see—

LUCIE. You seriously propose to send that poor child to Paris, where
she doesn’t know a soul?

BRIGNAC. What do you mean by that? I will go to Paris myself, if
necessary. There are special boarding-houses: very respectable ones.
I’ll inquire: of course without letting out that it is for anyone I
know. And I’ll pay what is necessary. What more can you want? We shall
be sure of keeping the thing quiet that way. I believe there are houses
in Paris subsidized by the State, and the people who stay in them need
not even give their names.

LUCIE. I tell you, you’ve not stopped to think. Just when the child is
most in need of every care, you propose to send her off alone; _alone_,
do you understand, alone! To tear her away from here, put her into a
train, and send her off to Paris, like a sick animal you want to get
rid of. It would be enough to make her kill herself.

BRIGNAC. Can you think of anything better?

LUCIE. Everything is better than that. If I consented to that I should
feel that I was as bad as the man who seduced her. Be honest, Julien:
remember it is in our interest you propose to sacrifice her. We shall
gain peace and quiet at the price of her loneliness and despair. To
save ourselves trouble—serious trouble, I admit—we are to abandon this
child to strangers. She does not know the meaning of harshness or
unkindness; and we are to drive her away now—now, of all times! Away
from all love and care and comfort, without a friend to put kind arms
round her and let her sob her grief away. I implore you, Julien, I
entreat you, for our children’s sake, don’t keep me from her, don’t ask
me to do this shameful thing. I will _not_ do it! We must do something
else. Make _me_ suffer if you like, but don’t add abandonment and
loneliness to the misery of my poor little helpless sister.

BRIGNAC. There would have been no question of misery if she had behaved
herself.

LUCIE. She is this man’s victim! But she won’t go. You’ll have to
drive her out as you drove out the servant. Have you the courage?
Just think of what her life will be. Try to realize the long months
of waiting in that dreadful house: the slow development of the poor
little creature that she will know beforehand is condemned to all the
risks children run when they are separated from their mothers. And
when she is torn with tortures, and cries out in that fearful anguish
I know so well, and jealous death seems to be hovering over the bed of
martyrdom, waiting for mother and child; just when one is overcome by
the terror and amazement of the mystery accomplished in oneself; then,
then—there’ll be only strangers with her. And if her poor anguished
eyes look round for an answering look, perhaps the last; if she feels
for a hand to cling to; she will see round her bed only men doing a
duty, and women going through a routine. And then—after _that_—she’s to
let her child go; to stifle her strongest instinct; to silence the cry
of love that consoles us all for the tortures we have to go through; to
turn away her eyes and say ’Take him away, I don’t want him.’ And at
_that_ price she’s to be forgiven for another person’s crime!

BRIGNAC. But what can I do? I can’t alter the world, can I? The world
is made like that. If Annette was ten times more innocent she couldn’t
stay here.

LUCIE. I—

BRIGNAC [_violently_] And I don’t choose that she shall stay here. Do
you understand? I’m sorry she has to go by herself to Paris. But once
more, if she had behaved respectably she wouldn’t be obliged to do it.

LUCIE. Oh!

BRIGNAC. Can’t you understand that she would suffer much more here,
surrounded by people who know her, than she would there, where she
would be unknown? Here she couldn’t so much as go down the street
without exposing herself to insult. Why, if she even went to mass or
to a concert after her condition became evident, it would be a kind of
provocation; people would avoid her as if she had the plague. Mothers
would sneer and tell their daughters not to look at her, and men would
smile in a way that would be an outrage.

LUCIE. If necessary she can stay at home.

BRIGNAC. Stay at home! Rubbish! What would be the good of that?
Servants would talk, and the scandal would be all the greater. And
you haven’t reflected that the consequences would fall upon me. You
haven’t troubled to consider me, or to remember the drawback this will
be to me. I am not alluding to the imbecile jokes people are sure to
make about the apostle of repopulation. But our respectability will
be called in question. People will remark that there are families in
which such things don’t happen. Political hatred and social prejudice
will help them to invent all sorts of tales. And the allusions, the
suggestions, the pretended pity! There would be nothing left for me but
to send in my resignation!

LUCIE. Send it in.

BRIGNAC. Yes, and what should we live upon then?

LUCIE [_after a silence_] Then _that_ is society’s welcome to the
newborn child!

BRIGNAC. To the child born outside marriage, yes. If it wasn’t for that
there would soon be nothing but illegitimate births. It is to preserve
the family that society condemns the natural child.

LUCIE. If there is guilt two people are guilty. Why do you only punish
the mother?

BRIGNAC. What am I to say to you? Because it’s easier.

LUCIE. And that’s your justice! The truth is, you all uphold the
conventions of society. You do. And the proof is that if Annette stayed
here in the town to have her baby, you’d all cry shame upon her; but
if she goes to Paris and has it secretly and gets rid of it, nobody
will blame her. Let’s be honest, and call things by their names: it
is not immorality that is condemned, but motherhood. You say you want
a larger number of births, and at the same time you say to women ‘No
motherhood without marriage, and no marriage without money.’ As long as
you’ve not changed _that_ all your circulars will be met with shouts of
derision—half from hate, half from pity!

BRIGNAC. Possibly. Good night. I’m going to work.

LUCIE. Listen—Then you drive Annette from your house?

BRIGNAC. I don’t drive her from my house. I beg her to go elsewhere.

LUCIE. I shall go with her.

BRIGNAC. You mean, leave me?

LUCIE. Yes.

BRIGNAC. Then you don’t love me.

LUCIE. No.

BRIGNAC. Ah! Here’s another story. Since when?

LUCIE. I never loved you.

BRIGNAC. You married me.

LUCIE. Not for love.

BRIGNAC. This is most interesting. Go on.

LUCIE. You’re another victim of the state of society you are defending.

BRIGNAC. I don’t understand.

LUCIE. I was a penniless girl, and so I had no offers of marriage. When
you proposed to me I was tired of waiting, and I didn’t want to be an
old maid. I accepted you, but I knew you only came to me because the
women with money wouldn’t have you. I made up my mind to love you and
be loyal.

BRIGNAC. Well?

LUCIE. But when my first baby came you deceived me. Since then I
have only endured you, and you owe my submission to my cowardice. It
was only my first child I wanted, the others you forced upon me, and
when each was coming you left me. It’s true I was unattractive, but
that was not my fault. You left me day after day in my ugliness and
loneliness, and when you came back to me from those other women, you
were full of false solicitude about my health. I begged for a rest
after nursing. I asked to be allowed to live a little for myself, to
be a mother only with my own consent. You laughed at me in a vain,
foolish way. You did not consider the future of your children or the
life of your wife, but you forced upon me the danger and the suffering
of bringing another child into the world. What was it to you? Just the
satisfaction of your vanity. You could jest with your friends and make
coarse witticisms about it. Fool!

BRIGNAC. That’s enough, thank you. You’re my wife—

LUCIE. I’ll not be your wife any longer, and I won’t have another child.

BRIGNAC. Why?

LUCIE. Because I’ve just found out what the future of my poor,
penniless little girls is to be. It’s to be Annette’s fate, or mine.
Oh, to think I’ve been cruel enough to bring three of them into the
world already!

BRIGNAC. You’re mad. And be good enough not to put on these independent
airs. They’re perfectly useless.

LUCIE. You think so?

BRIGNAC. I am sure of it. If you have had enough of me, get a divorce.

LUCIE. But you would keep the children?

BRIGNAC. Naturally. And let me tell you that as long as you are my wife
before the world, you’ll be my wife really.

LUCIE. And you will force me to have a child whenever you please?

BRIGNAC. Most certainly.

LUCIE. My God! They think a woman’s body is like the clay of the
fields; they want to drag harvest after harvest from it until it is
worn out and done for! I refuse this slavery, and I shall leave you if
you turn out my sister.

BRIGNAC. And your children?

LUCIE. I will take them with me.

BRIGNAC. And their food?

LUCIE. I will work.

BRIGNAC. Don’t talk nonsense. You couldn’t earn enough to keep them
from starving. It’s late: go to bed.

LUCIE [_her teeth clenched_] And wait for you?

BRIGNAC. And wait for me. Precisely. [_He goes out_].

LUCIE [_rushing to the door on the left_] Annette! Oh, Annette! There’s
nobody to help us!




ACT III


  _A court house, of which only two sides are visible. The footlights
  would almost correspond with a line drawn from one angle to the
  opposite one. On the left to the front is the raised seat of the
  public Minister. Further back, to the left, the court. Facing the
  audience, successively, counsels’ bench; the defendants’ bench, a
  little raised; and the police bench._

  _In the centre, facing the table on which lie the ‘pièces à
  conviction,’ is the witness-box._

  _To the extreme right are three or four benches, of which a part only
  is visible, reserved for the public. The jury, which is not visible,
  would be in the prompter’s place._

  _There are present the advocate-general: the president of the court
  and his assessors; also the counsel for the defence and some junior
  barristers. In the dock are Madame Thomas, Marie Caubert, Tupin,
  Madame Tupin and several policemen. Madame Chevillot is among the
  public._

PRESIDENT [_authoritatively, to the counsel for the defence_] Maître
Verdier, you cannot speak now. I see what line you propose to take for
the defence, and I give you fair warning that I shall use my whole
power and authority to prevent you from making light of the criminal
acts attributed to the defendants.

COUNSEL FOR THE DEFENCE. You are mistaken, M. le président. I have
no intention of making light of them. On the contrary, I declare
definitely that in my eyes abortion is a crime, because it deprives
of life a creature already living; and to condone it would lead to
condoning infanticide also. But what I propose to demonstrate is that
in not permitting affiliation and in not respecting all motherhood,
whatever its origin may be, society has lost its right to condemn
a crime rendered excusable by the hypocrisy of custom and the
indifference of the laws.

PRES. This is not the time for your address. Let the woman Thomas stand
up. [_To Madame Thomas_] So you hunted up your clients in the provinces?

MME. THOMAS. No, M. le président. They came and found me.

PRES. We shall see. Usher, bring forward the witness—[_he hunts for the
name in his notes_]—Madame Lucie Brignac.

MME. CHEV [_among the audience, to her neighbor_] Mustn’t Brignac be
in a hurry to get his divorce!

  _Lucie has approached the witness-bar. She is thinner and older._

PRES [_to the usher_] Has the witness been sworn?

USHER. Yes, M. le président.

PRES [_to Lucie_] Was it of her own free will that your sister,
the unfortunate Annette Jarras, in consequence of whose death the
defendants have been arrested, came to Paris and placed herself in the
hands of this woman?

LUCIE. Yes, M. le président.

PRES. Very well. Go and sit down. I will call you again presently.
[_Lucie retires to her place, sobbing_]. Marie Caubert, come forward.
[_A small, thin woman rises_]. Your name is Marie Caubert? How old are
you?

SCHOOLMISTRESS. Twenty-seven.

PRES. Profession?

SCH. Schoolmistress.

PRES. You have come from the country, too: do you know what you are
accused of?

SCH. Yes, M. le président.

PRES. What have you to say in your defence?

SCH. I did not know I was doing wrong.

PRES. Your levity amazes me. You are a schoolmistress, and you do not
realize that the sacred mission with which you are entrusted, the
mission of preparing citizens and citizenesses for the glories of the
future, demands that your life should be exemplary. You are appointed
to give the elementary course of lessons in civic morality: is it thus
that you practise that morality? You have no answer? According to the
notes I have here you insisted upon nursing your two children yourself.
Do you love them?

SCH. It was just because I love them.

PRES. But you decided that two were enough. You ventured to limit the
work of the Creator.

SCH. I should have liked nothing better than to have four or five
children.

PRES. Indeed! Then allow me to inform you that you’ve not taken the
best means for arriving at that desirable result. [_He laughs, turning
to his assessor on the right, who laughs also_].

SCH. One must have money enough to bring them up.

PRES. Ah! Stop a moment. If some people were to make that bad excuse I
might understand it. But from you, who enjoy the inestimable advantage
of being under the protection of the State, I do not understand it. You
are never out of work.

SCH. I earn 83 francs a month, and my husband, who teaches too, earns
the same. That makes 166 francs a month to live on and to rear two
children. When there were four of us we could just scrape along, but
with five we couldn’t have managed it.

PRES. You forget to mention that when your children are coming you have
a right to a month’s holiday on full salary.

SCH. Yes, at one time, M. le président, but not now. In 1900 a
ministerial circular announced to us that there was not enough money,
and we could practically only have holidays at half salary. To get the
whole salary we must have a certificate from the inspector, giving
reasons. One has to petition for it.

PRES. Well, then one petitions.

SCH. It’s hard to seem like a beggar simply because one has children.

PRES. Oho! You’re proud.

SCH. That’s not illegal.

PRES. And that’s why you went to the woman Thomas?

SCH. Yes, monsieur. My husband and I had arranged our expenses
carefully. On the evening of the day we were paid our salary we used
to divide the money into little portions and put them away. So much
for rent, so much for food, so much for clothing. We just managed
to get along by being most careful; and several times we cut down
expenses it didn’t seem possible to cut down. A third child coming
upset everything. We couldn’t have lived. We should all have starved.
Besides, the inspectors and directresses don’t like us to have many
children, especially if we nurse them ourselves. They told me to hide
myself when I was suckling the last one. I only had ten minutes to do
it in, at the recreations at ten o’clock and at two o’clock; and when
my mother brought baby to me I had to shut myself up with him in a dark
closet.

PRES. All that’s irrelevant.

COUN. DEF. No, M. le président, it ought to be known here how the
State, which preaches increase of the population, treats its employés
when they have children.

PRES [_furious_] You have no right to speak. [_To the schoolmistress_]
Have you anything more to say?

SCH. No, M. le président.

PRES. Then sit down. Tupin, stand up.

TUPIN [_a working man, mean and wretched_] After you, Calvon.

PRES. What! _What_ did you say?

TUPIN. I said ‘After you, Calvon.’ Calvon’s your name, isn’t it?

PRES. I warn you I shall not stand any insolence from you.

TUPIN. I say to you ‘After you, Calvon,’ as you say to me ‘Tupin, stand
up.’ If that’s insolence, I didn’t begin it.

PRES. I shall have you turned out of the court. Stand up.

TUPIN [_standing_] There: I’m very glad to. It’ll take the stiffness
out of my legs.

PRES. Your profession?

TUPIN. Electrician.

PRES. You were once. It is a long time since you worked regularly.

TUPIN. I can’t get work.

PRES. Because you look for it in the public house. The police reports
about you are most unfavorable.

TUPIN. I never liked the police: I’m not surprised they don’t like me.
[_Laughter from the audience_].

PRES. Silence! or I shall clear the court. [_To Tupin_] The name of
your wife, Eugénie Tupin, has been found in the papers of the woman
Thomas. Where is the woman Tupin? Stand up. [_To Tupin_] That will do,
sit down. You attempted to conceal her from the police.

TUPIN. I thought they were not good company for her.

PRES [_pretending not to hear and consulting his notes_] You gave
yourself up and declared that you yourself took her to this woman’s
house.

TUPIN. You speak like a book.

PRES. You persistently accused yourself. Did you want to go to prison?

TUPIN. It’s not a bad place. One’s warm, and there’s food at every
meal.

PRES. It is true that prison diet is better than your everyday fare.

TUPIN. Now you’re talking.

PRES [_consulting his notes_] When you were arrested you were both
completely destitute. What remained of your furniture had been sold,
and you were entering upon a state of complete vagabondage. No doubt
you also will accuse society. You are an unruly person. You frequent
Socialist clubs; and when you don’t affect a cynical carelessness in
your language, as you are doing now, you like to repeat the empty
phrases you have picked up from the propagandist pamphlets which are
poisoning the minds of the working classes. But we know all about you;
and if you are a victim, you are the victim of your vices. You drink.

TUPIN. I have taken to it lately. That’s true.

PRES. You confess it. Most extraordinary.

MME. TUPIN. What does that prove?

PRES. Your eldest daughter is on the streets and one of your sons has
been sent to prison for a year for theft. Is that true?

TUPIN. Possibly.

PRES. Not quite so insolent now. I congratulate you. We will proceed.
You took your wife to an abortionist. Why?

TUPIN. Because I considered that bringing seven miserable little devils
into the world was enough.

PRES. If you had continued to be the honest and laborious workman that
you once were you might have had another child, without that child
being necessarily a miserable little devil.

MME. TUPIN. That isn’t true.

TUPIN. No, monsieur. After four it’s impossible.

PRES. I don’t understand you.

TUPIN. What I say is that a workman’s family, however hard they work
and screw, can’t get along when there are five children.

PRES. If that is true there are—and this society you despise may be
proud of it—there are, I say, many charities on the watch, so to speak,
for the destitute; and they make it a point of honor to leave none
without relief.

TUPIN [_indignant_] Oh, and that seems all right to you, does it? You
say it’s a workman’s duty to work and to have a lot of children, and
when he does it, fair and square, and it makes a beggar of him, it
seems to you all right!

PRES. Ah, ha! Here’s the orator of the public house parlor. In the
first place, we have only your assertion that a workman’s family cannot
live when there are five children. But, thank God, there are more than
one or two in that condition who have recourse neither to charity nor
to an abortionist.

MME. TUPIN. That’s not true.

TUPIN. Shall I prove to you that you’re wrong?

PRES. That has nothing to do with the charge against you.

MME. TUPIN. Yes, it has.

TUPIN. I beg your pardon. If I prove it that will explain how I came to
do what I did.

MME. TUPIN. I should think so!

PRES. Very well, but cut it short.

TUPIN. I gave my lawyer the month’s account. Please let him read it to
you.

PRES. Very well.

  _The counsel for the defence rises._

COUN. Here it is.

PRES. Stop. You’re not Tupin’s counsel.

COUN. No, M. le président. But my learned friends, with a confidence
which honors me, and for which I thank them, have begged me to take
over the conduct of the case as a whole, reserving to themselves the
right to discuss important matters affecting their several clients.

PRES. Then I give you permission just to read this document. But do not
attempt to address the court. This is not the time. You can read the
paper and that is all. Do you understand?

COUN. I perfectly understand, M. le président. [_He reads_].[B]

[Footnote B: A shorter version of this document, for the theatre, will
be found in a note at the end.]

DAILY EXPENSES.

  FOR THE MOTHER AND CHILDREN.
        _Breakfast._                     f. c.
      Milk, 20c., bread, 10c             0  30
        _Dinner._
      Bread                              0  70
      Wine                               0  20
      Vegetables and dripping for soup   0  20
      Meat                               0  60
      A relish for the children          0  25

  SUPPER FOR ALL THE FAMILY.
      Stew                               0  90
      Potatoes, etc.                     0  20
      Wine                               0  40

  FOR THE HUSBAND.
      Tramway return fare                0  30
      Tobacco                            0  15
      Dinner (out)                       1  25
                                         —————
  TOTAL FOR THE DAY.                     5  45
      Comes to 1989f. 25c. per annum.

YEARLY EXPENSES.

  Rent, 300f.

  Dress.—Three skirts at 5f.; three bodices at 3f.; sixteen pairs of
  boots for the children at 4f. 50c. the pair; four for the parents at
  8f. Two hats at 2f. Underclothes for the mother, 5f.; for the father,
  15f.; for the children, 30f. Bedding and linen, 10f. Clothes of the
  father, 120f. Total, 312f.

The expenses are therefore 2,600f. a year. Tupin, who was a capable
workman, earned 175f. a month, or 2,100f. a year. There was therefore
an annual deficit of 500f. As I promised, I abstain from comment. [_He
sits down_].

MME. CHEV [_to her neighbor_] There were three sous a day for tobacco
that he might very well have saved.

COUN. Perhaps this document might be formally put in evidence.

PRES. It is quite useless. [_To Tupin_] I am not going to dispute your
figures. I admit them, and I repeat there are charities.

TUPIN. And I repeat that I’m not a beggar.

PRES. You prefer to commit what is almost infanticide. A man who has a
daughter on the streets and a son a thief may accept charity without
degradation.

MME. TUPIN [_outraged_] Oh!

TUPIN [_indignant_] In those days they were not what they are now. If
they fell so low it was because I had too many children and I couldn’t
look after my boy; and because my girl was deserted and starving. But
you must be made of stone to throw that in my teeth.

PRES. And if you took to drinking it’s not your fault either, I suppose?

TUPIN. I want to explain about that. When we began to get short in the
house my wife and I started to quarrel. Every time a child came we
were mad at making it worse for the others. And so—I needn’t make a
long story of it—I ended up in the pub. It’s warm there, and you can’t
hear the children crying nor the mother complaining. And besides, when
you’ve drink in you forget.

MME. TUPIN. It’s the sort of thing that it’s good to forget.

TUPIN. And that’s how we got poorer and poorer. My fault if you like.

PRES. And the last child, what about that?

MME. TUPIN. Oh, the last.

TUPIN. The last? _He_ cost us nothing.

PRES [_carelessly_] Eh?

MME. TUPIN. No.

TUPIN. No, he was a cripple. He was born in starvation, and his mother
was worn out.

PRES. And his father was a drunkard.

TUPIN. Maybe. Anyway that one, the sickly fellow, wanted for nothing.
They took him into the hospital. They wouldn’t let me take him away.

MME. TUPIN. He was a curiosity for the doctors.

TUPIN. And they nursed him and they nursed him and they nursed him.
They didn’t leave him a minute. They made him live in spite of himself.
And they let the other children—the strong ones—go to the bad. With
half the money and the fuss they wasted on the cripple they could have
made fine fellows of all the others.

PRES. And was that the reason you did away with the next?

MME. TUPIN. For all the good he’d have got out of this world he might
thank me for not letting him come into it.

PRES. He should never have been created.

TUPIN. That’s true.

PRES. If everyone was like you the country would soon go to the dogs.
But you don’t trouble yourself much about the country, I expect.

TUPIN. Someone said ‘A man’s country is the place where he’s well off.’
I’m badly off everywhere.

PRES. You are perfectly indifferent to the good of humanity.

TUPIN. Humanity had better come to an end if it can’t get on without a
set of miserable wretches like me.

PRES. The jury thoroughly appreciate your moral sense. You can sit down.

  _Evening has come. The ushers bring lamps._

PRES [_to Madame Tupin_] Have you anything more to say?

MME. TUPIN. I have to say that all this is not my fault. My husband and
I worked like beasts; we did without every kind of pleasure to try and
bring up our children. If we had wanted to slave more I declare to you
we couldn’t have done it. And now that we’ve given our lives for them,
the oldest is in hospital ruined and done for because he worked in a
‘dangerous trade’ as they call it!

PRES. Why didn’t you put him into something else?

MME. TUPIN. Because there’s no work anywhere else. They’re full up
everywhere else. There are too many people in the world. My little girl
is a woman now like lots of others in Paris. She had to choose between
that and starving. She chose that. I’m only a poor woman, and I know
what it means to have nothing to eat, so I forgave her. The worst of it
is that sometimes she’s hungry all the same.

TUPIN. And they say God blesses large families!

PRES [_from his notes_] Two others of your children are dead. The two
youngest are out at nurse.

MME. TUPIN. Yes. They were taken away as soon as they were born. All
I know about them is the post-office order I send every month to the
woman who’s bringing them up. Oh, it’s cruel! It’s cruel! It’s cruel!
[_She sits down_].

PRES. We have now only to examine the case of Annette Jarras. Let the
woman Thomas stand up. [_To Madame Thomas_] This was your victim. She
was nineteen, quite young and in perfect health. Now she is in her
grave. What have you to say?

MME. THOMAS [_quietly_] Nothing.

PRES. You don’t excite yourself. Oh, we know you are not easily moved.

MME. THOMAS. If I told you that it was pity made me do it, you wouldn’t
believe me.

PRES. Probably not. But at any rate you might try. Every accused person
has a right to say whatever he can in his own defence: of course under
the control of the president of the court.

MME. THOMAS. It isn’t worth while.

PRES. Oh, yes. Let us hear. The gentlemen of the jury are listening.

MME. THOMAS [_after a sign from her counsel_] A girl came to me one
day; she was a servant. She had been seduced by her master. I refused
to do what she asked me to do: she went and drowned herself. Another I
refused to help was brought up before you here for infanticide. Then
when the others came, I said Yes. I’ve prevented many a suicide and
many a crime.

PRES. So that’s your line of defence. It is in pity, in charity, that
you have acted. The prosecution will answer that you have never failed
to exact payment for your services, and a high payment.

MME. THOMAS. And you? Don’t they pay you for condemning other people?

PRES. Those you condemn to death and execute yourself are all innocent.

MME. THOMAS. You prosecute _me_, but you decorate the surgeons who
trade in sterility.

PRES. Be silent. Sit down. Madame Lucie Brignac. [_Lucie comes forward,
in great emotion_]. Calm yourself, madame, and tell us what you know.
You are called for the defence.

LUCIE. It was I, monsieur, who asked to be heard.

PRES. Speak up, madame, I cannot hear what you say.

LUCIE [_louder_] It was I, monsieur, who asked to be heard. I wanted
to defend the memory of my little one. I fear now I shall not have the
strength. [_She controls herself_]. Annette was seduced by a man who
had promised to marry her. She lived with us. When my husband knew that
my sister was in a certain condition, he wished to send her away. I was
indignant, and I left his house with her and my children. We went to
Bordeaux. We had a few hundred francs, and we thought we could work for
our living. [_She stops_].

PRES. Well?

LUCIE. Our money was soon spent. Annette was giving some music
lessons; they guessed her condition and they sent her away. I did some
sewing.

PRES. And earned some money?

LUCIE. I couldn’t always get work. When I got it, I was paid
sevenpence-halfpenny for twelve hours. I was not a skilled worker. Some
people get a shilling and a halfpenny. We were in despair, thinking of
the child that was coming.

PRES. That was not a reason for leading your sister and her child to
their deaths! [_Lucie is seized with a nervous trembling and does not
answer_]. Answer!

COUN. DEF. Give her a moment to recover, M. le président.

LUCIE [_controlling herself_] I wanted to get her into a hospital, but
they only take them at the end. It seems there are homes one can go to
in Paris, but not in the provinces.

PRES. You could have applied for charity.

LUCIE. Six months residence was necessary. And then, what should we
have done with the child?

PRES. As it was impossible for you to bring it up, your sister could
have taken it to a foundling hospital.

LUCIE. Abandon it—yes, we thought of that. We made inquiries.

COUN. DEF. It is necessary to get a certificate of indigence, and then
make an application to the board of admission. They inquire into the
case and admit or reject. The child may die meanwhile.

LUCIE. And they make a condition that the mother shall not know where
her child is. That she shall never see it or hear of it again. Only
once a month she will be told if it is alive or dead. Nothing more.

PRES. Proceed, madame.

LUCIE. Then I brought my children back to my husband, because we had
nothing left. I went to see the parents of the young man, who is the
cause of everything. They practically turned me out of doors. The
young man is going to be married.

COUN. DEF. May I say a word, M. le président?

PRES. You are sure it is only a word?

COUN. DEF. Yes, M. le président. All the guilty are not in court. I
look in vain for the seducer of this poor girl. He is waiting anxiously
in the provinces to hear the result of this trial, fearing his name may
come out. I have received from him and from his family an imploring
letter, entreating me to spare him and not to mention him by name
during the proceedings. Until now, as a matter of fact his name has not
been mentioned, and we are at the end of the trial. Well, I am going
to make it known at once. I shall have no more pity for the family
and the intended wife of this criminal, than he had for the woman who
is dead, and for the woman whose life he has ruined. If there is no
law in the Code of this country which can reach him, there will be at
least indignation enough in the hearts of all honest people to prevent
Jacques Bernin from enjoying in peace the happiness he has stolen!
[_Prolonged applause_].

PRES [_to Lucie_] Proceed, madame. [_Pause_]. Kindly conclude your
evidence.

LUCIE. I implored my husband to take us back, Annette and me. He
wouldn’t. We came to Paris with a little money he gave me. It was too
soon for them to take Annette into one hospital: in another, where they
would have taken her, there was no room. My husband filed a petition
for divorce.

PRES. Kindly tell us about what concerns the woman Thomas.

LUCIE [_with growing emotion_] Yes, monsieur. Annette was always
reproaching herself with having accepted what she called my sacrifice.
She kept saying she was the cause of all my troubles. [_A silence_].
One day they came to fetch me and I found her dead at this woman’s
house. [_In a burst of sobs, which become hysterical, she cries out_]
My little sister, my poor little sister!

PRES [_kindly, to the usher_] Take her back to her place, or, if
necessary, take her outside and do all you can for her. [_To the
defendants_] Then none of you has any more to say in your defence!

TUPIN [_excited_] Oh, if we said all we’ve got to say we should be here
until to-morrow morning!

MME. TUPIN [_the same_] _That_ we should!

TUPIN [_shouting_] We should never stop!

PRES. I call upon the counsel for the prosecution for his speech.

SCH. But, monsieur, you are not going to condemn me? It’s not possible.
I haven’t said everything.

TUPIN. _We’re_ not the guilty ones.

SCH. I’m afraid of getting a bad name. And we hadn’t the means to bring
up another.

MME. TUPIN [_violently, much excited_] Shut up! As it’s like that—as
that’s what they do to our children—as men have found nothing to change
that—we must do it—the women must do it. We must start the great
strike—_the_ strike—the strike of the mothers.

  _Cries in the audience, ‘Yes, yes.’_

PRES. Silence.

MME. TUPIN [_shouting_] Why should we kill ourselves to get wage-slaves
and harlots for other people?

TUPIN. _We’re_ not the guilty ones.

PRES. I did not—

MME. THOMAS. And all the men that seduced the girls I saved—have you
punished _them_?

PRES. Sit down.

TUPIN. The guilty ones are the people that tell us to have more
children when the ones we have are starving.

COUN. DEF. The seducers are the guilty ones; and social hypocrisy.

  _During the proceedings, anger, which rapidly becomes fury, has taken
  possession of the defendants. They are all on their feet except
  the schoolmistress, who goes on sobbing and murmuring to herself
  unintelligibly. The president, also standing, strikes his desk with
  a paper-knife, trying to impose silence. He shouts, but cannot make
  himself heard. The tumult increases until the curtain falls. The
  voices of the counsel for the defence and the defendants drown those
  of the president and the counsel for the prosecution._

MME. THOMAS. The fine gentlemen that get hold of them and humbug them!

PRES. I will have you taken back to prison.

MME. THOMAS. And the rich young man, and the old satyrs—and the men!
The men! All the men!

COUNSEL FOR THE PROSECUTION. Police, can’t you silence these lunatics?

COUN. DEF. You have no right to insult the defendants.

TUPIN. They’ve been doing nothing else the whole time.

COUN. PROS. Keep this rabble quiet! The defendants must respect the law.

COUN. DEF. And you, sir, must respect justice.

COUN. PROS. You sympathize with their crime. I am outraged by it.

COUN. DEF. They are right. They are not guilty. You must respect—

COUN. PROS. I demand—

COUN. DEF. Our customs are guilty, which denounce the unmarried mother!

AUDIENCE. Bravo! Hear, hear!

COUN. PROS. I demand that the counsel for the defence—

COUN. DEF. Every woman with child should be respected, no matter what
the circumstances are. [_Applause_].

PRES. Maître Verdier, by article forty-three of the regulations—

COUN. DEF. Their crime is not an individual crime, it is a social
crime.

COUN. PROS. It is a crime against nature.

COUN. DEF. It is _not_ a crime against nature. It is a revolt against
nature.

PRES. Police, remove the defendants. [_The police do not understand or
do not hear_]. Maître Verdier, must we employ force? [_Tumult in the
whole court_].

COUN. DEF [_rhetorically_] It _is_ a revolt against nature! And with
all the warmth of a heart melted by pity, with all the indignation
of my outraged reason, I look for that glorious hour of liberation
when some master mind shall discover for us the means of having only
the children we need and desire, release us for ever from the prison
of hypocrisy and absolve us from the profanation of love. That would
indeed be a conquest of nature—savage nature—which pours out life with
culpable profusion, and sees it disappear with indifference. But, until
then—

  _The tumult recommences._

PRES. Police, clear the court! Police—police, remove the defendants.
The sitting is suspended. [_The magistrates cover their heads and
rise_].

MME. THOMAS. It’s not I who massacre the innocents! _I’m_ not the
guilty one!

SCH. Mercy, monsieur, mercy!

MME. TUPIN. _She’s_ not the guilty one!

TUPIN. She’s right. She’s _not_!

MME. THOMAS. It’s the men! the men! _all_ the men!

  _The magistrates go out by the narrow door reserved for them, the
  backs of their red robes disappearing slowly during the last words._


TUPIN’S BUDGET (CONDENSED).

  The daily food of the mother and the five children consists of a loaf
  of bread, soup made of dripping and vegetables, and a stew. Total
  cost, 3f. 75c.

  The husband’s expenses are: tramway fare, 30c.; tobacco, 15c.; lunch,
  1f. 25c.

  General expenses of the family: rent, 300f.; clothing, linen, boots
  (sixteen pairs for the children at 4f. 50c. the pair, four for the
  parents at 8f.), are again 300f.

  Annual total, 2,600f.
