------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               CHARACTERS


                                                             _Age_
      CYRILLE VAN BELLE, _Burgomaster of Stilemonde_          60
      ISABELLE, _his daughter_                                25
      FLORIS, _his son_                                       14
      MAJOR BARON VON ROCHOW                                  45
      LIEUTENANT OTTO HILMER, _the Burgomaster’s son-in-law_  30
      LIEUTENANT KARL VON SCHAUNBERG                          28
      THE MUNICIPAL SECRETARY                                 30
      CLAUS, _the Burgomaster’s head-gardener_                62
      JEAN GILSON                                             30
      THE BURGOMASTER’S FOOTMAN
      A GERMAN SERGEANT
      A GERMAN SOLDIER

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                           SCENE OF THE PLAY


_The Scene is laid at the end of August, 1914, at Stilemonde, a small
town in Belgian Flanders._

_The first_ ACT _begins at 10_ A.M. _and ends at 12 noon; the second
begins at 2_ P.M. _and ends at 4_ P.M.; _the third begins at 5:30_ P.M.
_and ends at 7_ P.M. _on the same day._

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                           THE BURGOMASTER OF
                               STILEMONDE




                                 ACT I


_The_ BURGOMASTER’S _study, a large and very comfortably furnished room
    on the first floor of the house, used partly as an office, and
    partly as a horticultural laboratory. Leather easy-chairs, a glass
    book-case. A large table laden with papers and with vases, dishes
    and baskets full of flowers and fruit: orchids, peaches, plums and
    magnificent bunches of grapes. In the various corners, a
    grandfather’s clock, garden-tools, pulverizers, retorts,
    test-tubes, bee-hives, etc. At the back, a French window opening on
    a balcony. On the right a heavy door._

_As the_ CURTAIN _rises, the_ MUNICIPAL SECRETARY _is writing at a
    corner of the table_. ENTER, _on the right_, JEAN GILSON. _He is
    dressed in ill-fitting peasant’s clothes, and carries his arm in a
    sling._

                              JEAN GILSON

Good-morning, Mr. Secretary.

                             THE SECRETARY

Good-morning. What can I do for you?

                              JEAN GILSON

(_Going nearer._) Don’t you know me, old friend?

                             THE SECRETARY

Why, it’s you, Jean! The last man I expected to see! Where have you
come from? I say, you’re wounded!

                              JEAN GILSON

Yes, a bullet in the arm.... I got it outside Aerschot. They put me
into hospital at Winkel, but the Germans entered the town yesterday
and, as I could walk, I didn’t wait for them to take me prisoner. I got
into these clothes, cleared out, spent part of the night in a ditch,
tramped three hours across country and here I am at Stilemonde. I must
be off at once, though, and try and catch up my carabineers, who ought
to be somewhere near Overloop.

                             THE SECRETARY

You look tired. Does the arm hurt? And you’re soaked through!

                              JEAN GILSON

Yes. The arm’s not much, or rather it wasn’t. To-day, somehow, I seem
to feel it more.

                             THE SECRETARY

That’s because you’re tired. You must rest a little and have your wound
seen to. We’ll find you a bed somewhere, either at my place or here,
which is God’s own house.

                              JEAN GILSON

It’s not a question of resting, it’s not a question of bed; they’ll be
here before the morning’s over.

                             THE SECRETARY

Who?

                              JEAN GILSON

The Germans! There are Uhlans everywhere along the roads; and I expect
the main body isn’t far behind.

                             THE SECRETARY

Impossible! We’ve heard nothing of that here; but of course the
communications have all been cut.

                              JEAN GILSON

Where’s the Burgomaster?

                             THE SECRETARY

I’m waiting for him. He’s in one of the glass-houses. The storm last
night seems to have done some damage. He’ll be here in a minute: the
man has gone to find him. Would you like to speak to him?

                              JEAN GILSON

I’ve a message from the Burgomaster of Winkel, advising him to be very
careful and, above all, to see that no arms are found in the town.

                             THE SECRETARY

We’ve seen to all that; we’ve done everything. All the arms, even the
trophies and curios, have been put away in the Town-hall and locked up
in a room of which I’ve got the key.... So they’re at Winkel, are they?

                              JEAN GILSON

Yes, three or four hundred. I was told that the master’s son-in-law was
at the head of them.

                             THE SECRETARY

The master? Who?

                              JEAN GILSON

Yours, the Burgomaster of Stilemonde.

                             THE SECRETARY

Otto Hilmer? Impossible!

                              JEAN GILSON

Yes, that was the name: Lieutenant Hilmer. So it’s true then? I
wouldn’t believe it. Did the Burgomaster’s daughter marry a German?

                             THE SECRETARY

Of course she did; why not? We were not very fond of the Germans here;
but, after all, they did us no harm; on the contrary.... It was before
the war, when nobody thought of these things. As luck would have it,
poor Madame van Belle, the master’s wife, died a year before the
wedding. It would never have happened had she been alive, for she
loathed the Prussians; and if she could see what they are doing to-day!
But what a blow it will be to the master! Is Lieutenant Otto likely to
be coming here?

                              JEAN GILSON

Sure to. At least, so he told the Burgomaster at Winkel.... But how did
that marriage come about?

                             THE SECRETARY

In the most natural way. How was one to know that some fine day the
Germans would come and massacre us and do all the dreadful things that
people are talking about ... if they’re true?

                              JEAN GILSON

They’re true enough; and what you’ve heard isn’t the worst.

                             THE SECRETARY

Dreadful! But who could have thought it!... You see, Monsieur van
Belle, our Burgomaster, went to Germany now and again on business. They
made a great fuss of him there and treated him royally. At Cologne they
made him the president of all the local horticultural societies. He had
known the Hilmer family a long time and used to stay with Otto’s
parents whenever he went to Cologne.

                              JEAN GILSON

Are they well off, the Hil—what did you say the name was?

                             THE SECRETARY

The Hilmers. They’ve got a factory in the Rhine Province: electrical
machinery; it’s the biggest factory in the place. Well, young Hilmer,
who’s now Lieutenant Otto, wanted to learn about cultivation of orchids
and hot-house grapes, which happens to be the specialty of Van Belle
and Co. And Monsieur van Belle’s son was keen on electricity only. So
they paired off: young Van Belle went to Cologne and Otto came here.

                              JEAN GILSON

How long ago was that?

                             THE SECRETARY

Nearly two years.

                              JEAN GILSON

And where is young Van Belle now?

                             THE SECRETARY

He was at Cologne when war was declared; but there’s a rumour that he
managed to escape. We’ve heard nothing definite, though, and are very
uneasy.

                              JEAN GILSON

And the other? How did he get back to Germany?

                             THE SECRETARY

I don’t know. He must have got wind of it somehow. He left us suddenly,
at the end of July, gave out that his mother was ill.

                              JEAN GILSON

That shows again that they knew what was going to happen and were
preparing for it. And, as _he_ had been warned, he might at least have
done the same by his father-in-law and still more by his wife’s brother.

                             THE SECRETARY

You see, those people aren’t like us.

                              JEAN GILSON

Or rather we’re not like them, thank Heaven!... Have they been married
long?

                             THE SECRETARY

Close on six months.

                              JEAN GILSON

Are they happy?

                             THE SECRETARY

They worshipped each other. And one’s got to be fair. Otto is a very
pleasant, good-hearted fellow, very kind, and liked doing people a good
turn. Worked very hard. Polite to everybody. Clever too, very. Nothing
really to be said against him.

                              JEAN GILSON

Except that he’s a German; and that’s quite enough.... And how does his
wife take it all?

                             THE SECRETARY

She’s very much upset, of course; and that’s bad, because, as I hear,
she is at this moment—you understand. However, it’s not certain
yet.... She is very restless, very depressed, but she doesn’t say
anything: she was never one to talk much.

                              JEAN GILSON

But he must surely have told her, have prepared her?... She must have
known what was going on?

                             THE SECRETARY

I know nothing about that. I’m not in her confidence.

                              JEAN GILSON

And what does the master say?

                             THE SECRETARY

He’s dreadfully worried. At first, he was quite bowled over. He simply
refused to believe it. Then he was furious, wild, beside himself. But
he calmed down after a bit: you see, he was always something of an
optimist; and now he’s beginning to think that things will be settled
very soon. But here he is.

      (_Enter the_ BURGOMASTER, _carrying a basket filled with prize
          grapes._)

                             THE SECRETARY

(_Rising._) Good-morning, Mr. Burgomaster.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Good-morning, Pierre. How are you?

                             THE SECRETARY

As well as can be, after working all night.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Is everything settled at the Town-hall?

                             THE SECRETARY

Yes, Mr. Burgomaster. All the arms have been stored there; I drew up a
list myself and gave the receipts.... But let me introduce my old
friend Jean Gilson, who’s been wounded at Aerschot. He was in hospital
at Winkel when the Germans entered the town yesterday; he managed to
escape last night.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

(_Shaking hands with_ GILSON.) So you were at Aerschot?

                              JEAN GILSON

Yes, I was a sergeant in the battalion of carabineers which covered the
retreat.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Was it much of a fight?

                              JEAN GILSON

Yes. Two-thirds of the battalion were killed or wounded. There are
always three of them to one of us; and we had no guns. We held our
ground as long as we could; then we were obliged to fall back.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

You look dreadfully tired and must be starving! Pierre, my dear fellow,
why on earth didn’t you...? (_He rings._) I’ll tell him myself. (_Enter
the_ FOOTMAN.) Firmin, bring up some cold meat; bring anything you’ve
got downstairs: bread, butter, eggs, cheese. What cold meat is there?

                              THE FOOTMAN

Veal and chicken, sir; ham, tongue.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

All right, bring them all. And as to drink.... (_To_ JEAN GILSON.) What
wine do you like? I’ve a splendid Rudesheimer and an ’82 white port
which you won’t quarrel with. Which would you like? (_To the_ FOOTMAN.)
Look here, bring both, that’s simpler. (_To_ JEAN GILSON.) You can
manage a couple of bottles, I dare say. If necessary we’ll lend you a
hand, eh, Mr. Secretary? It will be so much less left for the Germans.
There’s fruit enough, as you see. These pears, these plums and peaches
are of my own growing; look at the grapes I have just picked; did you
ever see anything like them? They’re my special achievement: a variety
I got by slowly and patiently crossing the Black Alicante, which is
magnificent to look at but hasn’t much flavour, with a Sicilian muscat
that’s very small but delicious. I’ve secured what’s best in both of
them and kept out what’s bad. Just taste them: aren’t they wonderful?
They’re hard and yet they’re juicy; they just melt as you crush them
with your teeth. Each one is like a drop of wine with a touch of snow
in it. I shall be putting over four thousand pounds of these grapes on
the market every week in five years or so. You’ve been the first to
have a taste of them.... So they’re at Winkel, are they?

                              JEAN GILSON

Yes, Mr. Burgomaster; and they’ll be here this morning. I’m just a bit
ahead of them.

                             THE SECRETARY

Jean tells me that they’re led by Mr. Otto, your son-in-law.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

What, Otto? Impossible! Were you told that? Did you see him?

                              JEAN GILSON

I didn’t see him, but that’s what I was told. There were three officers
at Winkel, a major and two lieutenants; Otto Hilmer was one. I hear
that he said he was coming to occupy Stilemonde with a detachment of
the 62nd Foot.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Yes, he was a lieutenant in the reserve. It’s odd that he should have
dared.... But no, in point of fact he’s right. He has done the right
thing, he will arrange matters and we shall have nothing to fear. All
the same, it’s rather extraordinary. My own son-in-law comes into my
town as a conqueror, booted and helmeted, with his sword drawn, after
violating the frontier of his adopted country.... However, it’s war;
and he can’t help it. He’s not responsible and he can’t do what he
likes. Besides, it’s all the better for us: as long as he’s here, we’ve
nothing to be afraid of.... How are they behaving at Winkel? I hope
they haven’t done much harm?

                              JEAN GILSON

They hadn’t when I left. They took the burgomaster, the priest and the
notary as hostages and declared that they would kill them if a single
shot was fired in the village.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

They won’t do that, thanks to Otto. Otto is a kind-hearted chap, who
wouldn’t hurt a soul. Besides, I feel certain that their massacres and
atrocities have been greatly exaggerated; after all, they’re not
savages.

                              JEAN GILSON

I beg your pardon, Mr. Burgomaster, there has been no exaggeration at
all; on the contrary, we haven’t heard everything yet. What they did at
Andenne, at Dinant, at Louvain, at Aerschot and at every town they came
to is simply appalling. As for the massacres at Dinant and Louvain,
I’ve got that at first hand: two of my men saw it with their own eyes.
At Louvain, they executed two hundred and ten innocent people,
including twenty-four women and fourteen children; at Dinant, six
hundred and six, including thirty-nine children and seventy-one women;
at Aerschot, they shot the burgomaster and his son of fifteen, with
many other entirely harmless and defenceless citizens.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Then it’s true that there have been military executions? I didn’t
believe it.... And what excuse did they make?

                              JEAN GILSON

Their colonel had been killed by a stray bullet, fired by one of their
own men.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

The devil! They’re dangerous then! But we must have none of that here.
(_Enter the_ FOOTMAN.) Here’s Firmin with the tray: sandwiches and the
two bottles. (_Filling the glasses._) This is my ’95 Rudesheimer. Tell
me what you think of it.

                              JEAN GILSON

(_Tasting the wine._) It’s remarkably good.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

You’re right. (_Exit the_ FOOTMAN.) This is one of a lot of fifty
dozen, which I bought at the sale of Von Hulthem the notary, who had
the best cellar in these parts.... But what do you mean to do now? You
can’t go off like this, you know. You must have a few days’ rest here;
and we’ll dress your wound properly; it doesn’t do to trifle with a
thing like that.

                              JEAN GILSON

You see, if they catch me here, they’ll send me to Germany, unless they
shoot me as a franc-tireur.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Have no fear of that. I’ll hide you in the house; I’ll tell Otto and
he’ll arrange things.

                              JEAN GILSON

Nothing would suit me better. I’m very tired and I feel I haven’t the
strength to go very far. But I’m afraid of compromising you if they
find me under your roof.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

I assure you, you have nothing to fear. Leave it all to me. Otto can
refuse me nothing; and you’ll see, we’ll settle all this among
ourselves.

      (_Enter the_ FOOTMAN.)

                              THE FOOTMAN

They’re at the gate, sir.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Who?

                              THE FOOTMAN

The Germans, sir: some officers and a dozen Uhlans. Shall I let them in?

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Certainly, let them in at once. Show the officers up; I’ll wait here.
(_Exit the_ FOOTMAN.)

                             THE SECRETARY

Shall I leave you, Mr. Burgomaster?

                            THE BURGOMASTER

No, stay. But first see to your friend’s safety. Take him into the next
room; then, when Firmin comes back, we’ll find him a bed. Good-bye for
the present, Monsieur Gilson. Take the food and wine with you; you have
nothing to fear. (JEAN GILSON _goes into the next room._) And now let
us prepare to face the enemy. I hear their swords clattering on the
stairs.

      (_Enter the_ FOOTMAN, _with_ MAJOR BARON VON ROCHOW, LIEUTENANT
          OTTO HILMER _and_ LIEUTENANT KARL VON SCHAUNBERG.)

                            THE BURGOMASTER

It’s you, Otto! (_Mechanically puts out his hand and then withdraws
it._)

                                  OTTO

Yes. (_Presenting the_ BURGOMASTER _to the_ MAJOR.) Major, this is the
Burgomaster of Stilemonde, my father-in-law. Major Baron von Rochow.
Lieutenant Karl von Schaunberg.

                               THE MAJOR

Mr. Burgomaster, we shall occupy the town until further orders. You
will have to find billets for two hundred and fifty men. For the
present you will not be called upon to feed them. My two officers and I
will ask leave to take up our quarters in your house. I know the ties
that unite you to one of them. I hope that, thanks to these good
relations, there will be no difficulties between us. Nevertheless, as
is customary, considering the bad spirit which the civil population
have hitherto displayed and in accordance with the formal instructions
which I have received, I am obliged to look upon you as a hostage. If
unfortunately—which Heaven forbid—an attempt were made upon the life
of one of my officers or men, your own life would answer for it. But we
need not, I trust, contemplate any such deplorable contingencies. If
the civilians behave properly, they have nothing to fear. Whatever
people may say, we are not barbarians. We are, above all things, just;
but the necessities of war oblige us to be sometimes severe and always
on our guard. In an hour from now I will send for you to the Town-hall
to discuss the question of supplies and to fix the war-levy.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

The war-levy? I cannot see that, so far, we have done anything to
justify a levy.

                               THE MAJOR

I beg your pardon. I may permit you to discuss the amount but not the
principle.

                                  OTTO

(_To the_ BURGOMASTER.) Please give the Major the large bedroom on the
first floor, the one with a balcony overlooking the square, and the
sitting-room leading into it. Lieutenant von Schaunberg and I will take
the other two spare-rooms. Firmin, show the Major and the Lieutenant to
their rooms.

                               THE MAJOR

I must beg you, Mr. Burgomaster, to put forward your luncheon hour by
thirty minutes. We shall have the honour of taking our seats at your
table at twelve o’clock precisely.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Certainly, sir.

      (_Exeunt the_ MAJOR _and_ LIEUTENANT VON SCHAUNBERG, _with the
          Footman leading the way._)

                            THE BURGOMASTER

My poor Otto!

                                  OTTO

Where is Isabelle?

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Upstairs in her room. She can’t have heard you.

                                  OTTO

How is she? Not ill, I hope?

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Not exactly, but dreadfully depressed, extremely tired and very much
affected by all these happenings.... I expect she is still asleep; and
it is better not to wake her.

                                  OTTO

How does she take the war?

                            THE BURGOMASTER

As we all do, with the utmost amazement, indignation and consternation.
But she is naturally more upset than we, who can’t believe our eyes. My
poor Otto, this is an ugly business they’ve let you in for!

                                  OTTO

You need not think that we do it with a light heart. We are acting as
you see, only because we are forced and constrained to do so by the
incredible attitude of your fellow-countrymen.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Of course it was Belgium that began.

                                  OTTO

That’s truer than you think. She began by playing the game of our
enemies; and, if we had not struck the first blow, we should have been
the victims of our confidence in her loyalty.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Look here, Otto, I know you for an intelligent, conscientious and
thoroughly honest man. You have lived among us and you know what sort
of people we are. How can you stand there and seriously utter such—I
don’t know what word to use, or, if I did, it wouldn’t be a pleasant
one. Let them tell that sort of humbug to your wretched soldiers, or to
a pack of Junkers fuddled with pride and stupidity, but not to a man
like yourself! You know the plain, terrible truth as well as I do, just
as you know what to think of the hideous massacres at Vise, Andenne,
Dinant, Aerschot, Louvain and other places.

                                  OTTO

Excuse me, it is not the same thing. I admit that the violation of
Belgium was a regrettable incident; in my opinion it was a mistake,
necessary perhaps, from certain points of view, but one which will cost
us dear. But I do not admit the massacres. There have been executions
of hostages and reprisals necessitated by incessant acts of treachery
committed by the civil population. Here and there, perhaps, there has
been some excess of zeal; that, unfortunately, is inevitable. But I
know the German army better than you do, because I belong to it; and it
is the most highly disciplined army in the world. It is extremely rare,
not to say impossible, for the army to act without orders, or to
overstep the orders which it receives.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

That’s just what I blame it for. To judge by the effects, those orders
are execrable!

                                  OTTO

It’s lucky that we’re alone. Don’t use words like that: with the best
will in the world, I might not always be able to save you from the
unpleasant consequences.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Very well, we won’t argue about it. We shall never agree on these
points nor on a good many others. I know what I know; and I stick to it.

                                  OTTO

I also know what I know; and history will judge between us.... Let us
try rather to get back to the feeling that united us before this
cataclysm, for which we are not responsible.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

It’s a good thing that you at least do not hold us to be responsible
for the disaster which your people have brought on us. I thank you for
that.

                                  OTTO

Why do you say such things to me? I have absolutely nothing to do with
what has happened. Like the rest of us, I am compelled to obey an
authority which no one can resist. I am a wheel in the machine. I
cannot act otherwise than I do. But my feelings, my affections are just
the same as they were before the war! I persuaded my superiors to send
me here, so that I might prove how grateful I am to you....

                            THE BURGOMASTER

And because you know the country so well!

                                  OTTO

Please don’t continue in that tone: it is not fair and it is extremely
painful to me. I simply wished, as I have told you, to prove my
gratitude by doing all I could to save you, and the town of which you
are the chief authority, from the inconveniences and dangers of an
occupation which I was unable to prevent.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Very well, we won’t talk about it. How long do you reckon to stay here
with your men?

                                  OTTO

We don’t know: perhaps two hours, perhaps two months. It all depends on
events and on the orders which we receive.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

And the Major, what sort of a man is he? He does not look easy to deal
with.

                                  OTTO

He is severe, rather hard, rather dictatorial, rather domineering, a
strict disciplinarian, but absolutely just; taken all round, a good
sort. I repeat, you have nothing to fear, if your people behave
themselves. Besides, in the case of any conflict or misunderstanding, I
hope to use my influence and to smooth matters down. And now let us be
friends, if you will, and allow me to embrace you as I used to.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

(_Stepping back._) Forgive me.... Excuse me.... I can’t just now.

                                  OTTO

That’s strange; I simply can’t understand it. After all, this war is no
business of ours; it’s over our heads; it’s beyond us. However, I
mustn’t take it ill of you; and I can only say, like Antigone, “I take
part in love and not in hatred.” But what’s the time? Eleven o’clock?
Perhaps we might let Isabelle know, if she really isn’t ill? You can
imagine how eager I am to see her after this long separation and after
all that has happened.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

I will send the maid up to her. (_He rings. Enter the_ FOOTMAN, _who
takes the_ BURGOMASTER’S _orders and exit._) Have you any news of my
son?

                                  OTTO

Of Odilon? No, isn’t he here?

                            THE BURGOMASTER

No, they did not let us know of their plans, as they did you; _we_
weren’t told what they were going to do; and so he stopped at Cologne.
We are rather uneasy about him.

                                  OTTO

He is in no danger if he keeps quiet. He will be interned in a
concentration-camp. I’ll write to my people and ask them to see that he
is well treated.... I say, I see on your table one of those Cattleyas
which were rather sickly before I left. How are they doing?

                            THE BURGOMASTER

I believe they’re saved. I found out under the microscope what it was
that was making them wither. It’s a tiny fungus which no orchid-grower
had located before and against which all the ordinary methods of
vaporizing and fumigation are quite useless. I’ve contrived a new
blend; I’ll give you the prescription; it has done wonderfully well so
far. I’m worried about my poor hot-houses, on which I’ve spent the best
part of my life and nearly half my fortune. If only this war doesn’t
turn them into broken glass and scrap-iron! As you know, they contain
nearly half a million valuable flowers; and their destruction would be
an irretrievable disaster, for it would take a whole lifetime to build
up a collection that could compare with mine.

                                  OTTO

Have no fear, there will be no battle or bombardment in this direction;
and while the occupation lasts I shall be able to protect the house of
my wife and my father-in-law, or at least to see that it is protected.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Here is Isabelle.

      (_Enter_ ISABELLE.)

                                ISABELLE

(_Pausing for one moment on the threshold and then rushing into_ OTTO’S
_arms._) You! Is that you? You here; and I did not know!

                                  OTTO

(_Embracing her._) Isabelle!

                                ISABELLE

You’re not wounded? You haven’t been ill?

                                  OTTO

No; and you? I heard you were not very well.

                                ISABELLE

It’s nothing; it was the horror of everything that has happened and the
anxiety of knowing you to be constantly in danger from the enemy....

                            THE BURGOMASTER

What enemy? It’s he and his friends that are the enemy; and he runs no
danger in the midst of them. But I will leave you to yourselves. Call
me when you want me. (_Exit._)

                                ISABELLE

It’s true. I no longer know where I am. I call enemies all who wish you
ill; and that means all the people I love. It is too much for a woman’s
heart to bear. But it is over now, I hope; and the worst is ended.

                                  OTTO

No, the worst is beginning. But I was sure of you and that you at least
would not condemn me unheard.

                                ISABELLE

I condemn the others, but I know that you are no more to blame than I
am. Besides, what does it all matter, when I find you the same as you
were? But shall I have you with me for a few days? That will be
something to set against this awful war!

                                  OTTO

I have no idea. I may have to go away to-morrow.

                                ISABELLE

Are you in the firing-line?

                                  OTTO

It’s all firing-line at the moment. We are advancing like a torrent. I
did not dare tell your father, but the whole of Belgium is invaded.
Antwerp will fall to-morrow and Paris in a week.

                                ISABELLE

And after that?

                                  OTTO

After that, victory; and we shall settle down here, unless you would
rather go with me to Germany.

                                ISABELLE

I shall go where you go.

      (_Enter_ FLORIS.)

                                 FLORIS

Isn’t dad here?

                                  OTTO

Good-morning, Floris! Come and shake hands.

                                 FLORIS

(_Recoiling in horror._) Shake hands with you!

                                ISABELLE

Floris!

                                 FLORIS

Where’s dad?

                                ISABELLE

In the next room. But you might at least be civil and shake hands with
Otto, who wishes us no harm and who has come here to protect us.

                                 FLORIS

I don’t want his protection, thank you!

      (_Exit, slamming the door behind him._)

                                  OTTO

You see the hatred! Amazing! It’s the same everywhere, all the time,
wherever we go. They simply will not listen, they will not understand.
I was conscious of its existence even in the heart of your father, who
is the best-natured, fairest and most tranquil-minded man I know. What
can we do, when they treat us like that?... But we must keep an eye on
the boy. So long as he confines his offensive remarks to me, there’s no
great harm done, but it would be a bad look out for him if he took it
into his head to treat the Major or Lieutenant von Schaunberg in this
way, for they are neither of them very patient. (_A shot is fired in
the distance._) That’s a shot!

                                ISABELLE

Yes, at the bottom of the garden, near the wood.

      (_Enter hurriedly the_ BURGOMASTER _and_ FLORIS.)

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Did you hear? A rifle-shot!

                                 FLORIS

(_Between his teeth._) One less.

                                  OTTO

What do you say?

                                 FLORIS

Nothing. I can say what I like.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

(_Anxiously._) But who fired the shot? It can only have been one of
your men. There’s not a fire-arm left in this house, or anywhere in the
town.

                                  OTTO

It’s probably my brother-officer, Lieutenant von Schaunberg, taking a
stroll in the wood. He’s very fond of shooting; and I told him he’d
find rabbits there.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Yes, the shot came from that side; but there wasn’t a single gun in the
house.

                                  OTTO

He always carries his own among his kit. In any case, if all the arms
are at the Town-hall, you have no cause for alarm. Do you answer for
your servants? Are there no disaffected ones among them?

                            THE BURGOMASTER

What do you call disaffected? They are irritated, incensed, indignant,
exasperated, that’s natural enough; but they know how to restrain
themselves and are not such fools as to attempt a useless murder, which
would entail the destruction of the town and the death of hundreds of
innocent victims, as at Dinant, Andenne, Louvain and Aerschot. I know
them; they will be patient and bide their time.

                                  OTTO

What time?

                            THE BURGOMASTER

The time that will come later.

                                  OTTO

I don’t understand you. Here you are talking like our worst enemies!

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Do you expect me to be one of your friends? Would you insult me by
numbering me among those who.... But I won’t say what I was going to
say, it’s better not.... This incident has unnerved me. For I know that
I am responsible and that if any unpleasantness occurs, it will be on
my head.

                                  OTTO

I hear footsteps outside the house. (_Going to the balcony-window and
opening it._) Is that you, Sergeant Hartung? What is it?

                              THE SERGEANT

(_In the garden below, unseen._) I don’t know, sir. I saw Lieutenant
von Schaunberg go that way.

                                  OTTO

When?

                              THE SERGEANT

A quarter of an hour ago.

                                  OTTO

(_To the_ BURGOMASTER.) It’s what I told you: he has gone shooting in
the wood.

                              THE SERGEANT

Beg pardon, sir, he had no gun with him.

                                  OTTO

Are you sure? That’s odd. Well, run and see what it is, instead of
standing there gaping!

                              THE SERGEANT

Very good, sir. I was just going when you stopped me. But a lot of my
men are there already.

                                  OTTO

I hear shouts. There’s something I don’t like about this. But here’s
one of your men coming back; he’ll tell us what has happened.

                              THE SERGEANT

Hurry up, there! What was it?

                              THE SOLDIER

(_Also in the garden, unseen._) The Lieutenant? Where’s the Lieutenant?

                                  OTTO

Here. What’s the matter? Why don’t you speak?

                              THE SOLDIER

Sir! Lieutenant von Schaunberg! He’s been murdered.

                                  OTTO

What? Who? Come nearer! What are you saying?

                              THE SOLDIER

He’s dead.

                                  OTTO

When? How? Send for a doctor. I’ll come down. Perhaps he’s only wounded.

                              THE SOLDIER

No, sir, he has a bullet through his head. They found him lying in the
bracken.

                                  OTTO

Have they arrested the murderer?

                              THE SOLDIER

They’re hunting in the wood. They’ve seen nobody.

                                  OTTO

(_To the_ SERGEANT.) Have sentries posted at all the gates. Quick!
quick! Shoot any one at sight who attempts to leave the grounds. He
can’t escape. Where’s the Major?

                              THE SERGEANT

I don’t know, sir.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

He’s probably in his room, on the other side of the house. He won’t
have heard.

                                  OTTO

Send and tell him.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

This forebodes no good.

                                  OTTO

Don’t be afraid. The criminal can’t escape; and, when we’ve caught him,
he shall serve as an example that will make them think twice before
they do it again. Stay here, all of you. Let no one leave the room, or
I won’t answer for the consequences. It’s a serious matter, a very
serious matter.


                                (_Exit_)


                                CURTAIN

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                 ACT II


                           _Scene: The same._


_The curtain rises on the the_ MAJOR, _the_ BURGOMASTER, OTTO, _the_
    SECRETARY _and_ ISABELLE.


                               THE MAJOR

Mr. Burgomaster, Lieutenant Karl von Schaunberg has been murdered on
your premises, in your grounds. One of your gardeners has been arrested
near the spot where the crime was committed. We may therefore presume
him to be the culprit. In any case, I shall consider him such, until I
have proof to the contrary; and that is enough. We must make an
example; our safety demands it; and our safety outweighs all other
considerations. In war-time, the best form of justice is the promptest.
Your gardener, therefore, will be shot at seven o’clock precisely,
unless between now and then you hand over the person who, in your
opinion, is the criminal. You know the character and disposition of
your servants better than I do; and you are therefore better able to
discover the malefactor. I have it in my power to command the most
terrible reprisals. Any one else, in my place, would have ordered the
town to be pillaged and set on fire and sentenced a third or a half of
the inhabitants to death. It would have been more regular. Yielding to
the wishes of Lieutenant Otto Hilmer, I will be satisfied with a single
victim. Let me have no cause to regret my clemency and my moderation.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

I repeat what I said to the men who arrested him: it is quite
impossible for old Claus, my head-gardener, to have committed the
crime. He has been in my service for over forty years; and I can answer
for him as I would for myself. He is the gentlest of men, the most
patient, the most harmless. The reason why he was found in the little
wood where the Lieutenant was killed is that the wood contains a
nursery-garden where I myself sent him, this morning, to bud the
rose-trees. He had no weapons on him except his pruning-shears and his
grafting-knife. Besides, I am convinced that, of all my servants and
workmen, Claus is perhaps the only one who has never handled a gun or a
revolver in his life.

                               THE MAJOR

Mr. Burgomaster, you do not seem to perceive that, by exonerating your
head-gardener, you are accusing and condemning yourself. But I will not
argue with you; the enquiry is not my affair. Manage it as you please;
what I have said I have said. I need a culprit; and that culprit has to
be shot at seven o’clock. It shall be whichever of your men you choose
to name; it shall be yourself, if you give me no one else. Meanwhile,
please consider yourself under arrest in your own house. It is guarded;
and any attempt at escape will be pitilessly suppressed. I will let you
know at four o’clock the amount of the fine, over and above the
war-levy, which the town will have to pay before twelve o’clock
to-morrow morning. (_Exit._)

                            THE BURGOMASTER

This is sheer lunacy! To expect me to name the criminal among my
servants, when I know that it is physically impossible for any of them
to be guilty! And, if I do not hand him over before this evening, it
means delivering myself to the firing-party!... You must admit that
this Major of yours, with his “clemency” and his “moderation,” has a
very unpleasant sense of humour. I would rather deal with a brute who
runs amuck and destroys everything with fire and sword: then at least I
should know where I am.

                                  OTTO

What would you have him do? As things are, he can hardly act
differently.

                                ISABELLE

Otto!

                                  OTTO

But, after all, it’s true! You can see for yourself, we are surrounded
by enemies and traitors; we are surrounded by hatred on every side; we
live in a perpetual trap; our lives hang by a thread; and every one of
us can expect a bullet through his head at any moment. It is only
natural that we should protect ourselves, when we are treated like
this! I think the Major’s decision most reasonable, most fair, most
humane. He had the right, it was almost his duty, in fact, to put the
whole town to death; and he is contented with a single victim. Surely
you can’t ask that a crime of this sort should remain unpunished! It
would be the end of us! Besides, you will easily find the criminal; you
have only to confirm the evidence that points to him. The mere fact of
his presence in the wood implies so grave a presumption that you will
never destroy it, however hard you try. All you have to do is to leave
things alone and not interfere. Then, if the Major is wrong, the
mistake will be on his head!

                            THE BURGOMASTER

I can hardly believe my ears, Otto! The war has altered you completely.
You know old Claus as well as I do. You know that, of all men in my
employment, he alone most likely is absolutely incapable of an act of
this kind. If it were any one else, I might have a doubt, I might say:
“Very well, perhaps. In war-time, you can never tell.” But Claus! It’s
as much out of the question as though you suggested that the shot had
been fired by the child which Isabelle is about to bring into the
world!... “A grave presumption!” How dare you say that? You know why
the poor fellow was in the nursery-garden: I sent him there myself,
when he came to take my orders at six o’clock this morning. If I don’t
do all that can be done to prove his innocence, it is as though I
myself were commanding the firing-party....

                                  OTTO

And, if you do prove his innocence, you will be putting yourself in his
place, in front of the firing-party.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Very well, I’d rather have it that way!... But surely that isn’t
possible.

                                  OTTO

It won’t be, unless you want it yourself. We have ample time before us.
It is almost certain that the real criminal will be discovered between
now and this evening.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

The real criminal? Do you know where you’ve got to look for him? Among
your own men! It is simply one of your soldiers who has taken the
opportunity to rid himself of an officer who ill-treated him. You
yourself told me, before the Major came in, that Lieutenant von
Schaunberg was an insufferable lout and that he was generally hated and
loathed.

                                  OTTO

I dare say; but it’s a far cry from that to murder. In any case, I will
myself make enquiries on that side; you, on yours, had better question
Claus; he may give us a clue that will prove useful.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

I don’t mind, but I don’t expect much: the poor man evidently knows
nothing, or he would have told me already. Between ourselves, do you
think the Major was speaking seriously? Does he really mean to place me
in this awful dilemma and condemn me to death if I refuse to surrender
an innocent man?

                                  OTTO

You stand no chance whatever that way. I have never known him to go
back upon a decision which he has once taken. There is no hope of that
at all; but there is every hope elsewhere. We will all of us set to
work. You begin by questioning Claus; I’ll go and see my men.

                                ISABELLE

And may I go out?

                                  OTTO

What for?

                                ISABELLE

You can’t expect me to sit quiet while my father’s life is at stake! I
want to go into the town, to see people, talk to them, ask them
questions, to do something!... Surely our united efforts....

                                  OTTO

Very well, come with me, I’ll get the permit.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Is Claus there?

                                  OTTO

He’s under arrest and guarded by my men; I’ll send him to you. (_Exit
with_ ISABELLE.)

                             THE SECRETARY

I will leave you also, Mr. Burgomaster. I must go and see the sheriffs
and councillors. Perhaps they can take steps or interfere in some
way....

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Yes, my dear Pierre, go. (_Shakes hands with him._) There are bad
moments in a man’s life.... But here is Claus. Leave me with him.

      (_Exit the_ SECRETARY. _Enter_ CLAUS, _with his clothes torn and
          his head covered with bruises and scratches._)

                                 CLAUS

Good-morning, Mr. Burgomaster.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Well, my poor Claus? Why, what have they been doing to you? You’re
bleeding at the mouth and forehead.

                                 CLAUS

There’s no great harm done, Mr. Burgomaster. They knocked me about a
bit, because I didn’t at once understand what they wanted with me; but
there’s no great harm done. Luckily I had on an old shirt and my
third-best trousers.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

You know what you’re accused of?

                                 CLAUS

Yes, Mr. Burgomaster; I didn’t understand at first, but Mr. Otto has
explained.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

You and I have worked together for over forty years, my dear old Claus,
and neither of us has anything to say against the other. Do you trust
me?

                                 CLAUS

Yes, Mr. Burgomaster.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Then tell me all you know. Speak without fear. I give you my word that
whatever you say will remain between ourselves.

                                 CLAUS

I don’t know much, Mr. Burgomaster. I was in the nursery-garden where
you told me to go this morning; I was trimming the rose-trees. They
needed it, Mr. Burgomaster, I can tell you, especially the Paul Nerons,
which had suckers as high as that. And the Malmaisons and Marshal Neils
are getting the blight, Mr. Burgomaster.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

The blight? I’m surprised at that; I didn’t notice any two days ago.
How much of the insecticide have we left?

                                 CLAUS

Only a gallon or so, Mr. Burgomaster.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

That’s not enough. I’ll order some more to-morrow.... And then what
happened?

                                 CLAUS

Then, Mr. Burgomaster, I heard a shot.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

From which side? At what distance?

                                 CLAUS

Not very far, Mr. Burgomaster. Perhaps forty or fifty yards from where
I was working.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

And then?

                                 CLAUS

I went on with my work, Mr. Burgomaster, saying to myself that a shot
more or less in war-time was no reason to make me desert my rose-trees.
Then I heard shouts; I came out of the nursery, to see what was
happening; some German soldiers saw me, fell upon me, shook me, struck
me and kept shouting, “Kaput! Kaput!” Then they dragged me to the
house; and Mr. Otto rescued me from them and locked me up in the
seed-house.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

After the shot was fired, did you see no one near you, no one running
away under the trees? Did you hear nothing, notice nothing?

                                 CLAUS

As you know, Mr. Burgomaster, there’s a thick hedge all the way round
the nursery and you can’t see what happens in the woods.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Now is there any one whom you suspect among the workmen and gardeners?
Is there any one who has let himself go at all and who has said things
that may put us on the right track? Once more, I give you my word that
all this will remain strictly between ourselves.

                                 CLAUS

The young men, Mr. Burgomaster, the hot-headed ones, are gone: they
have all joined the army. There’s none left here but old men like you
and me, who know that you can’t fight against God’s will and that any
show of violence only makes things worse for us.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Well, in the town or outside, don’t you know of some reckless fellow
who might have committed the murder?

                                 CLAUS

That’s not so easy to answer, Mr. Burgomaster. But I’ve thought and
thought; and, since the young men are gone, there’s no one I can think
of.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

You’re a Christian, Claus, you’re a religious man; and I’ve always
respected you for it. Do you swear that what you have told me is the
exact truth and that you are keeping nothing from me?

                                 CLAUS

I swear it, Mr. Burgomaster, as I hope to be saved.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

I believe you, my dear old Claus, and there was no need for you to take
that oath. But the fact is that all this is very important to me, for
my life depends upon it....

                                 CLAUS

Your life? How do you mean, Mr. Burgomaster?

                            THE BURGOMASTER

I may as well tell you that, if I declare you to be innocent and if I
don’t produce the criminal, it’s I who will be shot in your place this
evening.

                                 CLAUS

You, Mr. Burgomaster? Why? You’ve done nothing! It’s impossible; people
don’t do such things!

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Yes, they do, my dear Claus: it’s what they did at Aerschot, what
they’ve done everywhere and what they mean to do here as well. Otto
himself told me that nothing could prevent it.

                                 CLAUS

It can’t be possible, Mr. Burgomaster, it would be too unjust!... We
shall find the man who did it, or the man himself when he hears, will
feel ashamed and will give himself up.... Or else you will be able to
escape: Mr. Otto will help you. Something will happen; and I am sure
that God will not permit....

                            THE BURGOMASTER

He permits plenty of other things, my poor Claus; He is permitting
everything to-day. The only thing that will happen is my death; and we
may think ourselves lucky if nothing worse happens. You know as I do
that escape is quite impossible. Otto might try and help me, as a last
resort; but then he would be shot in my place; and that would not be
fair either. But all hope is not lost. Otto is at this moment making
enquiries among his men; that may lead to something. You, in your turn,
must collect our labourers and speak to them. You have great influence
with them; they will listen to you. Explain the position to them; and,
if one of them knows the guilty man, you must arrange things among
yourselves. I do not ask them to betray him or to surrender him. I will
not mix myself up in it. They must settle among themselves what is the
right thing to do.

                                 CLAUS

I will speak to them, Mr. Burgomaster; and you may be sure that, if the
man who did it is one of them, he will do his duty.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Get them to come to the palm-house; say there’s some urgent work to be
done because of the damage last night. I will ask Otto to let you come
and go freely. Ah, here he is!

      (_Enter_ OTTO.)

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Otto, I have questioned Claus; I told you that he was as innocent as
you or I; as I thought, he has no information to give me. Can you take
it upon yourself to let him move about freely, so that he may see the
gardeners and workmen and make enquiries which may lead to the
discovery of the murderer?

                                  OTTO

By all means; I trust him fully. Come with me, Claus; I’ll give the
necessary orders. (_Exit with_ CLAUS.)

                            THE BURGOMASTER

(_Taking out his watch and looking at the clock._) Three o’clock.
There’s not much time to lose. (_Enter_ OTTO.) Well, what have you
learnt on your side?

                                  OTTO

I am feeling a little less uneasy; but everything depends on you. To
begin with, Dr. van Cassel, of this town, has made a hurried
post-mortem examination. It appears that the bullet entered by the back
of the neck, passed through the brain and came out at the forehead. The
bullet has not been found. The wound shows that it was of military
calibre.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

That’s something, at any rate, for it proves that there is no question
of a sporting-gun.

                                  OTTO

Yes, but it may have been a revolver-bullet. Also, I don’t believe it
is possible that one of our men committed the crime. At the time when
the shot was fired, we had only a hundred and fifty men here, in
addition to a dozen Uhlans. The soldiers stacked their rifles in the
square and never left the square. Six men, with their arms, were posted
in the little yard behind the stables and they never left the yard.
These are the men who ran up after the shot was fired. As for the
Uhlans, with the exception of two who were on sentry duty outside the
house, they were grooming their horses in the stable of the Unicorn
Hotel. I have personally examined the arms of those six men. They did
not look as if they had been used this morning at all; the barrels were
oiled and shiny, they might have just come from the gunsmith’s.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

It is easy enough to polish up a rifle-barrel.

                                  OTTO

Of course; but remember that the Major will never admit that one of his
men committed the murder, unless we bring him a concrete and undeniable
proof.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

So there is nothing more to be hoped for in that direction?

                                  OTTO

I fear not.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

That closes one more door against us. Have you seen the Major since?

                                  OTTO

Yes; and I came away with a very hopeful feeling. But, once more,
everything will depend upon yourself.... First of all, though, here is
the proclamation which he handed me for you to sign. I may tell you, it
is already in print and will soon be posted in the town.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Show me the proclamation.

                                  OTTO

I’ll read it to you: “A dastardly attack having been committed on an
officer of the German army, if the culprit is not delivered before
seven o’clock this evening precisely, the Burgomaster of the town of
Stilemonde, being responsible, will be publicly shot at the hour
aforesaid. If any other attempt were made, the town will be looted and
set on fire; and the tenth man of all the male inhabitants will be put
to death.”

                            THE BURGOMASTER

He wants me to sign that, does he?

                                  OTTO

You must. Besides, he has taken your consent for granted, for your
signature already appears at the foot of the sheet.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Then it was scarcely worth while asking me to sign it.

                                  OTTO

It was more regular and more correct.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

And suppose I refuse?

                                  OTTO

You will be no better off; he will do without and will not forgive you
for refusing.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

What more can he do than shoot me?

                                  OTTO

You are not the only one whom he can order to be shot.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

That’s true. After all, I am only signing my own death-warrant and am
wronging nobody. (_Signing the paper._) There, that’s done. But wait:
what about improving the grammar a bit?

                                  OTTO

You had better not try. He is persuaded that it is above criticism.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

My poor Otto, I believe there’s nothing left for me to do but make my
will. It is made; but I should like to revise it and alter a few of the
bequests.

                                  OTTO

Don’t say that and don’t lose courage; you still have several chances
of escape.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Really? I don’t see one.

                                  OTTO

To begin with, there’s this: the Major is so thoroughly convinced of
Claus’s guilt that he is quite capable of having him shot together with
yourself, if you persist in proclaiming his innocence. He has taken it
into his head that you are absolutely determined to save Claus from the
punishment which he deserves. In reality, he is not at all keen on
having you shot; I could see that; he bears you no ill-will....

                            THE BURGOMASTER

That’s very good of him....

                                  OTTO

But he must have an example at all costs; on this point his mind is
fully made up; and I am bound to say that I agree with him. I gathered
that, if need be, he will cease to demand that you should declare Claus
guilty. It will be enough for you to keep quiet, to make no fuss and
not to protest the man’s innocence. You have only to know nothing of
what happens.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Indeed? And you, what would you do in my place?

                                  OTTO

I should not hesitate. After all, as there are two innocent men, why
should you, who are unquestionably the more innocent of the two, be the
one to suffer? We are at war; war brings strokes of good and bad luck
which have nothing in common with the chances of ordinary life. Those
upon whom ill-luck falls can only accept their fate. The others are not
responsible for an injustice in which they have no more share, in which
they take no more part than, let me say, in the injustice of a bridge
that breaks down or a factory-chimney that falls to the ground, burying
a dozen victims in its ruins.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

All this is much too subtle for me. I see and understand one thing
only: Claus is innocent. If I do not declare the fact aloud, by your
Major’s own decision my silence becomes tantamount to a formal
accusation and, to save my own life, I shall be sending a man whom I
know to be innocent to face the firing-party. Is there a name for that
action in German?

                                  OTTO

You refuse to understand. Whatever happens, from your point of view an
injustice is bound to be committed. The question is who shall be the
victim, you or Claus. Why should you die rather than he?

                            THE BURGOMASTER

And why he rather than I?

                                  OTTO

Because he has been appointed by fate, chance, destiny, or whatever you
like to call it. You are not responsible for his death; and there is no
reason why you should shout, like Nisis, “I, I am here, I did it! Let
me die in his stead!” This is not the time and place for theatrical
display or inopportune heroism.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

You are quite right; and, if, in order to save Claus, I went and said
to the Major, “You need look no further, it is I who killed the
Lieutenant,” I should, as you say, be making a display of inopportune
heroism for which I am not at all fitted. There is nothing of the hero
about me; I am just a poor, respectable man, like the other men of this
town; like the other men, I fear death; and I am as much attached to
life as any one else, indeed perhaps more, for my life hitherto has
been happier than I deserved. I should like to end it as calmly as
possible, but even so, I want to end it decently. It is all very well
for you to say that Claus, innocent as he is, must die because he has
been selected by fate and that I am not responsible for what happens to
him. But I too am selected by fate! If an unlucky chance brought him on
the scene of the murder, a similar and equally unlucky chance has
placed me at the head of this town at a moment of terrible
responsibility and danger. Our position, looked at from the point of
view of ill-luck and of the excuse which you are trying to find in
destiny, is absolutely the same. If Claus had in his hands the power
which I have in mine, if my life or death depended on his evidence
alone and if, knowing me to be innocent, he proclaimed me guilty, you
would consider him a monster or the meanest of cowards; yet he would be
doing exactly what you wish me to do. He and I are both marked down, to
the same extent, by the same fatality and we stand an equal chance; but
you are urging me to cheat and to take an unfair advantage against a
decent man who cannot protect himself and who trusts me. I should be
only too glad to be convinced by what you say, but that is out of the
question; and I cannot understand how you yourself do not understand!

                                  OTTO

Very well, let us drop argument, since you will not listen to reason.
Let us admit that the position is the same in both cases; but, as a
choice has to be made between two lives, would you consider your own,
which is useful and necessary to all, of no more value than that of a
poor devil who has no relations, no children, no one to regret him, who
does no public service and who will soon be a burden to the community?

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Old Claus’s life is worth just as much as mine; and my answer would be
the same if, instead of being the respectable, God-fearing man that he
is, he were the lowest of scoundrels. It is here a question not of
weighing the value or the usefulness of a man’s life, but of knowing
whether or not I am to dishonour my own.

                                  OTTO

You really amaze me! You scarcely seem to be the same man, the wise,
prudent person, the man of tact and discretion, who did me the honour
to entrust me with his daughter!

                            THE BURGOMASTER

I certainly did not realize to what sort of man I was giving her.

                                  OTTO

I will be fairer and more reasonable than you are; and I do not abandon
the hope of saving you in spite of yourself. You have time for
reflection; you have three hours before you; and I shall see that you
are free to make your choice until the very last minute.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

My choice is made. The longer I reflect, the more clearly I shall see
that any decent man in my place would do as I am doing and that I
cannot do otherwise. (_Enter_ CLAUS.) But here comes Claus, bringing us
news, which perhaps will show how futile all this discussion has been.
Well, Claus, what have you heard?

                                 CLAUS

I’ll tell you, Mr. Burgomaster. I called my gardeners into the
palm-house. They were all there except old Decoster, who is ill in bed,
and the young men who left a fortnight ago. I told them what had
happened and what was going to happen. They understood and they were
wild with indignation. I saw quite plainly that they knew nothing and
could do nothing. And I also know that, if the guilty man was among
them, they would have no need to accuse him and to hand him over. He
would have handed himself over. They all had tears in their eyes, Mr.
Burgomaster, and in their hearts something of which I won’t speak, in
Mr. Otto’s presence.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

I was sure of it.

                                 CLAUS

And now, Mr. Burgomaster, may I make a suggestion? I will say this in
Mr. Otto’s presence, for there is no harm in his repeating it to the
Major.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

What is it, Claus?

                                 CLAUS

It’s like this, Mr. Burgomaster; I’ve been thinking things over. I’m an
old man, I shall be sixty-three by the end of next month. I’m a
widower, Mr. Burgomaster, and I have no children. I suffer a good deal;
and my life, which is nearly finished, isn’t worth much, Mr.
Burgomaster. So I said to myself, Mr. Burgomaster, “Claus, old man,
seeing that you were found near the Lieutenant who was killed, it would
perhaps be better if you did not say that it wasn’t you who killed him.”

                                  OTTO

Then you admit that you killed him?

                                 CLAUS

No, Mr. Otto, I can’t admit that I killed him, because I didn’t. I have
only to say nothing next time they accuse me. Or else I will ask the
Major to have me shot instead of the Burgomaster. The Burgomaster’s
life is necessary to everybody here, especially at this time, whereas
mine is no longer of much use to anybody.

                                  OTTO

You see? It’s exactly what I said. There’s no more ground for
hesitation. This good man understands his duty and yours better than
you do. Claus, old fellow, give me your hand.

                                 CLAUS

(_Withdrawing his hand._) No, Mr. Otto, excuse me. I have been digging
up the ground and I should soil your white gloves.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

I not only want to shake both your hands, though they be covered with
earth, but I want to take you in my arms as I would a brother, my dear
old Claus. (_Clasps him in his arms._) And now let there be no more
question of all this. What you propose to do is very beautiful and,
coming from you, does not astonish me at all; but it is not
practicable. To begin with, I have no right to accept your sacrifice.
It is very fine of you to offer it, but it would be mean and hateful of
me to accept it. Besides, if I did accept it, unless you formally
declared yourself guilty, it is pretty nearly certain that the Major on
his side would refuse it. What he wants, in order to make a striking
example, is not your life, but mine, or the murderer’s.

                                 CLAUS

I will say anything that I have to, so as to die in your place, Mr.
Burgomaster.

                                  OTTO

(_To the_ BURGOMASTER.) In that case, the Major will accept; I’ll
answer for him. Leave it to me and look upon yourself as saved.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

But don’t you see that it’s the same thing as before, that it means
handing over an innocent man to execution and that, the more you try to
obscure it, the clearer my duty becomes? If I will not permit Claus to
die voluntarily in my stead while declaring himself innocent, still
less can I allow him to do so by declaring himself guilty, when I know
that he is not. That would be committing two mean actions instead of
one.

                                  OTTO

(_Trying to drag_ CLAUS _away._) Come, Claus, we will save him in spite
of himself. Come along to the Major.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Claus, stay here. You love me, my dear old Claus: you have just given
me the most beautiful and positive proof that one man can give to
another. I will ask you for yet another proof, perhaps even more
trying; it shall be the last. Promise me that, whatever happens, you
will not go to the Major.

                                 CLAUS

Mr. Burgomaster, Mr. Burgomaster, you know what is right better than I
do.... (_Sobbing._) But I meant it with all my heart, Mr. Burgomaster.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

(_Embracing him._) Good-bye, my dear Claus.

                                 CLAUS

Good-bye, Mr. Burgomaster.

                                  OTTO

I can’t understand a syllable of all this. It’s simply a mad craving
for martyrdom.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

No, my dear fellow, it’s only the way decent folk behave in this
country. (_A knock at the door._) Come in! (_Enter the_ FOOTMAN.) What
is it?

                              THE FOOTMAN

Mr. Burgomaster, the Major has sent to ask you and Lieutenant Otto to
go with him to the Town-hall.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Of course, I was forgetting the war-levy and the fine. We shall have a
tough discussion. I’m reckoning on you, Otto.

                                  OTTO

I will do my best, but I can’t promise much: the Major seldom allows
any one to differ from him.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

What’s the time? Past four? And here was I quietly attending to private
matters, as though I were all alone in the world! It is time that we
were thinking of others.


                                CURTAIN

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                ACT III


                           _Scene: The same._

_The curtain rises on the_ BURGOMASTER, _the_ SECRETARY, ISABELLE _and_
    FLORIS.


                            THE BURGOMASTER

As you were not present at the meeting, Mr. Secretary, I will tell you
what was decided. The question of the war-levy and of the fine
inflicted on the town for the death of Lieutenant von Schaunberg is
settled. The Major demanded five hundred thousand francs for the levy
and two millions for the fine....

                                 FLORIS

Two hundred thousand times what he was worth!

                            THE BURGOMASTER

There’s no doubt about that.... I persuaded the Major, not without
difficulty, to agree to a lump sum of a million, which must be paid
before midday to-morrow. I have in my safe fifty thousand francs in
cash, which I place at the disposal of the town. De Cuyper’s Bank will
pay us two hundred and fifty thousand francs, Sheriff van den Bulke
fifty thousand and Councillor de Rudder seventy-five thousand francs.
That makes nearly half a million certain. Sheriff Vermandel will try to
get the rest of the money from the town-councillors and the leading
inhabitants. You will assist him in his efforts. Everything therefore
is more or less settled; and I can go without too much anxiety. The
conditions are hard, but, taken all round, they are better than I
hoped; and Stilemonde will not suffer unduly from the occupation. In
any case, its fate is almost enviable, compared with that of many other
towns. It owes this favour largely to Otto’s presence. He really did
all he could without dangerously compromising himself. I want to
recognize this in your presence and to do him justice.... I have said
good-bye to the sheriffs, the councillors and all my friends at the
Town-hall. I was very much touched; I had no idea that they cared so
much for me. Sheriff Vermandel was really quite distressing: I’ve never
seen a man look so sad. He clung to me, wanted to die in my place. I
had the greatest difficulty in making him understand that it was not
his turn and that his sacrifice would be impossible and useless. Father
de Coninck, the Rector of St. John the Baptist’s, arrived at the end of
the meeting and asked the Major why he had not taken him for a hostage
as well as myself. He said that it was an honour to which he was
entitled. Splendid of him, the way he demanded his share. The Major
replied that he would lose nothing by waiting. Say what you will, there
are good men left in the world. (_Looking at the clock._) Half-past
five. We have an hour and a half before us. But you have no time to
lose, my dear Pierre; go and see to your affairs. I will wait here with
my children until Otto returns. By the way, what has become of our
wounded soldier, your friend Gilson? We have been forgetting him.

                             THE SECRETARY

Firmin put him in the chauffeur’s room. I looked in there a moment ago.
He was sleeping soundly, like a child, and he knows nothing.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

So much the better. Be sure and keep an eye on him when I am gone, for
he might commit some imprudence.

                             THE SECRETARY

Make your mind easy; I’ll see to it. _Au revoir_, Mr. Burgomaster.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

(_Shaking hands with him._) _Au revoir._ Yes, perhaps we shall see each
other again. (_Exit the_ SECRETARY.) Otto has gone to make a last
appeal to the Major. I have no great hope of his succeeding. I shall be
leaving you soon, my dears, and I want to give you my last injunctions.

      (ISABELLE _and_ FLORIS _fling themselves into their father’s
          arms._)

                                ISABELLE

Father!

                                 FLORIS

Dad!

                            THE BURGOMASTER

(_Caressing them tenderly._) Don’t cry, dears; the time has not yet
come. But we must provide for everything. My will is with Van Overloop,
the solicitor. I have added certain safeguards against Otto, who, after
all, is not a member of the family. You will find in the safe, over and
above the fifty thousand francs put aside for the payment of the fine,
ten thousand francs in ready money, which will enable you to live till
better times come. Here, Isabelle, is the key. Don’t mention those ten
thousand francs, either of you, to Otto. Isabelle’s position will be
very difficult after the war. Flemish people have long memories and the
national hatred will be so great that Otto will not be able to show his
face here again.

                                 FLORIS

I should hope not!

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Hold your tongue, Floris; show some pity for your sister; and, whatever
happens, always remember that she is your sister.... But here comes
Otto; he will tell us the latest.

      (_Enter_ OTTO.)

                                ISABELLE

(_Running towards him._) Well? Did you succeed? Have you done it? Did
you make him understand?

                                  OTTO

Not a thing! I begged, entreated, dragged myself at his feet, did and
said what not another German officer would have done. Not a thing, not
a thing! He ended by commanding my silence in such a tone that it was
impossible to insist.

                                ISABELLE

You must try again! You give in too soon: that’s not the way to obtain
what one wants! If you had let me go with you, as I implored you, he
would have ended by yielding, I know he would! After all, he may be a
German, but he’s a man, for all that! Come along. I want to go with
you. If you won’t come, I’ll go alone!

                                  OTTO

It’s no use, he won’t see us.

                                ISABELLE

Did you say all there was to say? You have influence in Germany; your
family is rich and powerful; you’ve told me so again and again. You
must frighten him, make him feel uneasy, threaten him, anything!

                                  OTTO

Threaten him! You don’t realize; you don’t know what things are. I saw
that his patience was exhausted.... But I haven’t told you everything.
There’s something else, something worse.

                                ISABELLE

Something worse? Worse than what? What can be worse than death?

                                  OTTO

Yes, he has discovered something worse; and perhaps it is not his
fault. He is, as we all are, the slave of discipline and of the
military regulations. He does not like me as much, perhaps, as he liked
von Schaunberg, for I don’t belong to his class. But I do not believe
that he wishes me any ill. He was always a little distant to me,
perhaps, but on the whole, up to now, he has been very just. He is not
a bad sort of man; he is one of our most humane officers; but what he
wants to make me do is terrible.

                                ISABELLE

But what is it, what? There is nothing more for us to fear. Nothing
worse can happen than what has happened already. He is not going to
revive torture, I suppose? Does he want more victims? There are no
lives more precious than our father’s. Does he want you and me? I would
rather have that. We will all die together. Of what good will life be,
after this?

                                  OTTO

He does not ask for other victims, but his orders are.... No, I can’t
say it, I daren’t say it, to you!

                                ISABELLE

But what is it that he wants? Do speak, speak, tell us! Why all this
mystery? What can you say, worse than already is? If I lose my father,
I shall have nothing left to lose.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

She is right; it is cruel of you to keep her on tenterhooks like this.
You see how upset she is. Say what you have to say; tell us. You cannot
add much to what we know already.

                                  OTTO

You are right. Very well, he orders, he demands that I myself shall
command the firing-party.

                                ISABELLE

The firing-party, the men who are to shoot my father?

                                  OTTO

Yes.

                                 FLORIS

The scoundrel, the villain!

                                ISABELLE

You, Otto, you? It’s not true! He can’t have dared! It’s impossible!
And you didn’t rebel, you didn’t lash him across the face, you didn’t
cut him down with your sword, your eyes said nothing of what was
passing in your soul? I refuse to believe it! There has been nothing
like this in any war in history! Why, it’s not possible! It’s only a
test! He wanted to find out how far he could go; but he knows quite
well that no man, no man in the world, not even a German, could agree
to that!... Well, what did you answer? I hope that by this time he
knows what to expect and that, though you have had the misfortune to be
born in Germany, you are still different from the rest of them!

                                  OTTO

The worst of it is that he is obliged to do what he is doing. I am the
only officer he has with him. It’s the regulation: he can’t act
differently.

                                ISABELLE

He can’t act differently!... And you dare tell me that, just as though
you approved!... But you, you, what did you say, what did you do and
what do you intend to do?

                                  OTTO

I told him it was impossible.

                                ISABELLE

That’s something, at last! It’s the first word which was worthy of you,
which was worthy of the man I married!... And what did he reply? He
didn’t insist, of course?

                                  OTTO

He told me that he would give me till seven o’clock to think it over.
If at seven o’clock precisely I am not at the head of my men in the
little yard behind the stables, he will have me arrested, place me
against the wall beside your father and will himself command the party
which will execute both sentences.

                                ISABELLE

Good! I shall go and stand between the two of you. He will order three
volleys and it will be finished. After all, life has become impossible.

                                 FLORIS

I shall go too.

                                ISABELLE

And “the man is not a bad sort,” you say! “He’s one of your most humane
officers!”

                                  OTTO

It’s war!

                                ISABELLE

And who started the war?

                                  OTTO

As far as you Belgians were concerned, you did! And many of us were
sore at heart when we found that we had to march against you. But you
wanted it! Ah, that beloved king of yours did a fine stroke of work, on
the day when he blocked the way to a peaceful army of men, who merely
asked to pass through the country as friends.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Silence! Our king’s wishes were the wishes of every one of us; and if
to-morrow we had to do once more what we have done to-day, you would
find us in the same place, among our ruins, our martyrs and our dead,
ready to begin all over again.

                                 FLORIS

Tell your horrible Kaiser to put that in his pipe and smoke it!

                                  OTTO

(_Suddenly drawing himself up, in a threatening attitude._) Mind what
you’re saying!

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Come, come, stop this fooling and let us talk sense. We must not lose
our self-control. The Major is a monster, a brute, anything you please;
but, placed as he is, he’s right. He’s obeying the regulations; and,
again in his position, he can’t act differently.... I will ask Otto
once again, is it quite certain that he will not reconsider his
decision? People often change their minds at the last moment; and even
the most obstinate man will let himself think.

                                  OTTO

As I know him—and I have known him for more than ten years—he will
have everything carried out exactly as he has decided.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Can’t he have the firing-party commanded by a sergeant?

                                  OTTO

He won’t do it. In anything relating to the army orders, he is
inflexible. Besides, on second thoughts, I am not sure that I did not
go too far just now when I said that he had nothing against me. I have
sometimes observed a certain ill-will, almost a certain animosity,
where I was concerned. I don’t quite know to what to ascribe it. It may
be that the plebeian prosperity of my family offends his patrician
poverty. It may be that, as I took my wife from this country, he
suspects me of being too fond of its inhabitants. Or, more likely
still, he may have other reasons into which I do not care to enter. The
fact remains that he would not be sorry to find me at fault or at least
to put me to the test and to make that test a striking example, which
will teach our soldiers once more what German discipline can do.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

And if I asked him to grant me the favour of giving the word to fire?

                                  OTTO

I thought of that. He refused peremptorily, refused as a matter of
course, said that it was an honour which could not be shown to a rebel
and a traitor.

                                 FLORIS

A traitor?

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Yes, Floris, they call traitors all those who do not betray their
country for Germany’s benefit.

                                  OTTO

He added that it was also against all the regulations, so it became
useless for me to insist.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Very good. What do you intend to do?

                                  OTTO

Whatever Isabelle decides.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

And what will you have him do, Isabelle?

                                ISABELLE

Refuse to obey.

                                 FLORIS

Why, of course!

                            THE BURGOMASTER

And, if you refuse to obey, Otto, do you think that your refusal will
alter my fate at all?

                                  OTTO

I am convinced—I am sorry to say it—that nothing could alter it in
any way whatever.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

On the other hand, if he refuses to obey, do you, Isabelle, fully
realize the consequences? He will at once be arrested and shot by my
side. That is so, Otto, is it not?

                                  OTTO

There is not the least doubt of it.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Is that what you wish, Isabelle? He will die at the same time that I do.

                                ISABELLE

And at the same time that I do.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

It is not sure that they will permit you to die with us.

                                ISABELLE

It would certainly be the first time that they had spared a woman. You
need have no fear on that score. In any case, this is my affair; and we
need say no more about that.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Do you accept, Otto?

                                  OTTO

I accept, in so far as I am concerned, that is to say, I shall refuse
to obey; but I do not agree to letting my death involve Isabelle’s.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Therefore, by ordering you to disobey, Isabelle is sending you to face
the firing-party. She has no right to do that, unless she is absolutely
determined not to survive you. If a woman deliberately and of her own
free will—for that is what you are doing, Isabelle—sends a man to his
death and does not go with him, after explicitly promising to share his
fate, then she is guilty of one of the most odious and cowardly acts of
treachery which she could possibly commit. Reflect, both of you. It is
a question of taking, in my presence, a solemn and irrevocable pledge.

                                ISABELLE

I have thought it all out. The pledge is taken.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Then Otto will die in an hour’s time and you with him? Is that exactly
what you wish?

                                ISABELLE

It is exactly what I wish and all that I wish.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Do you accept, Otto?

                                  OTTO

I accept, since Isabelle wishes it.

      (_A pause._)

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Good. Each of you is worthy of the other. You have proved to me that
you love me and that you love each other better than life.... Now that
the proof is established and your sacrifice fulfilled as much as though
death had come to you, we have nothing more to fear and we can speak
freely. In all this nightmare there is only one death which is
necessary and inevitable; and that is mine. Your own deaths depend only
upon ourselves, that is to say, they must not take place.... Isabelle,
my darling, if I were lying on my death-bed at this moment, you would
not refuse to hear and carry out my last wishes. I am before you now,
standing on my feet, but as near to my end as though I were stretched
upon a bed of sickness. (_The clock strikes six._) Hark! Six o’clock!
You see how close it is. Besides, I have what dying men, whose minds
are often dulled, do not always have, the full possession of my mental
faculties. The wish which I am about to express, the request which I am
about to make of both of you, must therefore be all the more sacred. Do
you promise me, Isabelle, as you would promise a dying man, to perform
piously what I am going to ask of you?

                                ISABELLE

I know beforehand what you are going to ask; and I cannot promise you
to order the man I married to become the murderer of his father and
mine.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Isabelle, at a moment like this we must not juggle with words which do
not express what they say and which distort the truth most dreadfully.
Otto has revealed to us the only truth that counts, by proving that he
is ready to sacrifice his life not only to save mine, if that were
possible, but even to spare you the pain of seeing him become the
instrument—to some extent the accidental, involuntary, irresponsible
instrument—of my death. It is for you and me to show ourselves worthy
of that sacrifice by not accepting it.

                                ISABELLE

If I did not accept it, I should not be worthy of being your daughter.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Words, more words, Isabelle, which do not touch the truth. We have no
time to waste on sentences which do not say the things that have to be
said. The minutes are slipping by, there are very few left; and I
should not like to die before convincing you. Otto—you know it as well
as I do—is caught in the cogs of the machine and cannot extricate
himself. This is enough to justify him. He is no more responsible for
the harm which he will do me than the sword which he carries or the
twelve rifles which will discharge their bullets at me. We must look at
things as they are and rise above hackneyed phrases and theories which
show things to us as they are not. If his refusal could delay my
execution for a day, for an hour, I could in the last resort understand
your decision; but it will not delay it for three minutes. Whether it
be he or another who gives the word of command, the ten or twelve
bullets that enter my body will do it the same hurt.

                                ISABELLE

Enough, enough!

                            THE BURGOMASTER

No, it is not enough: you have not yet promised me.

                                ISABELLE

I can’t promise.

                                 FLORIS

Isabelle!

                                ISABELLE

What is it?

                                 FLORIS

(_Flinging himself into his sister’s arms._) I don’t know!

                            THE BURGOMASTER

I have done my duty, Isabelle, and you have approved. I have made the
sacrifice of my life; and I have made it much more easily than I dared
hope, for I did not know that I had so much courage. But I am no hero;
I am only a poor man who was quite unprepared to do what I am going to
do to-day. You must not ask too much of me. There are limits to my
strength. I am not used to suffering, I have not been in the habit of
braving misfortune. I can bear my own unhappiness, but not that of
others; and I feel that I shall not hold out to the end without
breaking down, if my death is to involve the loss of the most precious
of the lives which I thought I had ransomed. You must spare me one
intolerable sorrow that can still move me. You ought to understand
this. You ought to help me. And, instead of helping me, you are both of
you making it more difficult for me! Don’t you want your father to hold
up his head when he faces the enemy? I was not afraid of death for
myself, but I am for you. Do not weaken the strength which I shall need
very soon. I have made the sacrifice of my own life, but not of your
two lives: that would mean a twofold death to me and threefold
suffering; and the courage which I have called up will not be enough if
I see you fall by my side.

                                ISABELLE

(_Sobbing and throwing herself into her father’s arms._) Father!

                            THE BURGOMASTER

I thought that there would be tears for me, Isabelle. They prove that
you are becoming reasonable and will no longer resist me.

                                ISABELLE

I can’t do it, I can’t do it, I shall never be able to do it!

                            THE BURGOMASTER

But you must. Time presses; and you are making the last few minutes of
my life seem even more cruel than death.

                                ISABELLE

There are chances still. There is flight.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Flight?... Whither?... How?... The house is guarded.

                                ISABELLE

The men who guard it are under Otto’s orders. He has only to give a
command.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Otto is answerable for my safe custody. If I run away, he will take my
place against the wall.

                                ISABELLE

He can run away too.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

And both of us be caught before we have gone two hundred yards? The
tragedy would be the same; only it would be less seemly. And, if I did
succeed in escaping, too many others would pay the penalty. Of all the
chances of safety, this obviously is the only one that must on no
account be attempted. No, I am driven into a corner, I am marked down;
it is all over; and you must look upon me as dead. I have come to the
end of my days; those which were worth living are past. I am not dying
too soon; I had nothing more to wait for. Instead of a lingering,
troublesome death, a painful, miserable death on a bed, I am offered a
quick and sudden end, an honourable end, free from thought or
suffering, and one which perhaps will save half the town. I should be
mad to hesitate or to regret not dying in my bed. I too have been
afraid of death. If any one had ever told me that one evening I should
have to face it as I am doing now, I should not have dared to go on
living. Whereas now I hardly give it a thought; I have to make an
effort, to force myself, to concentrate my mind upon it in order to
realize that, after all, perhaps it is somewhat serious and not what we
had expected. Looked at from a distance, death seems like some horrible
mountain, which shuts out the horizon; but, as we draw near, it
dwindles and sinks away; and, when we are face to face with it, it is
nothing.

                                ISABELLE

Well, if it is nothing, let us die with you.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

It is nothing to me, because I was nearing my end; and, above all, it
is nothing because it is necessary. But to you two it is everything,
because it is purposeless and because your life is beginning.

                                ISABELLE

Our life is beginning. Ah, a beautiful life, a life that begins like
this!

                            THE BURGOMASTER

It will be what you make of it. But enough! I have begged, entreated
and argued. The seconds are flying and I am wasting the last of them in
quarrelling with you instead of pressing you to my heart. Yes or no,
will you do what I ask? I appeal to Otto: his silence shows that he
understands. He sees things now as you will see them later, as I see
them and as we are bound to see them. One day you will thank us both
for not listening to you to-day. But we must have done with this; and
there are certain precautions which we must take to protect you against
yourself and the strain of the final moment. I am going to lock you in
this room and I shall give the key of the door to Otto, who will let
you out when all is over.

                                ISABELLE

Lock me in here, while...? I won’t have it, I won’t have it!

                            THE BURGOMASTER

You surely will not compel Otto and me to use violence, to push you
back by force, to struggle with you? That would be too dreadful! Look
at me! Can’t you see that I am using up all my strength, my last atom
of strength, that I am dying ten deaths, rather than one, because of
you? Look! I can scarcely hold myself up! It is more than I can bear,
it is too much for me: will you not understand?

                                ISABELLE

(_Falls sobbing into her father’s arms._) I too cannot bear it any
more.... Do what you will!... I promise whatever you ask of me!

                            THE BURGOMASTER

At last my own daughter has come back to me! And now let me give you
one long, long kiss, free from any thought of pain or sorrow. You will
both of you live. I feel as I might if I had been reprieved. But
remember that you have given your promise to a dying man. And, my dear
one, I want something more. I am not asking you to forget: that does
not depend on yourself. Nor to forgive Otto: there is nothing to
forgive. I simply ask you not to shut him out from your heart. Is that
a promise also?

                                ISABELLE

(_Faintly._) Yes.

                            THE BURGOMASTER

Come and kiss her, Otto.

                                ISABELLE

(_Starting._) No, no!... Not now!...

                            THE BURGOMASTER

He is more to be pitied than either of us two. He is bearing the chief
burden of this dreadful ordeal; and I doubt if, in his place, I should
have the strength to bear that burden. We must have pity. You will
learn, slowly, to love him once more as you have loved him until this
day.... Besides, you will probably soon become a mother. The child that
is to be born must not become the last and most sorrowful victim of
this tragedy. I know that, at first, life will be very sad for you and
very difficult. Wait patiently. Listen humbly to what it says. Life is
always right. It is full of indulgence and good-will and very soon
forgets what should be forgotten. (_The clock strikes seven._) Seven
o’clock. I hear some one knocking at the door. My time is up. They have
come to fetch us, Otto. Let us embrace each other for the last time,
Isabelle. Come to my arms, Floris. You’re a man now. I entrust your
sister to you. We have been very fond of one another.... Come, Otto, we
must not keep them waiting. (_He turns to the door._)

                                ISABELLE

(_Clinging to his clothes._) No, no!... Not yet!... I can’t bear it!...
I want to go with you!...

                            THE BURGOMASTER

(_Releasing himself._) Not a word!... Not a cry!... I could not endure
more than I am doing.... Floris, look to your sister.

      (_He pushes_ ISABELLE _away and goes out with_ OTTO, _locking the
          door behind him. A pause._ ISABELLE _falls to the floor,
          where she lies half-supported by_ FLORIS _and sobbing._)

                                 FLORIS

(_Caressing her._) Don’t cry, dearest. We shall be revenged, we shall
be revenged!... We shall be revenged!

                                ISABELLE

(_Draws herself up, looks around her and suddenly rises and runs to the
door._) No, no, I can’t have it!

                                 FLORIS

(_Catching her up._) What are you doing? What do you want to do?

                                ISABELLE

I want ... I want to call out, to cry, to throw myself at his feet, to
kill myself in front of him.... One never knows.... There are things
left to try.... (_She shakes the door._) They’ve locked it!... (_She
runs to the window, opens it, measures the height with her eyes and
instinctively steps back._ FLORIS, _who has followed her, throws his
arms round her waist and drags her into the room._)

                                 FLORIS

You see, it’s too high.

                                ISABELLE

(_Returning to the door and shaking it violently._) I can’t open it!...
I can’t open it!... Ah, if I were only there!... One never knows until
the last moment!... I must get to him, I must get to him!... (_A volley
is fired. She steps back in horror._) It’s done, it’s done, it’s
done!... They’ve killed him!... They’ve killed what was best in the
wide world!... I shall never see him again, I shall never see him again!

      (_Supported by_ FLORIS, _she staggers to a chair, where she sits
          huddled, staring before her, dry-eyed._ FLORIS _puts his arms
          round her and, with his cheek against hers, rocks her to and
          fro, whispering, “Dearest, dearest, dearest!” A pause. The
          door opens and the_ MAJOR _and_ OTTO _appear on the
          threshold._)

                               THE MAJOR

(_Ceremoniously._) Madam, I have done your father the honour of myself
taking command of the firing-party. All I wanted was that your husband
should prove his respect for discipline to the end! I give him back to
you; you have nothing to blame him for. Everything went off very well,
in a most correct and satisfactory manner. Your father died like a
hero.... And now, Lieutenant Hilmer, go and embrace your wife....

                                ISABELLE

(_Suddenly drawing herself to her full height._) Go away!... Go away,
both of you!...

                                  OTTO

What, I too, Isabelle?... But you don’t understand....

                                ISABELLE

I understand everything, I understand too much, it’s you who will never
understand anything!...

                                  OTTO

(_Coming towards her._) But, Isabelle!...

                                ISABELLE

(_Shrinking back._) Don’t touch me!... Go away!... Don’t touch me!...
Go! It’s over ... for good!...

                                 FLORIS

(_Stamping his foot._) She’s right! She’s right! She’s right!... Kiss
me, kiss me! Let me kiss you!... It’s we two now, you and I!...

                               THE MAJOR

(_To_ OTTO.) Let them be; I want you. I hear they’re attacking on the
Oostwinkel side.... You’ve done your duty, Hilmer. This is
incomprehensible. But they’re all more or less mad in this country....


                                CURTAIN
﻿    _CHARACTERS_

  MERLIN
  LANCÉOR, _Merlin's Son_
  JOYZELLE
  ARIELLE, _Merlin's genius, invisible to the others_

      [SCENE: _Merlin's Island_




JOYZELLE




ACT I


_A Gallery in MERLIN'S Palace_

      [_MERLIN is seated near ARIELLE, who is sleeping on
      the steps of a marble staircase. It is night._

MERLIN.

You sleep, my Arielle, you my inner force, the neglected power
which slumbers in every soul and which I alone, till now, awaken at
will.... You sleep, my docile and familiar little fairy, and your
hair, straying like a blue mist, invisible to men, mingles with the
moon, the perfumes of the night, the rays of the stars, the roses
that shed their petals, the spreading sky, to remind us thus that
nothing separates us from any existing thing and that our thought
does not know where the light begins for which it hopes, nor where
the shadow ends which it escapes.... You are sleeping soundly and,
while you sleep, I lose all my knowledge and become like my blind
brethren, who do not yet know that on this earth there are as many
hidden gods as there are hearts that throb.... Alas, I am to them
the genius to be avoided, the wicked sorcerer in league with their
enemies!... They have no enemies, but only subjects who know not
where to find their king.... They are persuaded that my secret
virtue, which is obeyed by the plants and the stars, by water,
stone and fire and to which the future at times reveals some of its
features: they are persuaded that this new and yet so human virtue
is hidden in philtres, in horrible charms, in hellish herbs and
awful signs.... No, it is in myself, even as it resides in them; it
is in you, my frail Arielle, in you who were once in me.... I have
taken two or three bolder steps in the dark.... I have done a little
earlier what they will do later.... All things will be subject to
them when they have learnt at last to revive your goodwill, even as I
have revived it.... But it were vain for me to tell them that you are
sleeping here and to point to your dazzling grace: they would not
see you.... Each one of them must find you within himself; each one
of them must open as I do the tomb of his life and come to awake you
as I awake you now....

      [_He bends over ARIELLE and kisses her._

ARIELLE.

(_Waking._) Master!...

MERLIN.

This is the hour, Arielle, when love must watch.... I shall often
trouble your sleep in these coming days....

ARIELLE.

My sleep was so long that I am always relapsing into it; but I feel
stronger and become happier at each new awakening that your thought
imposes on me....

MERLIN.

Whither are you taking my son and when shall I see him again?...

ARIELLE.

I was following him with my eyes in my attentive dream.... He is
approaching us.... He thinks that he is lost; and his destiny leads
him where happiness awaits him....

MERLIN.

Will he know me?... It is many years since the prescribed proof
exacted that we should live as strangers to each other; and I am
eager to be able to embrace him as I did long ago, when he was a
child....

ARIELLE.

No, fate must be allowed to decide freely; nor may the proof be
falsified by the love of a father of whose existence he must not
know....

MERLIN.

But now that Joyzelle is here, close to us; now that he is coming
towards her, does the future become more clear, can you read further
into it?...

ARIELLE.

(_Gazing upon the sea and the night, in a sort of trance._) I read in
it what I read from the first moment.... Your son's fate is wholly
inscribed within a circle of love. If he love, if he be loved with a
wondrous love, which should be that of all men, but which is becoming
so rare that at present it seems to them a dazzling folly; if he
love, if he be loved with an ingenuous and yet clear-seeing love,
with a love simple and pure and all-powerful as the mountain stream,
with an heroic love, yet one that shall be gentler than a flower,
with a love which takes all and gives back more than it takes,
which never hesitates, which is not deceived; a love which nothing
disconcerts and nothing repels, a love which hears and sees naught
save a mysterious happiness invisible to all beside, which perceives
it everywhere, in every form and every trial, and which, with a
smile, will even commit crime to claim it.... If he obtain that love,
which exists somewhere and is waiting for him in a heart that I seem
to have recognized, his life will be longer, fairer and happier than
that of other men. But, if he do not find it before the month is
past, for the circle is closing; if Joyzelle's love be not that which
the future holds out to him from the high skies; if the flame do not
burn its full span, if a regret veil or a doubt obscure it, then
death triumphs and your son is lost....

MERLIN.

Ay, for all men the hour of love is an important hour!...

ARIELLE.

For Lancéor, alas, it is the inexorable hour!... Within these next
few days he will reach the summit of his life. With groping hands, he
touches happiness and the tomb.... He is dependent entirely on the
last steps which he is taking and on the act of the virgin who is
coming to meet him....

MERLIN.

And if Joyzelle be not she whom fate selects?...

ARIELLE.

Indeed, I fear that the proof which we are about to attempt is the
only one which it offers; but man must never lose courage in face of
the future....

MERLIN.

Why attempt the proof if it be uncertain?...

ARIELLE.

If we do not offer it, fate will offer it; it is inevitable, but it
is left to chance; and that is why I try to direct its course....

MERLIN.

And if he love Joyzelle and she do not love him with the love which
fate demands?...

ARIELLE.

Then we shall have to intervene more openly.

MERLIN.

How?

ARIELLE.

I will try to learn.

MERLIN.

Arielle, I conjure you, as this concerns the dearest being, much
dearer than myself; as I have only one son and he can become what
we well know that I could never be: is it not possible to make an
unexampled, an almost desperate effort with regard to the future; to
violate time; to snatch from the years, even were they to revenge
themselves upon us two, the secret which they conceal so strictly and
which contains much more than our own life and our own happiness?...

ARIELLE.

No, strive as I may, I can reach no further.... The future is a world
limited by ourselves, in which we discover only that which concerns
us and sometimes, by chance, that which interests those whom we
love the most.... I see very clearly all that unfolds itself round
Lancéor, until his road meets Joyzelle's road. But around Joyzelle
the years are veiled. It is an effulgent veil, a veil of light,
but it hides the days as profoundly as a veil of darkness.... It
interrupts life. Then, beyond the veil, I again find happiness and
death awaiting him, like two equal, indifferent, inscrutable hosts;
and I cannot tell which is the nearer, the more imperious.... It is
not possible for me to know if Joyzelle is the predestined one....
Everything promises that it is she, but nothing confirms it.... Her
face is stretched towards the coming years ... and, call to her as I
may, with all my might, she does not answer, does not turn her head.
Nothing can distract her; and I have never seen her features, which
I can only imagine.... One sign alone is certain: it is that of the
very sharp and cruel proofs which she will have to overcome.... By
these proofs alone we shall know her....

MERLIN.

And, therefore, starting from this point which I can surmount, we
must submit to unknown powers, question facts like other men, await
their reply and try to conquer them if they threaten harm to those
whom we love....

ARIELLE.

But here they come, in the breaking dawn.... Let us hasten away, they
are coming near.... Let us leave to their destiny, which is beginning
its work, the solitude and the silence which it demands.

      [_Exeunt MERLIN and ARIELLE. A few moments after,
      while the daylight swiftly increases, JOYZELLE and
      LANCÉOR enter from opposite sides and meet._

JOYZELLE.

(_Stopping, astonished, before LANCÉOR._) What are you seeking?

LANCÉOR.

I do not know where I am.... I was seeking a shelter.... Who are you?

JOYZELLE.

My name is Joyzelle.

LANCÉOR.

Joyzelle.... I am saying the name.... It is as caressing as a wing,
the breath of a flower, a whisper of gladness, a ray of light....
It describes you completely, it sings in the heart, it lights the
lips....

JOYZELLE.

And you, who are you?

LANCÉOR.

I no longer myself know who I am.... A few days ago, my name was
Lancéor; I knew where I was and I knew myself.... To-day, I seek
myself, I grope within myself and all around me and I wander in the
mist, amid mirages....

JOYZELLE.

What mist? What mirages?... How long have you been on this island?

LANCÉOR.

Since yesterday....

JOYZELLE.

Strange, they did not tell me....

LANCÉOR.

No one saw me.... I was wandering on the shore, I was in despair....

JOYZELLE.

Oh! Why?...

LANCÉOR.

I was very far from here, I was very far from him, when a letter told
me that my old father was dying.... I took ship at once. We were long
at sea; then, in the first port at which the ship put in, I learnt
that it was too late, that my father was no more.... I continued my
voyage, at least to be on the scene of his last thoughts and carry
out his last wishes....

JOYZELLE.

Why are you here?

LANCÉOR.

Why? I do not know, nor do I know how.... The sea was very still
and the sky was clear.... We saw only the water slumbering in the
azure.... Suddenly, without warning, the waves were invaded by thick
blue mists.... They rose like a veil, which clung to our hands, to
the rigging, to our faces.... Then the wind blew, our anchor broke
loose and the blind ship, driven by a current that made her timbers
creak, arrived towards evening in the unknown harbour of this
unexpected island.... Sad and disheartened, I landed on the beach; I
fell asleep in a cave overlooking the sea; and, when I awoke, the fog
had lifted and I saw the ship disappear like a radiant wing on the
horizon of the waves.

JOYZELLE.

What had happened?

LANCÉOR.

I do not know.... I would have tried to follow her, but I could find
no boat in the harbour.... I must wait, therefore, until another
vessel passes....

JOYZELLE.

That is curious.... It is like myself....

LANCÉOR.

Like you?...

JOYZELLE.

Yes, I too came to the island through a thick fog.... But I was
shipwrecked....

LANCÉOR.

When was that? And how?... Where do you come from, Joyzelle?...

JOYZELLE.

I was coming from another island....

LANCÉOR.

Where were you going?

JOYZELLE.

Where some one was awaiting me....

LANCÉOR.

Who?

JOYZELLE.

One whom they had thought right to choose for me....

LANCÉOR.

Were you betrothed?...

JOYZELLE.

Yes.

LANCÉOR.

Do you love him?...

JOYZELLE.

No.

LANCÉOR.

But then?...

JOYZELLE.

My mother wished it....

LANCÉOR.

Do you intend to obey her?

JOYZELLE.

No.

LANCÉOR.

Ah, that is well!... I like that!... And my father, at the moment of
his death, wished that I also should choose her whom he had chosen
for me.... He had his reasons, very deep and serious reasons, it
appears.... And, as he wished it and as he is no longer alive, I must
obey him....

JOYZELLE.

Why?

LANCÉOR.

We cannot evade the wishes of the dead.

JOYZELLE.

Why?

LANCÉOR.

They can no longer be altered.... We must have pity, we must respect
them....

JOYZELLE.

No....

LANCÉOR.

You would not obey?...

JOYZELLE.

No.

LANCÉOR.

Joyzelle!... This is horrible!...

JOYZELLE.

No, the dead are horrible, if they want us to love those whom we do
not love....

LANCÉOR.

Joyzelle!... I am afraid of you....

JOYZELLE.

I said.... What did I say?... Perhaps I was too quick....

LANCÉOR.

Joyzelle, your eyes are moist at the thought of the dead and belie
your words....

JOYZELLE.

No, it is not for them.... Perhaps I was harsh.... And yet, they are
wrong.

LANCÉOR.

Let us speak no more of the dead.... You have not told me how your
shipwreck....

JOYZELLE.

We lost our way in a thick fog.... A fog so thick that it filled our
hands like white feathers.... The pilot mistook the course.... He
thought he saw a beacon.... The ship struck upon a hidden reef....
But no one perished.... The waves bore me away; and then I saw
the blue water glide before my eyes as though I were sinking in a
stifling sky.... I went down and down.... Then some one caught hold
of me and I lost consciousness....

LANCÉOR.

Who caught hold of you?...

JOYZELLE.

The lord of this island.

LANCÉOR.

And who is this lord?...

JOYZELLE.

He is an old man who wanders like a restless shade about this marble
palace....

LANCÉOR.

If I had been there!...

JOYZELLE.

What would you have done?...

LANCÉOR.

I should have saved you!...

JOYZELLE.

Was I not saved?...

LANCÉOR.

It is not the same thing!... You would not have suffered, nothing
would have come to you.... I should have carried you on the crest of
the waves.... Ah, I do not know how.... Like a cup full of precious
pearls, of which not one must be touched by a shadow; like a flower
of the dawn, from which we fear to shake a single dewdrop.... When I
think of the dangers which you, so fair, so fragile, ran among the
cruel rocks, in that old man's arms!... What he did was fine; he did
the impossible.... But it was not enough.... How did you reach the
shore at last?...

JOYZELLE.

I awoke lying on the sands.... The old man was there. Then he had me
carried to this palace....

LANCÉOR.

Is he king of this island?...

JOYZELLE.

The island is almost desert, one sees none but a few servants who
move about in silence.... He can have for his subjects only the
trees, the flowers and the happy birds with which the island seems
filled....

LANCÉOR.

What he did was well done....

JOYZELLE.

He is good and kind; and he received me as my father himself could
not have received me.... Yet I do not like him....

LANCÉOR.

Why?

JOYZELLE.

I believe he loves me....

LANCÉOR.

What!... He dares!... No, it is not possible, or else the years no
longer have the weight they should have and reason escapes us when
death draws near....

JOYZELLE.

And yet I fear it.... He gave me to understand.... He is strange and
sad.... They say he has a son who is very far from here, who is lost,
perhaps.... He is always thinking of him.... When he thinks that he
will see him again, his face lights up, he.... Here he is!...

      [_Enter MERLIN._

MERLIN.

I was looking for you, Joyzelle.... (_Turning to Lancéor, with a
threatening glance._) As for you, I know who you are and I know the
reasons that have brought you to this island, the trick of this
pretended shipwreck and the name of the enemy who sent you....

LANCÉOR.

Me?... But it was a mere accident that flung me on this coast....

MERLIN.

Let us waste no phrases.

JOYZELLE.

What has he done?

MERLIN.

He intended, alas, to do the basest thing that man can do: to betray
kindness, deceive friendship and sell to the enemy the too generous
host who was going to welcome him....

JOYZELLE.

No!

MERLIN.

Why? Do you know him?

JOYZELLE.

Yes.

MERLIN.

Since when?

JOYZELLE.

Since I first saw him.

MERLIN.

And when did you see him?

JOYZELLE.

When he entered this room....

MERLIN.

That is hardly....

JOYZELLE.

It is enough.

MERLIN.

No, Joyzelle, and soon proofs and facts will show you that it is not
enough and that an honest look, an innocent smile and ingenuous words
often conceal more dangerous snares than those of thankless old age
or of love that has but little hope....

JOYZELLE.

What do you mean to do?

MERLIN.

I am waiting for the final certainty; and then I shall do what it is
lawful and necessary to do to remove all fear of an enemy who would
stop at nothing. The pitiless measures which I shall take concern
your safety as much as my own; for the same plots surround us both
and we are united by fate.... I can tell you no more to-day; have
confidence in me; perhaps you already know that your happiness is
mine....

JOYZELLE.

You saved my life, I remember that....

MERLIN.

You remember it without any kindliness: but I hope that one day
you will do me justice.... (_To LANCÉOR._) As for you, go. The
information which I have received is not open to doubt. When the
facts which I fear have confirmed it, I shall act. Meanwhile, you are
my prisoner. You will be shown the part of the palace reserved for
you. If you go beyond the limits laid down, you become your own judge
and pronounce your own sentence. There will be no appeal. Go, my
orders are given....

LANCÉOR.

I obey, but only until you recognize your error. We shall meet soon,
Joyzelle....

MERLIN.

No, bid her farewell; for it is doubtful if you will ever see her
again.... Nevertheless, Joyzelle, chance may bring you again in this
man's presence. In that case, fly from him; your life and his depend
most strictly on your prompt flight. If I learn that you have seen
each other, you are irrevocably lost.... (_To LANCÉOR._) Do you
promise to fly from her?

LANCÉOR.

If her life is at stake, yes.

MERLIN.

And you, Joyzelle?

JOYZELLE.

No.




ACT II


      _A wild, neglected garden, full of weeds and
      brambles. On the right, a very high and gloomy wall,
      pierced by a railed gate._

      [_JOYZELLE is discovered in the garden, alone._

JOYZELLE.

This is the garden which no one visits. The sun does not enter here;
the poor wild flowers upon which men wage war because they are not
beautiful here await death; and the birds are silent. Here are
the violet, which has lost its perfume, the trembling, shrinking
buttercup and the scarlet poppy, which sheds its petals without
ceasing.... Here are the scabious begging for a little water, the
deadly spurge hiding its green blossoms, the blue campanula silently
shaking its useless bells.... I know you all, you humble and despised
flowers, so good and so ugly!... You could be beautiful; it needs
scarce anything: a ray of happiness, a minute's grace, a bolder
smile to attract the bee.... But no eye sees you, no hand sows you,
no hand gathers you; and I have come among you to be also alone....
How gloomy everything looks!... The grass is neglected and parched,
the leaves are sick, the old trees dying; and spring itself and
the dew of dawn are afraid lest they should grow sorrowful in this
solitude....

      [_LANCÉOR appears behind the railed gate._

LANCÉOR.

Joyzelle!...

JOYZELLE.

Lancéor!...

LANCÉOR.

Joyzelle!...

JOYZELLE.

Go away!... Go away!... Take care!... It is death if he sees you!...

LANCÉOR.

He will not see us; he is very far from here.

JOYZELLE.

Where is he?...

LANCÉOR.

I saw him go away. I watched his departure from the top of that tower
in which I am a prisoner.... He is at the other end of the island,
near the blue forest that shuts in the horizon....

JOYZELLE.

But he may return; or some one will tell him.... Go away, go away, I
say!... Your life is at stake!...

LANCÉOR.

The palace is deserted; I have gone through the rooms, the gardens
and the courts, the long box hedges, the marble staircases....

JOYZELLE.

Go away, it is only a trap.... He has a design upon your life; I know
it, he said so.... He suspects that I love you.... He is only seeking
an excuse for what he would like to do.... Go away!... As it is, you
have done too much....

LANCÉOR.

No.

JOYZELLE.

If you do not go away, then I shall go.

LANCÉOR.

If you go, Joyzelle, I shall remain at this gate until night brings
him back to the palace.... He will find me on this forbidden
threshold.... I have passed the limits assigned to me; I have
therefore disobeyed him and I wish him to see it and I wish him to
know it!...

JOYZELLE.

Lancéor, have pity! I entreat you, Lancéor!... You are risking all
our happiness!... Do not think only of yourself!... I will go where
you please, if you will leave this gate!... We shall see each other
elsewhere, later, another day.... We must choose the time, we must
take care, we must make our preparations.... See, I am stretching out
my arms to you ... what would you have me do?... What must I promise
you?...

LANCÉOR.

Open the gate.

JOYZELLE.

No, no, no, I cannot....

LANCÉOR.

Open, open, Joyzelle, if you would have me live....

JOYZELLE.

Why do you wish me to open?...

LANCÉOR.

I want to see you closer, I want to touch your hands which I have not
yet touched, to look at you once more as I looked at you on the first
day.... Open, or I am determined to be undone; I shall not go away....

JOYZELLE.

Will you go away then?...

LANCÉOR.

I promise you, Joyzelle.... As soon as you open the gate, before a
swallow, before a thought has time to hasten from wherever it may be
to surprise my hand as it touches yours.... I beseech you, Joyzelle:
this is too cruel.... I am standing at this gate like a blind
beggar.... I can see only your shadow moving among the leaves....
These bars are hateful and hide your face.... One look alone,
Joyzelle, in which I shall see you wholly; and then I will go like a
robber flying with a great treasure dragging noisily behind him....
No one will know and we shall be happy....

JOYZELLE.

Lancéor, this is terrible!... I never tremble, but I am trembling
to-day.... Perhaps it means your life; and it already means mine....
What is that light which rises so quickly?... It has come to threaten
us, it is going to betray us!...

LANCÉOR.

No, no, it is the sun rising behind the wall.... It is the innocent
sun, the good May sun, which has come to delight us.... Open, then,
open quickly: each minute that passes adds its dangers to the dangers
which you fear.... A single movement, Joyzelle; a turn of your hand;
and you really open the gates of life to me! (_JOYZELLE turns the
key; the gate opens; LANCÉOR crosses the threshold._)

LANCÉOR.

(_Taking JOYZELLE in his arms._) Joyzelle!...

JOYZELLE.

I am here!...

LANCÉOR.

I hold your hands and your eyes, your hair and your lips, in the
same kiss and at the same moment, all the gifts of love which I have
never had and all its presence!... My arms are so surprised that they
cannot carry them; and my whole life cannot contain them.... Do not
turn away your face, do not draw back your lips!...

JOYZELLE.

It is not to escape you, but to be closer to you....

LANCÉOR.

Do not turn your head; do not deprive me of a shadow of your lashes,
a gleam of your eyes: it is not the hours, but the very minutes that
threaten our happiness....

JOYZELLE.

I was seeking your smile....

LANCÉOR.

And your own meets mine in the first kiss that passes between our
lips to unite our destinies.... It seems to me to-day as though I
had always seen you and always clasped you and as though I were
repeating, in reality, on the threshold of paradise, what I did on
earth when embracing your shadow....

JOYZELLE.

I used to embrace you at night when I embraced my dreams....

LANCÉOR.

I knew no doubt....

JOYZELLE.

I knew no fear....

LANCÉOR.

And everything is granted me....

JOYZELLE.

And everything makes me happy!...

LANCÉOR.

How deep your eyes are and how full of confidence!...

JOYZELLE.

And how clear are yours and full of certainty!...

LANCÉOR.

How well I recognize them!...

JOYZELLE.

And how well I know yours!...

LANCÉOR.

Your hands rest on my shoulders just as when I lay waiting for them
without daring to wake....

JOYZELLE.

And your arm is round my neck just as it was....

LANCÉOR.

It was thus that your eyelids used to close at the breath of love....

JOYZELLE.

And it was thus, too, that the tears came to your eyes when they
opened....

LANCÉOR.

When happiness is so great....

JOYZELLE.

Unhappiness does not come so long as love binds it....

LANCÉOR.

Do you love me?...

JOYZELLE.

Yes....

LANCÉOR.

Oh, how you said "yes!"... "Yes" from the depths of your heart, from
the depths of your thought, from the depths of your very soul!... I
knew it, perhaps; but it had to be said; and our kisses themselves
did not count without it.... Now it is enough, it will feed my life;
all the hatred on earth could not wipe it away nor thirty years of
distress exhaust it!... I am in the light and the spring overwhelms
me!... I look up to the sky and the garden awakens!... Do you hear
the birds making the trees sing and repeating your smile and that
wonderful "yes;" and do you see the rays that caress your hair like
diamonds sparkling among the flames and the thousands of flowers that
bend over us to surprise in our eyes the mystery of a love which they
did not know?...

JOYZELLE.

(_Opening her eyes._) There was nothing here but poor, dead
flowers....

      [_She looks around her, stupefied; for, since
      Lancéor's entrance, without their noticing it, the
      gloomy garden has become gradually transfigured by
      magic. The wild plants, the weeds that poisoned it
      have grown and each, according to its kind, has
      increased its flowers, blooming to a prodigious size.
      The puny bindweed has become a powerful creeper,
      whose wonderful blossoms engarland the trees weighed
      down with ripe fruits and peopled with miraculous
      birds. The pale pimpernel is now a tall shrub of
      a warm and tender green, with bursting flowers
      larger than lilies. The pale scabious has lengthened
      its stalks, from which spring tufts like mauve
      heliotrope.... Butterflies flit to and fro, the bees
      hum, the birds sing, the fruits swing and fall, the
      light streams down. The perspective of the garden
      has become infinitely extended; and the audience
      now sees, to the right, a marble basin, half-hidden
      behind a hedge of oleanders and turnsoles cut into
      arches._

LANCÉOR.

There is nothing here now but the flowers of life!... Look!...
They are coming down, they are streaming down upon us!... They are
bursting on the branches, they bend the trees, they entangle our
steps, they press against one another, they crush one another, they
open out wide, one within the other, they blind the leaves, they
dazzle the grass; I know none of them and the spring is drunk; I have
never seen flowers so disordered, so resplendent!...

JOYZELLE.

Where are we?...

LANCÉOR.

We are in the garden which you would not open to my love....

JOYZELLE.

What have we done?

LANCÉOR.

I have given the kiss that is given but once; and you have spoken the
word that is never respoken....

JOYZELLE.

(_Swooning._) Lancéor, I am mad, or else we are going to die....

LANCÉOR.

(_Supporting her._) Joyzelle, you are turning pale and your dear arms
are pressing me as though you feared that a hidden enemy....

JOYZELLE.

Have you not seen...?

LANCÉOR.

What?

JOYZELLE.

We are caught in a trap and those flowers are betraying us.... The
birds were silent, the trees were dead, there was nothing here but
weeds, which no one dug up.... I recognize them all and remember
their names, which still remind me of their former wretchedness....
Here is the buttercup, laden with golden disks; the poor pale
pimpernel is changed into a bush of lilies; the tall scabious are
dropping their petals over our heads; and those purple bells which
shoot up over the wall to tell the world that they have seen us, are
the foxglove, which was pining in the shade.... It is as though the
sky had shed its flowers.... Do not look at them; they are here to
ruin us.... Ah, I am wrong to seek and I should have understood!...
He muttered confused threats.... Yes, yes, I knew he had spells
at his command.... They told me so one day, but I did not believe
them.... Now it is his time; it is well, it is too late; but perhaps
we shall see that love also knows....

      [_A horn sounds._

LANCÉOR.

Hark!...

JOYZELLE.

It is the horses' hoofs and the horn sounding the recall.... He is
returning. Fly!...

LANCÉOR.

But you?...

JOYZELLE.

I have nothing to fear, but his hateful love.... Go!...

LANCÉOR.

I will stay with you; and, if his violence....

JOYZELLE.

You will ruin us both.... Go!... Hide there, behind those spurges....
Whatever he may say, whatever he may do, do not show yourself and
fear nothing for me: I shall know how to defend myself.... Go!... He
is coming!... Go!... I hear his voice....

      [_LANCÉOR hides behind a cluster of tall spurges. The
      railed gate opens and MERLIN enters the garden._

MERLIN.

Is he here, Joyzelle?...

JOYZELLE.

No.

MERLIN.

Those flowers do not lie; they inform against love.... They were your
keepers and have been faithful to me.... I am not cruel and I forgive
more than once.... You can save him by pointing to the bush which
hides him.... (_JOYZELLE stands motionless._) Do not look at me with
those eyes of hatred.... You will love me one day, for love goes by
dark and generous paths.... Do you not believe that I will keep my
promises?...

JOYZELLE.

No!...

MERLIN.

I have done nothing, Joyzelle, to deserve such hatred or such an
insult.... Since you wish it, I will let fate take its course....

      [_A cry of pain is heard from behind the cluster of
      spurges._

JOYZELLE.

(_Rushing behind the cluster._) Lancéor!...

LANCÉOR.

Joyzelle!... I am hurt.... An adder has stung me....

JOYZELLE.

It is not an adder.... It is a horrible animal.... It is lifting
itself against you!... Let me crush it underfoot.... It is
foaming.... It is dead.... Lancéor, you are turning pale!... Lean
on my neck.... Fear nothing, I am strong.... Show me your wound....
Lancéor, I am here.... Lancéor, answer me!...

MERLIN.

      (_Approaching them and examining the bite._)

The wound is mortal.... The poison is very slow and its action is
strange.... Do not despair.... I alone know the remedy....

JOYZELLE.

Lancéor! Lancéor! Answer me! Answer me!...

MERLIN.

He will not answer, he is sound asleep.... Withdraw, Joyzelle, unless
you wish this mere sleep to end in the grave.... Withdraw, Joyzelle:
you will not be betraying him; you will be warding off death....

JOYZELLE.

First make the sign that shall restore him to life!

MERLIN.

(_Looking at her gravely._) I will make the sign, Joyzelle.
(_JOYZELLE exit slowly, turns back and withdraws at last, before a
grave and imperious gesture from MERLIN. MERLIN, left alone with
LANCÉOR, kneels down beside him to dress his wound._) There, have no
fear, my son, there, it is for your happiness; and may all my heart
open in the first kiss that I am able to give you.

      [_He embraces him long and fervently. Enter ARIELLE._

ARIELLE.

Master, we must hasten and lay the new trap.

MERLIN.

Will he fall into it?

ARIELLE.

Man always falls into a trap, when his instinct leads him; but let us
veil his reason, let us change his character; we shall behold a sight
that will make us smile....

MERLIN.

I shall not smile, for the sight is a sad one and I do not like
to see a noble and beautiful love, a love that believes itself
predestined and unparalleled, thus reduced to nothing, at the first
proof, in the arms of a phantom....

ARIELLE.

Lancéor is not free, for he is no longer himself and I have abandoned
him to his instinct during the past hour....

MERLIN.

He ought to have conquered it....

ARIELLE.

You speak like that because I am submissive: but remember the time
when I was less docile.

MERLIN.

You think yourself very docile because I have conquered you; but you
retain some shadow even in the light in which I have been able to
train you and I find in you a certain cruelty that takes too great a
pleasure in men's weaknesses....

ARIELLE.

Men's weaknesses are often necessary to the purposes of life....

MERLIN.

What will happen if he yields?...

ARIELLE.

He will yield: it is written. The question is if Joyzelle's love will
surmount the proof.

MERLIN.

And do you not know?

ARIELLE.

No; she has a mind which is not wholly within my sphere, which
depends upon a principle which I do not know, which I have never seen
except in her and which changes the future.... I have tried to subdue
her; but she obeys me only in little things. But it is time to
act. Go and find Joyzelle and leave your son to me.... Go, lest you
should spoil the proof.... I shall revive him, I shall renew and make
still deeper and blinder the intoxication into which I have plunged
him; and I shall become visible to his eyes in order to deceive his
kisses....

MERLIN.

(_In a voice of smiling reproach._) Arielle....

ARIELLE.

Go, let me be.... You know that kisses given to poor Arielle pass
like the flash of a wing that closes over running water....

      [_MERLIN retires to a distance. ARIELLE goes towards
      the marble basin; and there, half-hidden behind the
      hedge of oleanders, she half opens the veils that
      cover her, sits on the grassy steps that surround the
      basin and slowly unties her long hair, while LANCÉOR
      awakes, groping with his hands._

LANCÉOR.

Where did I fall asleep? Some strange poison has entered my
heart.... I am no longer the same and my mind is wandering.... I
am struggling against the intoxication and I do not know where I
am going.... (_Catches sight of ARIELLE._) But who is that woman
behind the oleanders? (_Approaching the hedge and looking._) She is
beautiful!... She is half unclad and her curved foot, like a prudent
flower, is trying the water, which smiles and encircles it with
pearls.... She raises her arms to bind her hair; and the light of the
sky glides between her shoulders, like gleaming water over marble
wings. (_Approaching closer._) She is beautiful, she is beautiful!...
I must see her.... She is turning round and one of her bare breasts,
peeping through her tresses, adds rays to the rays that strike it....
She is listening, she hears; and her wide-open eyes are questioning
the roses.... She has seen me, she hides herself, she is going to
fly.... (_Passing through the hedge._) No, no, do not fly from
me!... I have seen you.... It is too late!... (_Taking ARIELLE in his
arms._) I want to know the name of so pure a vision, which plunges
into darkness all that I have loved!... I want to know also what too
faithful shadow, what profound retreat concealed the marvel which I
hold in my arms!... What trees, what caves, what towers, what walls
were able to stifle the brilliancy of that flesh, the fragrance of
that life, the fire of those eyes?... Where were you hiding, you whom
even a blind man would find without difficulty in a holiday crowd?...
No, do not thrust me away; this is not the passion, the intoxication
of a moment; it is the lasting dizziness of love!... I am at your
knees; I humbly embrace them.... I give myself to you alone.... I am
only yours.... I ask for nothing but a kiss from your lips to forget
the rest and seal the future.... Bow down your head.... I see it
bending towards me, I see it consenting; and I call for the token
which nothing can efface henceforth.... (_He kisses her passionately.
A cry of distress is heard from behind the bushes._) What is it?...

      [_ARIELLE releases herself from his embrace, flies
      and disappears. Enter JOYZELLE._

JOYZELLE.

(_Dismayed._) Lancéor!...

LANCÉOR.

Why, where do you come from, Joyzelle?

JOYZELLE.

I have seen and heard....

LANCÉOR.

Well, what?... What have you seen?... Look around you: there is
nothing to see.... The oleanders are in flower, the water in the
basin sleeps, the doves are cooing, the water-lilies are opening
their petals: that is all that I see, all that you can see....

JOYZELLE.

Do you love her?

LANCÉOR.

Whom?...

JOYZELLE.

The woman who has just fled....

LANCÉOR.

How should I love her?... I had never seen her.... The woman was
there; I happened to pass.... She gave a loud scream.... I ran up....
She seemed to have lost her footing and, as I held out my hand to
her, she gave me the kiss which you heard....

JOYZELLE.

Is it really you speaking?

LANCÉOR.

Yes, look at me: it is really and wholly I.... Come nearer, touch me
if you doubt it....

JOYZELLE.

The proof was terrible; but this is mortal....

LANCÉOR.

What?...

JOYZELLE.

Was this the first time that you saw that woman?...

LANCÉOR.

Yes.

JOYZELLE.

I shall not speak of it again.... I shall understand, perhaps; in any
case, I forgive....

LANCÉOR.

There is nothing to forgive.

JOYZELLE.

What do you say?...

LANCÉOR.

I say that I have no need for the pardon with which you overwhelm a
fault which I have not committed.

JOYZELLE.

Which you have not committed?... Then I did not see what I saw nor
hear what I heard?...

LANCÉOR.

No.

JOYZELLE.

Lancéor!...

LANCÉOR.

Lancéor! Lancéor!... If you called me by my name for a thousand years
and more, it would alter nothing in what was nothing!...

JOYZELLE.

I do not know what is passing between your happiness and mine.... Oh,
look at me and touch my hands, that I may know where you are!... Oh,
if you speak like that, then it was not you whom I saw this morning
in the wonderful garden where I gave away my soul!... No, there is
something that is mocking our strength.... It is not possible that
all is thus lost because of a single word.... I am seeking, I am all
astray.... I saw you, then, and saw all truth and all trust, as one
suddenly sees the sea between the trees!... I was sure, I knew....
Love did not deceive me.... It deceives me now!... It cannot be that
all this should crumble away for a yea or a nay.... No, no, I will
not have it!... Come, it is not too late; we have not yet lost our
happiness.... It is all in our hands, which close upon it.... What
you have just done was mad, perhaps.... I forget it, I laugh at it,
I saw nothing, I tell you!... It does not exist: you can wipe it out
with a word.... You well know, as I do, that love has words which
nothing can resist and that the greatest fault, when confessed in a
loyal kiss, becomes a truth more beautiful than innocence.... Speak
that word to me; give me that kiss; confess the truth, confess what
I saw, what I heard; and all will again become pure as it was and I
shall recover all that you gave me....

LANCÉOR.

I have said what I have said; if you do not believe me, go away, you
annoy me....

JOYZELLE.

Look me in the face.... Do you love her, since you lie like that?...

LANCÉOR.

No, I love no one and you less than the others....

JOYZELLE.

Lancéor!... What have I done?... Perhaps, without knowing....

LANCÉOR.

Nothing, it is not that.... But I am not what you thought and I do
not care to be.... I am like other men; I wish you to know it and
make the best of it.... I want all our promises to be scattered to
the wind of some new dream, like this dead leaf which I crumple in
my hand.... Ah, the love of women!... Well, so much the worse for
them!... I shall live like other men in a faithless world, where no
one loves, where all oaths yield to the first test.... Ah, tears!...
They were bound to come, I expected them!... You are hard, I know,
and your tears are scarce.... I count them drop by drop!... You did
not love me!... Love which comes thus, at the first call, is not that
on which happiness is based.... In any case, it is not that which I
hoped for.... More tears!... They flow too late!... You did not love
me, I did not love you.... Another would have said.... Ah, another
would have known!... But you, no, no; go away!... Go away, go away, I
say!...

      [_JOYZELLE moves away silently, sobbing. When she has
      taken a few steps, she turns back, hesitates, looks
      sadly at LANCÉOR and disappears with a suppressed
      cry_, "I love you!..." _LANCÉOR, overwhelmed,
      bewildered, staggers away and leans against the trunk
      of a tree._

LANCÉOR.

What have I done?... I am obeying ... what?... I do not know.... What
have I said?... It is not I speaking.... I have lost happiness,
the present, the future.... I am no longer my own master.... I do
what I hate to do... I do not know who I am.... Joyzelle!... Ah, my
Joyzelle!...

      [_He falls, sobbing, with his face to the ground._




ACT III


SCENE I.--_A Room in the Palace_

      [_LANCÉOR is discovered before a mirror. He appears
      emaciated, bent, aged, unrecognizable._

LANCÉOR.

Who am I? In a few hours I have aged thirty years.... The poison is
doing its work and sorrow too.... I see myself with terror in this
mirror which shows me the wreck of myself.... Yet, it does not lie.
(_Going to another mirror._) For here is another that says the same
thing ... unless they all lie, even as everything seems to lie and
to mock at me in this extraordinary island. (_He feels his face._)
Alas, they are right!... These wrinkles which my hand follows are not
formed by their malevolent crystal.... They are in my flesh!... And
these hideous blemishes which will not come away, I feel them under
my fingers.... These bent shoulders refuse to straighten themselves;
my hair is colourless, like pale ashes after the flame has died away;
my eyes, even my eyes, hardly recognize themselves.... They used to
open, to laugh, to welcome life.... Now they blink and their glances
avoid me like the glances of a knave.... Not a thing remains to me
of what I was; my mother would pass by me and not see me.... It is
finished.... (_Drawing the curtain of a tall window._) Let us hide
ourselves; let complete dusk cover up all this!... (_He lies down in
a dark corner of the room._) I give up, I consent.... I have done
what love can never forgive.... I am losing my life at last, as I
have lost Joyzelle.... She will not see me again, I shall not see her
again....

      [_A door opens. Enter JOYZELLE._

JOYZELLE.

(_Surprised by the darkness, she stands a moment on the threshold.
Then, casting her eyes around the room, she perceives LANCÉOR
lying in a corner and rushes towards him with outstretched arms._)
Lancéor!... Ah, these last three days I have lived like a mad thing!
I looked for you everywhere. I went to the tower.... The doors were
closed, the windows too. I crouched on the sill to catch a glimpse of
your shadow, I called, I screamed, no one answered.... But how pale
you are, how thin!... I am talking to you without thinking.... Give
me your two hands....

LANCÉOR.

You know me?...

JOYZELLE.

Why not?

LANCÉOR.

But then I am not...? I am still myself?... Look at me!... What
trace of me remains?... (_Going to the window and tearing aside the
curtain._) Look! Look!... What do you know me by?... Tell me, is it
here?... Is it my hands, my eyes, my clothes, perhaps?...

JOYZELLE.

(_Looking at him and throwing herself, weeping, in his arms._) Oh,
how you have suffered!...

LANCÉOR.

I have suffered, yes, I have suffered!... I deserved it but too
well, after what I said, after what I did!... But that is not what
matters or overwhelms me.... I would willingly die, if you could
but see once more, were it only for the flash of an eye, that which
you once loved.... I cling to myself, to the little that remains of
me.... I should like to hide myself, to bury my distress; and yet
I want you to see me first, so that you may know at last what you
would have to love, if you still loved me.... Come, come, nearer,
nearer.... Not nearer to me, but nearer to the rays that shine upon
my wretchedness.... Look at these wrinkles, these dead eyes, these
lips.... No, no, do not approach, lest disgust.... I am less like
myself than if I had returned from a world which life had never
visited.... You do not recoil? You are not astonished?... You do not
see me as these mirrors see me?...

JOYZELLE.

I see that you are pale and that you seem tired.... Do not put
away my arms.... Bring your face closer.... Why not let me put my
lips to it, as I did when all things smiled to us in the garden of
flowers?... Love knows many days on which nothing smiles.... What
matter, if it be there to smile when we weep?... I am pushing back
your hair which hid your face and made it look so sad.... See, it is
just like that which I pushed back in our first kiss.... Come, come,
do not think about the lies of the mirrors.... They do not know what
they say; but love knows.... Already life is returning to those eyes
which see me again.... Have no fear, for I have none.... I know what
we must do and I shall have the secret that will cure your pain....

LANCÉOR.

Joyzelle!...

JOYZELLE.

Yes, yes, come nearer; I love you more dearly than at the happy
moment when all united us....

LANCÉOR.

Ah, I understand that; but the other, the other thing!...

JOYZELLE.

What thing?

LANCÉOR.

I understand that one can find one's love in ruins, that one can
gather up its remnants and loves them still.... But where are the
remnants of our love? Nothing is left of it; for, before fate struck
me as you see, I had crushed out of existence all that it could not
destroy.... I have lied and deceived; and, at the very moment when
the least lie begins again in a sphere where nothing is wiped out,
a fault which love might have pardoned.... Truth is dead in our
one heart.... I have lost the confidence in which all my thoughts
surrounded your thoughts, even as a transparent water surrounds a
still clearer water.... I myself no longer believe in it, I no longer
believe in myself; I have nothing pure left into which you can bend
to find my shadow; and my soul is even sadder than my body....

JOYZELLE.

Did you kiss that woman?...

LANCÉOR.

Yes.

JOYZELLE.

Did she call you?...

LANCÉOR.

No.

JOYZELLE.

And why did you say that I was mistaken?...

LANCÉOR.

What good would it be to tell you, Joyzelle? It is too late....
You would not believe me, for you would have to believe the
incredible.... I was walking in a trance, in a sort of invincible,
mocking dream.... My mind, my reason, my will were all farther from
themselves than is this shattered body from what it was.... I would
have liked to tell you, to shout to you again and again that I was
a lie that had escaped control and that the shameful speeches that
defiled my lips stifled, in spite of myself, the tearful confession
and the ardent words of desperate love that were leaping towards
you.... I made efforts fit to burst my throat, to break my heart; and
I heard my faithless voice betray me and my arms, my hands, my eyes,
my kisses were powerless to disown it; for, except my soul, which you
did not see, I felt myself a prey to a hostile force, irresistible,
alas, and incomprehensible!...

JOYZELLE.

But ah, I did see it!... And I knew at once that it was not you that
were lying, that it was impossible....

LANCÉOR.

How did you know?...

JOYZELLE.

Because I love you....

LANCÉOR.

But, what am I, Joyzelle, what do you love in me, in whom I have
profaned and others destroyed all that you once loved?...

JOYZELLE.

You.

LANCÉOR.

What remains of me?... Not these hands, which have lost their
strength; not these eyes, which no longer have their brightness; not
this heart, which has betrayed love....

JOYZELLE.

It is you and still you and none but you yourself!... What matter who
you are, so long as I find you!... Oh, I cannot tell how to explain
that!... When one loves as I love you, she is blind and deaf, because
she looks beyond and listens elsewhere.... When she loves as I love
you, it is not what he says, it is not what he does, it is not what
he is that she loves in the man she loves: it is he and only he, who
remains the same, through the passing years and troubles.... It is
he alone, it is you alone, in whom no change can come but that which
increases love.... He who is all in you, you who are all in him, you
whom I see, whom I hear, to whom I listen incessantly and whom I love
always....

LANCÉOR.

Joyzelle!...

JOYZELLE.

Yes, yes, embrace me, crush me in your arms!... We have to struggle,
we shall have to suffer; we are here in a world that seems full of
snares.... We are only two, but we are all love!...


SCENE II.--_A grove._

      [_JOYZELLE lies sleeping on a grassy bank, before
      a box hedge, cut into arches, in which lilies are
      flowering. It is night. A fountain ripples gently.
      The moon is shining. Enter ARIELLE._

ARIELLE.

She sleeps.... The breaths of the garden are hushed around her to
listen to her breath; and the nightingale alone, deputed by the night
which bathes her in silver, comes to soothe her slumbers.... How
beautiful and peaceful she is; and how pure she looks, a thousand
times purer than the water that trickles yonder, flowing from the
glaciers, in the snowy whiteness that sings under the pale leaves!...
Her sweet hair lies spread like a flood of motionless light; and
the moon cannot tell to whom belongs the gold that mingles with the
azure in which its beams float.... Her bright eyes are closed; and
yet the light that falls from the stars tremulously raises her loving
eyelids to seek beneath them the last memory of the fair day that is
past.... Her mouth is a moist, breathing flower; and the lilies have
poured dewdrops on her bare shoulder, to give her her share of the
pearls which night distributes in silence, in the name of the heavens
that open over the treasure of the worlds.... Ah, Joyzelle, Joyzelle!
I am but a phantom lost in the night, more lost than you, for all my
clear-sightedness, and nearer the tomb where happiness expires.... I
am not my own mistress; I obey my master, I can give nothing but an
invisible kiss, which cannot wake you and is not even mine.... But I
love you, I love you, as a less happy sister loves her whom love has
chosen first.... I love you, I encompass you with all the powers that
are not named in the prayers of men; and I would that my master had
met you earlier, before fate, which hurries forward that incomparable
hour, had fixed the tearful future that awaits him and awaits me
with him.... I spread my powerless, troubled affection over your
calm sleep.... Here is the only kiss that I can give you.... Ah, why
does not he of whom I am but the unconscious and docile shadow come
himself to lay it on your lips, which call to mine even as all that
is beautiful calls to mystery!...

      [_She kisses JOYZELLE on the forehead._

JOYZELLE.

(_In her sleep._) Lancéor!...

ARIELLE.

One more.... The last, even as we drink of the well defended by the
angels who keep the secrets of time and space, the well at whose
brink we shall never rest again....

JOYZELLE.

(_Sleeping, talking as in a dream._) Is that you, Lancéor?... How
sweet your lips are at the breath of dawn!... I swoon beneath the
flowers that fall from paradise....

ARIELLE.

Faithful in sleep and constant in her dreams!... The demons of the
night will steal nothing from the love that fills the past and
future of a heart!... Ah, my master and father!... It is she whom
your only hope awaited, in vain, to avert the fate that threatens
your old age!... O master, if you be willing, there is yet time; and
happiness is here: you have but to gather it!... It sways uncertain
between your son and you; a gesture would be enough to fix it upon
ourselves.... Come hither, she is yours!... Come, come, come, I am
calling you.... I know that I am right and that man must not renounce
life and ruin himself to save those whom he loves....

MERLIN.

(_In the distance, in a voice of grave reproach._) Arielle!...

      [_He enters, wrapped in a long cloak._

ARIELLE.

I am speaking for you and my voice is your voice.... I speak in the
name of your heart, which loves deeply and dares not confess it....
You had, at this prescribed moment, to meet that sleeping woman, in
order to avoid one who will destroy your old age....

MERLIN.

Begone, it is too late....

ARIELLE.

No, it is not too late; this is the one moment; and your destiny
depends on the movement which you make....

MERLIN.

Begone, do not tempt me, or I will plunge you back into your impotent
shade.... I drew you from it to open my eyes, not to mislead me....

ARIELLE.

To listen to the instinct by which alone men are saved is not to be
misled.... Think of the terrible days which Viviane is preparing:
Viviane, whom you must love if you do not love this one....

_Merlin._

Viviane?... Is it in this life or in some other world that that name
resounds within my secret heart like a name of madness, sorrow and
shame?...

_Arielle._

No, it is in this life, the only one that you possess.... It is the
name of the fairy who, in Brocéliande, where your fate leads you,
awaits your appearance to shatter your old age.... O master, I see
her!... Have a care, she approaches and will win your heart!... So
soon as this love, so pure, so healthful, has lost its claims, hers
crawls out of the shadow.... Master, I entreat you!... My eyes are
counting her wiles: she entwines you with her arms which travesty
love; she takes away your power, your reason, your wisdom; she
snatches from you at last the secret of your strength; and, like an
old, drunken man, you fall to the ground.... Then she strips you,
mocks at you, rises to her feet and closes on us the door of the
mortal cavern which will never open again....

MERLIN.

It is inevitable, then?...

ARIELLE.

You know, as I do, that nothing can deceive me where you are
concerned.... Master, I beseech you, both for yourself and for me,
who love the light and who must lose it with you!... This is the
irrevocable hour!... Choose, choose life!... It still offers itself
and therefore it belongs to us and you have a right to it!...

MERLIN.

Begone, it is useless.... Besides, this one would never have loved
me....

ARIELLE.

It is enough that you love her and that he whom she loves no longer
stands between you.... That is what I read in the two futures....

MERLIN.

(_Wiping the sweat of anguish from his brow._) Begone, for I know....
And so it was written that, by loving this child, I could have saved
myself.... But she is not for me; and my hour is past.... This is
the hour of those who come and who have met as time ordained, as
life ordained.... Begone, begone, I say!... (_ARIELLE, veiling her
features, exit silently._) I surrender my share; and it is for you,
my son, that I complete the proof.... (_He takes off his cloak and
appears taller and younger, dressed in clothes similar to LANCÉOR'S
and presenting a strange resemblance to him. Approaching JOYZELLE._)
Ah, my innocent Joyzelle!... You will suffer too, you must suffer
still more, since destiny lies hidden in your tears; but what matter
the sorrows that lead to love?... I would gladly exchange all the
joys that I have known in my poor life for the most cruel of those
happy sorrows.... (_He leans over JOYZELLE._) Arielle spoke truly.
I have but to make a movement to put back the hours and the days and
thus escape the horrible end which fate reserves for me.... Yes, but
that movement destroys him whom I love more than myself, him whom the
years have chosen for the love for which I had hoped.... Ah, when we
thus hold in our hands our own happiness and that of another man;
when we must crush one so that the other may survive: it is then
that we feel how deep are the roots that bind us to the earth on
which we suffer; it is then that life utters a superhuman cry to make
itself heard and to defend its rights!... But it is then also that we
must give ear to the other voice that speaks, to the voice that has
nothing definite or sure to tell us, that has nothing to promise and
that is only a murmur more sacred than life's inarticulate cries....
Lancéor and Joyzelle, love each other, love me, for I have loved
you.... I am feeble and frail and made for happiness like other men;
nor do I surrender my share without a struggle.... Love each other,
my children; I am listening to the little voice which has nothing to
tell me, but which alone is right.

      [_He kneels before JOYZELLE and kisses her on the
      forehead._

JOYZELLE.

(_Waking with a start._) Lancéor!...

MERLIN.

Yes, it is I: the darkness has led me to you; and I come to wake you
with a new kiss, so that you may....

JOYZELLE.

(_Springing up and looking at him in terror._) Who are you?...

MERLIN.

(_Putting out his arms to embrace her._) You know who I am, Joyzelle,
and love must tell you....

JOYZELLE.

(_Drawing back violently._) Ah, do not touch me, or I shall summon
death to come to put an end to this horrible dream!... I know not
what phantoms have haunted this night, but this is the vilest, the
basest, the most cowardly that the darkness has sent!... I do not
believe in it yet!... I am bruising my eyes in trying to awake
myself!... Ah, do not come near me!... Back!... Begone!... You fill
me with horror!...

MERLIN.

Look at me, Joyzelle!... I do not understand you; and doubtless sleep
still troubles....

JOYZELLE.

Where is he?...

MERLIN.

Wake, Joyzelle....

JOYZELLE.

Where is he and what have you done with him?...

MERLIN.

He is wherever I am; and, if your eyes mislead you....

JOYZELLE.

Do you not know that I carry him here, in these eyes which see you
and compare what he is with what you are?... Have you not seen what
he is in my heart, that you should copy him thus?... You, beside him;
you, in his clothes and under his aspect: ah, it is as though death
pretended to be life!... But there might be twenty thousand of you
resembling him and he alone be changed from what he was yesterday;
and I would sweep away the twenty thousand phantoms, to go to the
only man who is not a dream among the other dreams!... Oh, do not try
to hide in the shadow.... You retreat too late; I have discovered you
and I know who you are... I know your spells; and how I should laugh
at them, did I not fear that, by your witchcraft, when usurping that
dear and unrecognizable shape, you have caused him to suffer!... What
have you done to him?... Where is he?... I will know.... You shall
not go without answering.... (_Seizing MERLIN'S hand._) I am alone, I
am weak.... But I insist, I insist.... I will know, I will know!...

MERLIN.

I love you too much, Joyzelle, to do him any harm, so long as you
love him.... He has therefore nothing to fear.... Do you not fear me
either. I am not here to take advantage of the darkness and surprise
your heart. I had another object.... Listen to me, Joyzelle; it is
no longer the rival or the unhappy lover that speaks to you; it
is a prudent and anxious father.... Before he came who conquered
you, as never man in this world conquered woman, I had, I confess,
caught a glimpse of a happiness which it is idle to pursue in the
decline of years.... To-day I retire, sadly, but in good faith....
I know how much you love the poor unconscious being whom malevolent
chance has placed upon your road.... And do not mistake me: I am
speaking of him now without hatred or envy, but not without dismay,
when I think of the heart-rending days which he is preparing for
you.... That is why I insist on enlightening you as regards him, at
the risk of displeasing you.... I have no other care than to make
you turn away from an unhappy love in which nothing but tears and
disillusion awaits you.... I have no hope for myself.... I do not ask
you to love me in his stead.... You have shown me fully that that is
impossible.... I desire only that you will cease to love him: that is
all that I implore of the kindness of fate; and fate to-night hears
my prayer....

JOYZELLE.

How?...

MERLIN.

The proof is grave and sad; I would have liked to spare you.... But
you know better than I that there are salutary sufferings, before
which it is shameful to fly.... A sign will be enough to overturn a
world.... A little movement of that neck which as yet bends without
anxiety, a single glance of those eyes, too confident and too full
of innocence, will destroy before my sight the most beautiful thing
that love has created in a woman's heart.... And yet, it must be....
It is right, it is well that this thing should to-day be lost in
tears which it may yet be possible to wipe away; for later it would
have had to sink in sorrows which nothing could have consoled....

JOYZELLE.

What do you mean?...

MERLIN.

That, at this very moment, when all that is spotless and true, limpid
and ardent in your heart, when all the transparent virtues of your
soul, all the faithfulness, all the loyalty and all the innocence of
your virgin blood mount up towards him whom you had selected to make
of him the purest, the happiest of men, he is there, behind us, at
two steps from this bank, sheltered by those leaves which he thinks
impenetrable, in the arms of the woman with whom, the other day, as
you yourself saw, he profaned the marvellous love which you have
given him!...

JOYZELLE.

No.

MERLIN.

Why do you say no, without looking?...

JOYZELLE.

Because he is myself....

MERLIN.

I do not ask you to believe my words: I simply ask you to turn your
head....

JOYZELLE.

No.

MERLIN.

Do you hear the murmur of their voices mingling and the song of
kisses answering kisses?...

JOYZELLE.

No.

MERLIN.

Do not raise your voice to interrupt a crime which you do not wish
to see.... They will not hear you; they listen only to the sound of
their lips!... But turn, Joyzelle, I beseech you!... Your life is
at stake and all the happiness to which you have a right!... Do not
reject the proffered truth that comes to save you if you have the
courage at last to accept it! It will not return except to make you
weep, when it is too late!... But look! Look!... You need not even
turn your head!... Your star is kind to you and does not tire!...
Do not close your eyes, it is coming to unseal them!... See!... The
shadow of their arms, lengthened by the moonlight, is creeping along
that arch and covering your knees!... Open your eyes! Look!... It is
coming to defy you, it is rising to your lips!...

JOYZELLE.

No.

      [_A pause._

MERLIN.

I understand you, Joyzelle.... You must not deny what remains of your
love while I am here.... I leave you to yourself, face to face with
your duty, face to face with your destiny.... Such sacrifices ask
for no witnesses: they demand silence.... The truth is there; it is
cowardly to fly from it.... You will know how to face it when you are
alone.... There is yet time.... I admire you, Joyzelle.... Your life
and your happiness invoke your courage and depend upon a glance....

      [_Exit MERLIN. JOYZELLE, for a long moment, remains
      seated on the bank, motionless, with wide-open eyes,
      staring fixedly before her. Then she rises, draws
      herself up and goes out slowly, without turning her
      head._




ACT IV

_A Room in the Palace_

      [_At the back, to the right, is a large marble
      bed, on which LANCÉOR is lying lifeless. JOYZELLE,
      anxious, dishevelled, is busying herself around him._


JOYZELLE.

Lancéor! Lancéor!... He cannot hear me.... His eyes are wide open....
Lancéor, I am here, I am bending over your eyes.... Look at me, look
at me!... No, he does not see me!... Lancéor, for pity's sake!...
If your voice is too weak, give a sign of life!... I take you in my
arms, my arms that love you!... Come, come, come to yourself, in
our great love!... See, see, it is my hands that are lifting your
head.... Do you recognize my hands, as they stroke your hair?... You
so often told me, when we were happy, that the least caress of these
dear hands would recall your soul, even from the greatest happiness
of paradise, from the greatest darkness in the depths of.... No, no,
it is not there!... But his head is drooping, his arm falls back
lifeless and his fingers seem to me colder than this marble....
(_Mechanically feeling one of the columns of the bed._) No, it is
not that.... But I must know.... And his eyes are no longer....
(_Raising his head._) Is it his or mine that are so dim?... No, it
is impossible!... No, no, I will not have it! Ah, I will open your
lips!... (_She places her lips on LANCÉOR'S._) Lancéor! Lancéor! All
the ardour of my life shall enter your heart!... Do not fear, do not
fear! It is the saving flame and life that restores life!... Breathe
it all in the last efforts of my breath which loves you!... I would
gladly suffocate in exchanging my life for yours!... I give you my
strength, my hours, my years!... Here they are, here they are!...
You have but to make a movement, to open your lips!... It must be
so!... It must be possible thus to give new life to those whom we
love better than ourselves!... When we give them all, they cannot but
take it!... (_Raising her head to look at LANCÉOR._) He is falling
back! He is going from me!... (_Infatuated, she takes him in her arms
again._) Help!... No, this is too much!... Help! Hasten! Hasten!...
Ah no, I know better, no, no, it is not that.... Death does not
come like this when love threatens it!... No, no, I fear nothing,
no, no, I will not have it!... But I am crying for help! I cannot
remain alone, I cannot fight alone against all the strength of death
approaching!... If no one comes, it will end by conquering!... Help,
I say!... You must come to my aid!... Life must help me, or it is no
longer possible and we shall succumb!...

      [_She falls sobbing on LANCÉOR'S lifeless body. Enter
      MERLIN._

MERLIN.

I am here, Joyzelle....

JOYZELLE.

(_Starting up, as though to go to him, while still holding LANCÉOR
in a close embrace._) Ah, it is you!... So it is you!... At last
here is help and life coming!... Look at him! See!... It is time,
he is falling back!... I fling myself at your feet!... Yes, yes,
you can do all; and I have seen clear in all things!... Ah, at such
moments as this, one would see clear in the depths of a darkness
which worlds have never traversed!... Oh, I entreat you, tell me what
to do!... I am no longer Joyzelle, I am no longer fierce and I have
no more pride.... I am broken and dead: I drag myself at your feet;
and it is no more a question of this or that, of love or kisses, or
of trifling things!... Life and death stand face to face, they are
fighting under our eyes and must be separated.... You do not move a
step!... Ah, I know how great your hatred is and how you detest that
defenceless man!... Yes, you are right, he is anything you please, he
is a coward, he is a rascal, he is your enemy, he is a twenty-fold
traitor, since you will have it so!... Yes, I admit it, I was wrong,
I confess it, and I no longer love him, since you wish it, and I am
ready for anything, provided he be saved!... But that must be done
and that counts and all the rest is madness!... But come, come,
come, I tell you death is triumphing and will carry him off!... See,
his hands are turning blue and his eyes are growing dull and it is
horrible!...

MERLIN.

Joyzelle, fear nothing; his life is in my hands and I will save him,
if you wish me to save him....

JOYZELLE.

If I wish you to save him!... But do you not see that, if you were
to hesitate, do you not know that, if for his sake, I had to.... No,
no, I meant to say ... my distress bewilders me.... He has ceased to
breathe, I no longer hear his heart.... You seem to me so slow!...
Do you think that there is no danger, no need for haste?... I will
speak no more; I am making you lose minutes which perhaps were
passing to save him.... If you will not help him yourself--and I can
understand that, for you do not love him--tell me only what I must do
to assist him; and I shall know how to do it.... But I can see, I am
sure that he cannot wait and that we must make haste....

MERLIN.

I have told you, Joyzelle, his life is in my hands and cannot escape
without my consent. I warned you of it. The poison is doing its work
and I can see it. I alone can cure him, snatch him from death, call
back his vigour, his beauty, which are fading away, and restore him
to you as he was before....

JOYZELLE.

Ah, I entreat you, do not dally thus!... What is his beauty to me, if
his life escapes us?... Give him back to me as he is, whatever he may
be, what care I, if only I have him back, if only he breathes!...

MERLIN.

Yes, I will give him back to you. I have already twice done--and each
time repented--what I will do again for the last time, since you ask
it: but it is a sacrifice which none but you could have obtained.
By restoring his life, I risk my own. To rouse his strength, to
recall his soul, I must give him a part of my strength, a part of my
soul. It may be that he will take from me more than I have left and
that I shall fall dead beside the rival whom I shall have restored
to life.... Time was when I would thus risk my existence to save a
stranger by the wayside, almost without hesitating and without asking
anything in exchange.... But to-day I am more prudent and more wise.
As I am offering my life, it is but fair that I should be paid for it
and paid in advance; and I will give it to him only if you promise me
the dearest moment of your own....

JOYZELLE.

How?... What am I to do?...

MERLIN.

(_Aside._) O poor and all too innocent child!... And you, my chaste
thoughts, oh, take no part in the odious words which my voice must
now spread around their love!... I blush at the proof and am ashamed
of what I am now compelled to say.... You will forgive me when you
know all.... It is not I that speak: it is the future, which man
ought not to know, the shameless, pitiless future, which reveals a
day and throws light upon a destiny only to conceal the rest and
which wishes that I should know whether you are she whom it marks
out....

JOYZELLE.

What are you saying?... Why do you hesitate?... There is nothing in
the world; examine myself as I may, I see nothing in the world, in
our world or in the other, that I could be asked and not be ready
to....

MERLIN.

See, I will cease talking in riddles.... That man whom you see and
whom you hold pressed in your arms lies stretched as near death as
though he were laid on the slab of his tomb.... A movement can bring
him back to life; a movement can make him fall on the other side....
Well, at the very moment when you say yes and before the echo which
slumbers yonder under those marble vaults has time to repeat that you
have consented, I will make the certain movement which will snatch
him from the darkness, provided that you promise to come to-night,
here, in this room in which I shall restore him to you and on this
same bed over which you are leaning, to give yourself to me, without
shame, without reserve....

JOYZELLE.

I?... Give myself to you?...

MERLIN.

Yes.

JOYZELLE.

I, give myself to you, when he is restored to me?...

MERLIN.

So that he may be restored to you.

JOYZELLE.

No, I have not understood.... There are words, no doubt, which I
do not understand.... No, it is not possible that a man who is not
one of the princes of hell should come thus, at the moment when all
love's sorrow knows not what to hope for nor what to undertake....
No, I have mistaken you and I am doing you an injury.... You must
forgive me, I am a virgin, I am ignorant, I do not quite know what
those words imply.... But I see now.... Yes, you are right.... Yes,
yes, you mean to say that it is fair that I should bear a share of
the danger and that my life should be joined for a moment to yours,
in order to create the other life which is to revive him.... But I
want that share, I want it for myself alone, I want the whole of it,
the greatest possible share, and I never hoped that it could be given
me....

MERLIN.

Joyzelle, time presses.... Do not seek elsewhere: you know what I am
asking and the word means all that you dare not believe....

JOYZELLE.

Then, at the very moment when he comes back to me, when I see him
once more breathing in my arms and smiling at the love which he will
have found again, I shall have to snatch from him all that I have
given?... But what remains for him if you take everything from us;
and what shall I tell him when he kisses me?...

MERLIN.

You will tell him nothing, if you wish for his happiness....

JOYZELLE.

But I must tell him everything, since I love him!... No, no, I can
see clearly, that cannot be, that does not exist; and there must
be gods or demons to prevent such things: if not, I cannot see
why one should wish to live.... I have confidence in them, I have
confidence in you.... It was only a proof; and all this is not,
cannot be real.... It seems to me that already you look at me with
less ill-will.... See, I beseech you, I throw myself at your feet and
kiss your hands.... I will confess all to you.... I did not love you,
you hated him too much; but I never believed that you were unjust or
unworthy of love.... When you came in, I did not hesitate, I went up
to you, I asked you to snatch from death the only man I love; and yet
I knew that you love me too.... But, I do not know why, my instinct
told me that you were generous and capable of doing what I would have
done for you, what he himself would have done; and, when you have
done what we would have done, you shall have in our hearts a part of
our love that is not the least good part, nor the least fine, nor the
most perishable....

MERLIN.

Yes, I know: when I have given him back his life, at the risk of
my own, he will have the kisses, the lips and the eyes, the days
and the nights, all, in short, that forms love's vain and ephemeral
happiness!... But I, I shall have something much better; and
sometimes, by chance, in passing, I shall be vouchsafed a kindly
smile, which will not perish, provided that I refrain from demanding
it too often.... No, Joyzelle, at my age we are no longer satisfied
with illusions of that kind nor with those deceptive dregs. The hour
of heroic falsehoods is past for me. I wish to have what he will
have. I care little for your smile, which I know to be impossible:
I want yourself; I want you absolutely, were it only for a moment;
but I shall have that moment: he will give it me.... (_Approaching
LANCÉOR._) Look at him, Joyzelle: his features are becoming
distorted; we have waited too long and the danger increases with each
minute that passes.... Will you come?...

JOYZELLE.

(_Casting a bewildered glance around her._) Nothing bursts, nothing
falls and I am alone in the world!...

MERLIN.

(_Feeling LANCÉOR'S body._) The danger is becoming grave.... I know
the symptoms....

JOYZELLE.

Well, then, yes, I will come!... I will come to-night! I will come
this evening!... But save him first and restore him to life!... See,
his eyes are hollowing and his lips are fading and I stand here
bargaining for his life, as though it were a question of....

MERLIN.

He shall be restored to you; but remember, Joyzelle, if you are
not true to your promise, the hand that cures him will strike him
mercilessly....

JOYZELLE.

But I shall be true to it and I would go on my knees to the end of
the other world to remain true to it!... Ah, I will come, I tell you!
I give myself absolutely and I am wholly yours!... What more do you
want?... I have nothing left!...

MERLIN.

It is well; I have your promise; I will fulfil mine.... (_Aside,
taking LANCÉOR in his arms._) Forgive me, my son, in the name of
your destiny, which demands this torture.... (_He leans over LANCÉOR
and presses a long kiss on his eyelids and lips. Aloud._) See, he
returns from the regions without light.... Life is restored to him,
but he will awake only in your eager arms. I leave you to your work.
Remember your word....

      [_Exit MERLIN. JOYZELLE has taken LANCÉOR in her arms
      and looks at him in anguish. Soon her lover's eyes
      half open and his hands move feebly._

JOYZELLE.

Lancéor!... His eyes have opened and closed again and I saw the light
bathe in their blue! And here are his hands, which seem to seek
mine!... Here they are, Lancéor, here they are in your own, which
are no longer frozen!... They dare not leave them, lest they should
lose them; and yet I would support your shoulder and embrace your
neck which droops upon my breast.... Ah, all the good things are
returning and returning together!... I hear his heart beat, I breathe
his breath: they took all away from me, but they have given it all
back!... Listen to me, Lancéor: I want to see you, I am looking for
your face, do not hide your forehead in my hair, which loves you; my
eyes love you still more and want their share too!... (_LANCÉOR lifts
his head a little._) Oh, he has heard me and listened to me!... He is
here, he is here, there is no doubt of it now, he is here, before me,
more living than life!... He is here before me and the roses of dawn
and the flowers of awakening have brought colour to his cheeks and
are covering his smile, for he smiles already as though he saw me!...
Ah, the gods are too good!... They have pity on men!... There are
skies that open! There are gods of love! There are gods of life!...
We must thank them and love one another, since they also love!...
Come, come, come to my arms; your eyes still seek me, but your lips
find me.... They open at last to call to mine; and mine are here,
carrying all love!...

      [_A pause; she kisses him long and eagerly._

LANCÉOR.

(_Recovering consciousness._) Joyzelle....

JOYZELLE.

Yes, yes, it is I, it is I; look at me, look!... Here are my hands,
my forehead, my hair, my shoulder.... And here are my kisses, which
yours recognize!...

LANCÉOR.

Yes, it is you, it is indeed you, it is you and the light.... And
then this room, too, which I saw before.... Wait a little.... What
happened to me?... I remember, I remember.... I was lying yonder,
yonder, I know not where, before great doors which some one was
trying to open.... I was buried and was turning cold.... And then I
called to you, I called without ceasing and you did not come....

JOYZELLE.

But I did, I came, I was there, I was there!...

LANCÉOR.

No, you were not there.... I was seized with icy coldness, I was
seized with darkness and I was losing my life.... But now it is
you!... Yes, yes, my eyes see you, they behold you suddenly as they
emerge from the dark.... Scared though they be by the glaring light,
it is you they see and I am passing from the tomb to the joy of the
sunlight in the arms of love! That seems impossible to one coming
from so far!... I must touch you, I must cling to the caresses of
your hands, to the light of your eyes, I must seize the real gold of
the hair that bears witness to the daylight!... Oh, you could never
believe how one loves when dying, nor how I mean to love you after
losing you and finding you again!...

JOYZELLE.

I too, I too!...

LANCÉOR.

And the joy of returning to the arms which press one and which still
tremble, because they had ceased to hope!... Do you feel yours quiver
and mine adore you?... They seek, they enlace one another, they fear
lest they should lose one another, they no longer dare to open....
They no longer obey, they do not know that they are hurting us and
are like to stifle us in their blind intoxication!... Ah, they know
at last the worth of clasping a glowing body; and one would die to
learn life and to know love!...

JOYZELLE.

Yes, one would die....

LANCÉOR.

It is strange: when I was down there, in the frozen region, some one
approached whom I thought I recognized....

JOYZELLE.

It was he.

LANCÉOR.

Who?

JOYZELLE.

The lord of the island.

LANCÉOR.

He?... But he hated me....

JOYZELLE.

It was he.

LANCÉOR.

I do not quite understand.... Did he then bring me back to love, to
life?... Was he willing to restore me to her who loved me and whom he
loved himself?...

JOYZELLE.

Yes.

LANCÉOR.

But why did he do it?...

JOYZELLE.

I besought him until he consented.

LANCÉOR.

Did he hesitate?

JOYZELLE.

Yes.

LANCÉOR.

Why?

JOYZELLE.

He said that, in saving your life, he risked his own.

LANCÉOR.

Nothing compelled him to it.... And then, quite simply, he gave back
life to the only man who is taking away all hope of the love that
would make the happiness of his life?...

JOYZELLE.

Yes.

LANCÉOR.

And without asking anything, from kindness, from pity, from
generosity?...

JOYZELLE.

Yes.

LANCÉOR.

Ah, we were unjust and our worst enemies are better than we
believe!... There are treasures of nobility and love even in the
heart of hatred!... And this thing which he has done!... No, I really
do not know that I could have done as much; and I would never have
thought that that poor old man.... But is it not almost incredible,
Joyzelle, and is it not heroic?...

JOYZELLE.

Yes.

LANCÉOR.

Where is he? We must go and fling ourselves at his feet, confess our
error, wipe out the injustice of which we were guilty when we did not
love him.... He must have his part and the best part of the happiness
which he restores to us!... He must have our hearts, our joy, our
smiles and our tears of love, all that one can give to those who give
all!...

JOYZELLE.

We will go, we will go....

LANCÉOR.

Joyzelle, what is it?... You scarcely answer me.... I do not know if
my senses are still in the power of the night whence I am issuing,
but I do not recognize your words and your movements.... You seem to
be seeking, doubting, dreaming.... And I, who return to you full of
love and joy, find so little of either in your eyes, which avoid me,
in your hands, which forget me.... What has happened? Why recall me
and restore me to life, if, during my absence, I have lost what I
love?...

JOYZELLE.

Oh no, no, Lancéor, you have not lost me!...

LANCÉOR.

Your voice seeks a smile and finds but a sob....

JOYZELLE.

Yes, I wanted to smile and I am smiling now.... But do not be
surprised: I have wept so long and so desperately that the tears
still rise in spite of myself.... Joy was so far away that it could
not return with the first kisses.... It will need many before it
recovers confidence in my heart; and I am almost sad in the midst of
my happiness....

LANCÉOR.

Oh, my poor Joyzelle!... Is that what your grave silence means?...
And I was distressing myself like a stupid child!... I am thinking
only of myself, I am drunk with life and understand nothing.... I
was forgetting that in your place I should have lost courage.... It
is true, you are right, it is you, not I, returning from death; and,
when two beings love as we do, the one that does not die is the only
one that really dies.... Do not hide your tears.... The sadder you
appear, the more I feel that you love me.... Now it is for me to
take care of you, now it is for me to call back your soul, to warm
your disconcerted hands, to pursue your lips and bring you back to
the midst of the happiness which we had lost.... We shall soon be
there, since love is our guide.... It triumphs over everything when
it finds two hearts that give themselves to it fearlessly and without
reserve.... All the rest is nothing, all the rest is forgotten, all
the rest withdraws to make way for love....


JOYZELLE.

(_Staring fixedly before her._) All the rest withdraws to make way
for love....




ACT V


SCENE I.--_A Gallery in the Palace._

      [_Enter MERLIN and LANCÉOR._

LANCÉOR.

Father!... Then it is true, and you are my father!... And indeed it
seems to me, since you told me, as though I had always known it in my
far-seeing heart.... (_Coming closer._) But how wonderful it is!... I
see you again at last as I saw you amid my childish sports; and, when
I look at you, I see myself in a graver, nobler and more powerful
mirror than those which reflect my features along this room. But
what will Joyzelle say?... How she will laugh when she remembers her
fears, for she imagined.... No, she herself shall tell you what she
thought, to punish her for her senseless terror.... She used to hate
you, but with a softened hatred that already smiled like one about
to be pierced by the rays of love.... But where is she hiding? I
have been seeking her for nearly two hours in vain.... Have you seen
her? I must tell her at once of the unspeakable happiness which this
evening has brought us....

MERLIN.

Not yet. I must remain in her eyes, until the close of the day, the
pitiless tyrant whom she curses in her heart. My poor, dear child!...
How I have tortured your adorable love!... But I have already told
you the object of these proofs.... In making you suffer, I have but
been the instrument of fate and the unworthy slave of another will,
whose source I do not know, which seems to demand that the slightest
happiness should be surrounded by tears.... I have but hastened, in
order to bring happiness more quickly, the coming of those tears
which hung in suspense between your two destinies.... You shall know
some day by what power, a power which has no magical or supernatural
quality, but which still lies hidden at the bottom of men's lives,
I at times command certain phenomena, certain appearances that
bewildered you. You shall also learn that I have acquired the gift,
often a useless one, of reading the future a little more clearly and
a little further than the rest of men.... And so I saw you, groping
for each other, in time and space, for an unparalleled love, the
most perfect perhaps that the two or three centuries over which
my eyes have turned concealed within their shade.... You might
have met each other after many wanderings; but it was necessary to
hasten the expected meeting, because of you, my son, whom death
claimed in the absence of love.... And, on the other side, nothing
marked out Joyzelle for the hoped-for love, save a few scattered
and uncertain points and the proofs themselves which she was to
surmount. I therefore hurried on the prescribed proofs: they have
all been painful, but necessary; the last will be decisive and more
serious....

LANCÉOR.

Serious?... What do you mean?... It will not be dangerous for
Joyzelle, or for others?...

MERLIN.

It will not be dangerous for Joyzelle, but it imperils, for the
last time, the predestined love to which your life is linked....
That is why, in despite of all, in despite of my confidence, of my
anticipations, of my certainty even, I am afraid, I tremble a little
at the approach of the decisive hour....

LANCÉOR.

If Joyzelle is to decide, love has nothing to fear.... Come, do not
hesitate, Joyzelle will always be the source of joy.... But I do
not understand how, knowing the future, you are not able to see her
triumph beforehand?...

MERLIN.

I already told you, before we came in here, that Joyzelle can change
the future which she faces.... She possesses a force which I have
seen in none save her; that is why I do not know whether the great
victory which your love expects will not be mingled with some little
shadow and tears....

LANCÉOR.

What do you mean?... You seem perturbed.... What are you hiding from
me?... How can you believe that Joyzelle would ever be the cause of a
tear or the cause of a shadow?... There is nothing in Joyzelle, not
even the suffering which she might inflict, there is nothing in her
but brings health, happiness and love!... Ah, how well I see that you
know little of the living triumph, the endless dawn contained in her
voice, her eyes, her heart!... One must have held her in his arms to
know what treasures of hope, what torrents of certainty issue from
the least word murmured by her lips, from the slightest smile that
plays upon her face.... But I am too long delaying the impatient
victory. Go, father, go.... I will remain here, I will wait, I will
watch the happy moments pass, until my Joyzelle utters a great cry of
joy which shall tell me that love has determined destiny....

      [_MERLIN embraces LANCÉOR and exit slowly._


SCENE II.--_The same room as in Act IV. The moon lights it with its
blue radiance._

      [_On the right, MERLIN is seated on the great marble
      bed. ARIELLE is kneeling at the head of the bed, on
      the steps of the dais that supports it._

MERLIN.

Arielle, the hour is striking and Joyzelle is approaching.... I have
made the sacrifice of my useless life; and yet I would that my death,
if possible, should not come to sadden the most ardent and innocent
love that the world has known.... But you tremble, you weep, you hide
from me your eyes swollen with tears.... What do you see, my child,
that you contemplate with so great a dread?...

ARIELLE.

Master, I beseech you, abandon this proof: there is yet time!... My
eyes cannot see through the mist that surrounds it.... It may be
mortal, I see it, I feel it; and chance has placed our two lives
in the hand of a blind and infatuated virgin.... I do not want to
die!... There are other outlets.... I have always served you as
your very thought.... But to-day I am afraid, I can follow you no
longer.... You well know that my death is the echo of yours....
Abandon this: we will look elsewhere, in the future; and we can still
escape the danger....

MERLIN.

I cannot abandon the last proof.... It is for you to see that it does
not turn to disaster. It is for you to grasp the as yet uncertain
weapon which Joyzelle is preparing to raise against us....

ARIELLE.

But I do not know that I shall succeed!... Joyzelle's strength is
so swift, so profound, that it escapes my arm, escapes my eyes,
escapes destiny!... I see only the flash of falling steel.... All is
confused in a shadow; and my life and yours depend on a movement of
my unskilful hand....

MERLIN.

She is there, I hear her, she is feeling for the door.... Be obedient
and silent; I am obedient too. Watch and be quick and strong.... I
will close my eyes and await my fate....

ARIELLE.

(_Dismayed and maddened._) Abandon the proof!... I cannot go through
with it!... I refuse!... I want to fly!...

MERLIN.

(_Imperiously._) Silence!...

      [_He stretches himself on the bed, closes his eyes
      and appears to be sleeping soundly. ARIELLE, overcome
      by her sobs, sinks down on the steps of the dais. On
      the left, at the opposite end of the room, a little
      door opens and JOYZELLE enters, wrapped in a long
      cloak and carrying a lamp in her hand. She takes two
      or three steps and stops. ARIELLE rises and stands
      invisible behind the heavy curtains at the foot of
      the bed._

JOYZELLE.

(_Stopping, haggard, hesitating, trembling._) Now and here.... I
have taken the last step.... Until this moment, which time can no
longer keep back and which is about to see a thing that will never
be wiped out; until I came to that little door which has just closed
upon two captive destinies, I knew, I knew all that I had to do....
Ah, I had reflected and I had judged so well!... There was nothing
but that, there was nothing else: it was certain, it was just, it
was inevitable!... But now all changes and I have forgotten all....
There are other powers, there are other voices and I am all alone
against all that speaks in the uncertain night.... Justice, where are
you?... Justice, what must I do?... I shall act because you wished
it.... You convinced me and urged me on.... There, but now, under the
thousands of stars which shone upon the door and which you invoked to
reassure my soul!... There was no doubt, then, and all the certainty
of all that breathes and of all that quivers and of all that loves
and has a right to love illumined my heart!... But, in face of
the deed, you yourself draw back, you deny your laws and abandon
me!... Ah, I feel too much alone, delivered like a blind slave to
the unknown.... I shall walk without looking.... I see nothing and
I shall not raise my mad eyes to the bed until the moment when the
thing.... (_She advances with a mechanical step to the foot of the
bed._) Now, fate itself shall say yes.... (_She lifts the lamp,
looks at the bed, sees MERLIN sleeping and, in her surprise, takes a
step back._) He sleeps!... What is this?... I had not foreseen....
Anything but this.... Must I wait still?... Oh, I should like to
wait!... He is sound asleep.... Then he did not wish.... But, if he
were not asleep, I could not have done it.... He would have disarmed
me, he would have mastered me.... It must be true, it is fate, it
is a good and just fate that delivers him to me thus.... I, who was
looking for a sign!... But there is the sign!... What more do I
want, if I want anything more?... And yet, as he is asleep, I cannot
know.... Perhaps he has pity, perhaps he renounces and would bid
me go!... He was not without soul; and often, at moments, he spoke
like a father.... Ah, if he had risen, if he had been there, with
arms held out to me, in an attitude of.... Then, then I should have
been strong and should have conquered!... But a man asleep.... That
shatters hatred.... And then, one no longer knows.... And to change
this sleep which one word puts to flight into that which no human or
superhuman power can disturb!... Oh, I would at least that one word
of forgiveness.... Ah no, I am too great a coward!... This is terror
seeking an outlet.... I did not come for further meditation.... There
is no doubt, after what he did, after what he said!... I listen only
to my voice, the voice of my destiny, which wills that I should save
us both!... So much the worse if I am wrong!... I am right! I am
right!... Go out, my lamp: I have seen all that I need see.... (_She
puts out the lamp, places it on one of the marble stairs, seizes
the dagger which she held concealed, raises it and looks at it for
a moment._) Now, it is your turn!... Ah, if you could do what my
thought, what my desperate pity would have, and if the death that
gleams at the point of this blade were not real death, irrevocable
death!... But enough.... It is time.... It is said, it is done, I
strike!...

      [_She raises the dagger to strike MERLIN. ARIELLE,
      invisible, seizes her wrist and, without apparent
      effort, paralyzes her gesture. At the same moment,
      MERLIN opens his eyes, smiling, rises and, with a
      movement of delight, takes JOYZELLE tenderly in his
      arms._

MERLIN.

It is well!... Joyzelle is great and Joyzelle triumphs!... She has
conquered fate by listening to love; and it is you, my child, whom
destiny marks out....

JOYZELLE.

(_Still failing to understand, and struggling._) No, no, no!... I
could not.... Ah, though my heart fail me, I have courage yet!... And
I have all my life, if I no longer have my strength, and never, no,
never, so long as I have breath....

MERLIN.

Look at me, Joyzelle.... I am restoring its strength to the arm which
you raised in love's defence.... I leave it its weapon which tried to
strike me and which was striking true.... Until that movement, all
was undecided; now, all is clear, all is radiant and sure.... Look
at me, Joyzelle, and no longer fear my lips.... They seek your brow,
there at last to place the kiss which the father lays on the brow of
his daughter....

JOYZELLE.

What is this and what do you mean that I cannot understand?... Yes, I
see in your eyes that you seem to love me as one loves a child....
So I was mistaken and I was on the point of...?

MERLIN.

No, you were right; you would not have been she whom love demands if
you had not done what you were going to do.

JOYZELLE.

I do not know, I am dreaming.... But since it is not the abominable
thing, I abandon myself to my dream....

MERLIN.

Yes, it is true, my Joyzelle, I am yearning to enjoy your delighted
surprise, to follow your glances which seem to me so beautiful in
their astonished flight, in which confidence dawns and which no
longer know where to rest their wings, like sea-birds that have
lost the shore.... I am taking my share of the happiness which I
bestow.... I shall have no other.... But do not be anxious, we shall
together enter into fate's secrets; and, when Lancéor....

JOYZELLE.

Where is he?

MERLIN.

Ah, that name rouses you; and see, the shore appears to those glances
lost in space!... Listen, I hear him.... Your heart, without our
knowing it, has gone to tell him that you loved him to the point
which love cannot surpass.... He is hastening, he is here!...

      [_The door opens. Enter LANCÉOR, followed by ARIELLE,
      invisible._

LANCÉOR.

Father!... She is mine!...

MERLIN.

My son, she has triumphed; destiny gives her to you....

LANCÉOR.

(_Taking JOYZELLE in his arms and covering her with wild kisses._)
Ah, I knew it and I was sure of it!... Joyzelle, my Joyzelle!... I
do not ask what you can have done to disarm fate.... I know nothing
yet; but we know all beforehand who love each other as you and I
love; and already I hail the new truth that must have been revealed
at the first touch of your heart!... Ah, father, father, I told you,
I told you!... But she does not understand why I am embracing you....
It is true, I go too fast.... Come here, Joyzelle, that I may unite
you both in my arms.... We had with us an enemy who loves us; he was
obliged to make us suffer; and that gentle enemy was my own father,
whom I thought lost, my father here, my father found again, who
awaits but a smile to embrace you too.... Oh, do not turn away, do
not look at me with those eyes already laden with reproaches.... I
have hidden nothing from you.... I knew it to-day, this evening, the
moment you left me; and, so soon as I knew it, I had to fly far from
you, lest I should betray myself, for all our happiness, it appears,
depended on this last secret; and, when a secret is committed to
love, it is as though one hid a lighted lamp in a crystal vase....
You would have learnt all merely by seeing my eyes, my hands, my
very shadow; and I could not show you my happiness.... You were
not to know of it till the great proof.... It was necessary that
you should do an impossible thing.... What thing I do not know;
but, smile as I might, I had to yield; I had to wait and patiently
count the minutes of the hour which thus separated our two impatient
passions.... But now, I hasten, I listen, I want to know.... Speak,
speak, I am listening....

JOYZELLE.

Since you are happy, I am happy, too.... I know nothing more.... I
have scarce awakened from a horrible and incomprehensible dream....

MERLIN.

Yes, my poor Joyzelle, the dream was horrible; but now it is overcome
and the proof is past, establishing a happiness which nothing
threatens now, except the enemy that threatens all men....

LANCÉOR.

But what, when all is told, was that fearful proof?...

MERLIN.

Joyzelle will tell you in the first kisses, free from all anxiety,
which you will exchange after this victory. They will veil better
than my poor words what, in this proof, appears unpardonable.... The
proof was dangerous and almost insurmountable.... Joyzelle could have
chosen a different course.... She might have yielded, sacrificed
herself, sacrificed her love, despaired, I know not what!... She
would not have been the Joyzelle that was expected.... There was but
one path traced by destiny; she entered upon it, followed it to the
end and saved your life in saving her own love....

JOYZELLE.

It is ordained, then, that love strikes and kills all that tries to
bar its way?...

MERLIN.

No, Joyzelle, I do not know.... Let us not make laws with a few
scraps picked up in the darkness that surrounds our thoughts....
But she who was to do what you were willing to do was she whom fate
intended for my son.... It was therefore written, for you and for you
alone and perhaps for those who resemble you a little, that they have
a right to the love which fate points out to them; and that that love
must break down injustice.... I do not judge you: it is fate that
approves you; but I am over-joyed that it has thus chosen you among
all women....

JOYZELLE.

Father!... I tremble still when I see that weapon which, for a
moment.... Forgive me, father, I loved you already....

MERLIN.

It is I who ask you now to offer me a forgiving hand....

JOYZELLE.

No, no, these are not the cold hands of forgiveness!... These are
the hands that caress, worship and give thanks!... I know now why,
despite my hatred, I could not hate!... What you have done was more
difficult than all that I have done, because it was cruel; and, when
I think again on what has happened, it is you, it is you, father, who
have endured the heaviest and the most deserving proof....

MERLIN.

No, the most deserving was not among those which you can discover....
It will remain the secret of this heart which loves you both and
unites you within itself and which, to change this too-deep secret
into happiness, asks my two children for but a moment of their joy
and perhaps for a kiss a little longer than those granted in passing
to old men whose time on earth is short....

LANCÉOR.

(_Throwing himself in MERLIN'S arms._) Father!...

JOYZELLE.

(_Also embracing MERLIN._) My father too!...

ARIELLE.

(_Trying to mingle with the closely entwined group._) No one sees me
and no one thinks of giving me my share of the love snatched by my
invisible hands from the miserly hands of the days and years....

MERLIN.

(_Smiling._) I see you, Arielle: you love all three of us; but a more
ardent kiss ascends towards Joyzelle than those which you give to
us.... There, kiss her; the proof is finished in my old heart too....
Yet a little while and we shall be far from her and far from all
love....

      [_ARIELLE kisses JOYZELLE long and slowly._

JOYZELLE.

What are you saying, father, and to whom are you speaking?... It
seems as though flowers which I cannot gather were lightly touching
my forehead and caressing my lips....

MERLIN.

Do not repel them, they are sad and pure.... It is my poor Arielle
who spreads them over you; it is my invisible daughter, the good
fairy of the island, who discovered and protected you and Lancéor.
She wishes to mingle, for the last time, in your great love and asks
for a share, as discreet as herself, of the happiness which we owe
her....

JOYZELLE.

Where is she?... I see no one near but you and Lancéor....

MERLIN.

And do you think, my child, that we see all that lives deep down
in our lives?... Be kind and gentle to poor Arielle.... She is
now giving you a parting kiss before going far away to disappear
with me in the regions where fate wills that my destiny should be
fulfilled....

LANCÉOR.

To disappear with you?... Father, I do not know....

MERLIN.

Let us not question those who have nothing more to say.... All is now
determined.... Thanks to the unknown gods, I have been able to give
happiness to the two hearts that were dearest to me; but I can do no
more, nor can you do anything, for my own happiness.... I am going
towards my destiny and I go in silence, lest I should sadden this
smiling hour, which is yours alone.... I know what awaits me; and
nevertheless I am going....

JOYZELLE.

No, no, no, no, father, you shall not go!... We are around you,
and if some danger which we cannot see threatens your old age, we
shall try at least to alleviate the dread of it.... When there are
three to undergo a misfortune and those three love one another,
then the misfortune changes to a burden of love, which we bear with
delight....

MERLIN.

Alas, no, my Joyzelle: it would all be useless!... Would to the gods
that men had to pass only through kindly evils, as yours were!... But
all life's secret purposes are not so clear, are not so good.... But
we speak in vain of what is written.... I am still here, in the arms
of those who love me.... The day of my distress is not this day....
Let us enjoy our hour, in the sweet sadness that follows on great
joys, by listening to our minutes of love, passing and fleeting, one
by one, in that frail ray of nocturnal light in which we clasp one
another for our greater happiness.... The rest does not as yet belong
to men....


      CURTAIN.




APPENDIX I


      (ACT III., SCENE II., _p. 75_). _If this
      transfiguration of MERLIN'S cannot be realized in a
      satisfactory manner on the stage, it may be easily
      avoided by cutting, on pp. 77 to 81, all that follows
      on JOYZELLE'S exclamation. The scene will then be as
      follows_:

JOYZELLE.

(_Waking with a start._) Lancéor!... (_Recognizing MERLIN, with a
movement of horror._) You!...

MERLIN.

Yes, it is I: the proof is grave and sad, &c.

      (_The rest as on pp. 81 to 85._)




APPENDIX II


      (ACT V., SCENE II., _pp. 130 to 133_). _Should
      there be a fear of "tedious passages" (as Villiers
      de L'isle-Adam said_, "To be or not to be" _and,
      generally speaking, all Hamlet's speeches would
      be described to-day as "tedious passages"), the_
      dénouement _could be hastened on, beginning with
      ARIELLE'S speech (p. 130), as follows_:

ARIELLE.

(_Who has remained standing at the foot of the bed; in a sad and
solemn voice._) Master!

MERLIN.

I see you, Arielle, and I will obey....

JOYZELLE.

What are you saying, father, and to whom are you speaking?

MERLIN.

To her who opened up to you the road to happiness. She is now giving
you a parting kiss, which I also give you....

JOYZELLE.

A parting kiss?

LANCÉOR.

Father!

JOYZELLE.

What does this mean and what has happened?

MERLIN.

Let us not question those who have nothing more to say. Would to the
gods that, &c.

      (_The rest as in MERLIN'S final speech._)
﻿THE BLUE BIRD


_A Fairy Play in Six Acts_


By Maurice Maeterlinck

_Translated By_ Alexander Teixeira De Mattos





CHARACTERS

   TYLTYL
   MYTYL
   LIGHT
   THE FAIRY BÉRYLUNE
   NEIGHBOUR BERLINGOT
   DADDY TYL
   MUMMY TYL
   GAFFER TYL (Dead)
   GRANNY TYL (Dead)
   TYLTYL'S BROTHERS AND SISTERS (Dead)
   TIME
   NIGHT
   NEIGHBOUR BERLINGOT'S LITTLE DAUGHTER
   TYLÔ, THE DOG
   TYLETTE, THE CAT
   BREAD
   SUGAR
   FIRE
   WATER
   MILK
   THE WOLF
   THE PIG
   THE OX
   THE COW
   THE BULL
   THE SHEEP
   THE COCK
   THE RABBIT
   THE HORSE
   THE ASS
   THE OAK
   THE ELM
   THE BEECH
   THE LIME-TREE
   THE FIR-TREE
   THE CYPRESS
   THE BIRCH
   THE CHESTNUT-TREE
   THE IVY
   THE POPLAR
   THE WILLOW
   STARS, SICKNESSES, SHADES, LUXURIES, HAPPINESSES, JOYS, ETC.




TRANSLATOR'S NOTE

A new act appears for the first time in this edition and is inserted as
Act IV--_Palace of Happiness_. It has been specially written for the
Christmas revival of _The Blue Bird_ at the Haymarket Theatre, where
it will take the place of the Forest Scene (Act III., Scene 2). In the
printed version, however, the Forest Scene is retained; and in this and all
later editions the play will consist of six acts instead of five.

ALEXANDER TEIXEIRA DE MATTOS.
CHELSEA, 14 _November_, 1910.




COSTUMES


TYLTYL wears the dress of Hop o' my Thumb in Perrault's Tales. Scarlet
knickerbockers, pale-blue jacket, white stockings, tan shoes.

MYTYL is dressed like Gretel or Little Red Riding-hood.

LIGHT.--The "moon-coloured" dress in Perrault's _Peau d'âne;_ that is
to say, pale gold shot with silver, shimmering gauzes, forming a sort of
rays, etc. Neo-Grecian or Anglo-Grecian (_à la_ Walter Crane) or even
more or less Empire style: a high waist, bare arms, etc. Head-dress: a sort
of diadem or even a light crown.

THE FAIRY BÉRYLUNE and NEIGHBOUR BERLINGOT.--The traditional dress of the
poor women in fairy-tales. If desired, the transformation of the Fairy into
a princess in Act I may be omitted.

DADDY TYL, MUMMY TYL, GAFFER TYL and GRANNY TYL.--The traditional costume
of the German wood-cutters and peasants in Grimm's Tales.

TYLTYL'S BROTHERS AND SISTERS.--Different forms of the Hop-o'-my-Thumb
costume.

TIME.--Traditional dress of Time: a wide black or dark-blue cloak, a
streaming white beard, scythe and hour-glass.

NIGHT.--Ample black garments, covered with mysterious stars and "shot" with
reddish-brown reflections. Veils, dark poppies, etc.

THE NEIGHBOUR'S LITTLE GIRL.--Bright fair hair; a long white frock.

THE DOG,--Red dress-coat, white breeches, top-boots, a shiny hat. The
costume suggests that of John Bull.

THE CAT.--The costume of Puss In Boots: powdered wig, three-cornered hat,
violet or sky-blue coat, dress-sword, etc.

N.B.--The heads of the DOG and the CAT should be only discreetly
animalised.

THE LUXURIES.--Before the transformation: wide, heavy mantles in red
and yellow brocade; enormous fat jewels, etc. After the transformation:
chocolate or coffee-coloured tights, giving the impression of unadorned
dancing-jacks.

THE HAPPINESSES OF THE HOME.--Dresses of various colours, or, if preferred,
costumes of peasants, shepherds, wood-cutters and so on, but idealised and
interpreted fairy-fashion.

THE GREAT JOYS.--As stated in the text, shimmering dresses in soft and
subtle shades: rose-awakening, water's-smile, amber-dew, blue-of-dawn, etc.

MATERNAL LOVE.--Dress very similar to the dress worn by Light, that is to
say, supple and almost transparent veils, as of a Greek statue, and, in so
far as possible, white. Pearls and other stones as rich and numerous as may
be desired, provided that they do not break the pure and candid harmony of
the whole.

BREAD.--A rich pasha's dress. An ample crimson silk or velvet gown. A huge
turban. A scimitar. An enormous stomach, red and puffed-out cheeks.

SUGAR.--A silk gown, cut like that of a eunuch in a seraglio, half blue
and half white, to suggest the paper wrapper of a sugar-loaf. Eunuch's
headdress.

FIRE.--Red tights, a vermilion cloak, with changing reflections, lined with
gold. An aigrette of iridescent flames.

WATER.--A pale-blue or bluish-green dress, with transparent reflections and
effects of rippling or trickling gauze, Neo-Grecian or Anglo-Grecian style.
but fuller and more voluminous than that of LIGHT. Head-dress of aquatic
flowers and seaweed.

THE ANIMALS.--Popular or peasant costumes.

THE TREES.--Dresses of different shades of green or the colour of the
trunks of trees. Distinctive attributes in the shape of leaves or branches
by which they can be recognised.




SCENES

  ACT I.--The Wood-cutter's Cottage.

  ACT II.,  Scene 1--At the Fairy's.

  Scene 2--The Land of Memory.

  ACT III., Scene 1--The Palace of Night.

  Scene 2--The Forest.

  ACT IV.,  Scene 1--Before the Curtain.

  Scene 2--The Palace of Happiness.

  ACT V.,   Scene 1--Before the Curtain.

  Scene 2--The Graveyard.

  Scene 3--The Kingdom of the Future.

  ACT VI.,  Scene 1--The Leave-taking.

  Scene 2--The Awakening.




THE BLUE BIRD




ACT I.  _The Wood-cutter's Cottage_

_The stage represents the interior of a wood-cutter's cottage, simple and
rustic in appearance, but in no way poverty-stricken. A recessed fireplace
containing the dying embers of a wood-fire. Kitchen utensils, a cupboard, a
bread-pan, a grandfather's clock, a spinning-wheel, a water-tap, etc. On a
table, a lighted lamp. At the foot of the cupboard, on either side, a_
DOG _and a_ CAT _lie sleeping, rolled up, each with his nose in his
tail. Between them stands a large blue-and-white sugar-loaf. On the wall
hangs a round cage containing a turtle-dove. At the back, two windows, with
closed inside shutters. Under one of the windows, a stool. On the left
is the front door, with a big latch to it. On the right, another door. A
ladder leads up to a loft. On the right also are two little children's
cots, at the head of which are two chains, with clothes carefully folded
on them. When the curtain rises_, TYLTYL _and_ MYTYL _are sound
asleep in their cots_, MUMMY TYL _tucks them in, leans over them,
watches them for a moment as they sleep and beckons to_ DADDY TYL,
_who thrusts his head through the half-open door_. MUMMY TYL _lays
a finger on her lips, to impose silence upon him, and then goes out to the
right, on tiptoe, after first putting out the lamp. The scene remains in
darkness for a moment. Then a light, gradually increasing in intensity,
filters in through the shutters. The lamp on the table lights again of
itself, but its light is of a different colour than when_ MUMMY TYL
_extinguished it. The two_ CHILDREN _appear to wake and sit up in
bed_.

TYLTYL
Mytyl?

MYTYL
Tyltyl?

TYLTYL
Are you asleep?

MYTYL
Are you?...

TYLTYL
No; how can I be asleep when I'm talking to you?

MYTYL
Say, is this Christmas Day?...

TYLTYL
Not yet; not till to-morrow. But Father Christmas won't bring us anything
this year....

MYTYL
Why not?

TYLTYL
I heard mummy say that she couldn't go to town to tell him ... But he will
come next year....

MYTYL
Is next year far off?...

TYLTYL
A good long while.... But he will come to the rich children to-night....

MYTYL
Really?...

TYLTYL
Hullo!... Mummy's forgotten to put out the lamp!... I've an idea!...

MYTYL
What?...

TYLTYL
Let's get up....

MYTYL
But we mustn't....

TYLTYL
Why, there's no one about.... Do you see the shutters?...

MYTYL
Oh, how bright they are!...

TYLTYL
It's the lights of the party.

MYTYL
What party?...

TYLTYL
The rich children opposite. It's the Christmas-tree. Let's open the
shutters....

MYTYL
Can we?...

TYLTYL
Of course; there's no one to stop us.... Do you hear the music?... Let us
get up....

(_The two_ CHILDREN _get up, run to one of the windows, climb on
to the stool and throw back the shutters. A bright light fills the room.
The_ CHILDREN _look out greedily_.)

TYLTYL
We can see everything!...

MYTYL (_who can hardly find room on the stool_)
I can't....

TYLTYL
It's snowing!... There's two carriages, with six horses each!...

MYTYL
There are twelve little boys getting out!...

TYLTYL
How silly you are!... They're little girls....

MYTYL
They've got knickerbockers....

TYLTYL
What do you know?... Don't push so!...

MYTYL
I never touched you.

TYLTYL (_who is taking up the whole stool_)
You're taking up all the room...

MYTYL
Why, I have no room at all!...

TYLTYL
Do be quiet! I see the tree!...

MYTYL
What tree?...

TYLTYL
Why, the Christmas-tree!... You're looking at the wall!...

MYTYL
I'm looking at the wall because I've got no room....

TYLTYL (_giving her a miserly little place on the stool_)
There!... Will that do?... Now you're better off than I!... I say, what
lots and lots of lights!...

MYTYL
What are those people doing who are making such a noise?...

TYLTYL
They're the musicians.

MYTYL
Are they angry?...

TYLTYL
No; but it's hard work.

MYTYL
Another carriage with white horses!...

TYLTYL
Be quiet!... And look!...

MYTYL
What are those gold things there, hanging from the branches?

TYLTYL
Why, toys, to be sure!... Swords, guns, soldiers, cannons....

MYTYL
And dolls; say, are there any dolls?...

TYLTYL
Dolls?... That's too silly; there's no fun in dolls....

MYTYL
And what's that all round the table?....

TYLTYL
Cakes and fruit and tarts....

MYTYL
I had some once when I was little....

TYLTYL
So did I; it's nicer than bread, but they don't give you enough....

MYTYL
They've got plenty over there.... The whole table's full.... Are they going
to eat them?...

TYLTYL
Of course; what else would they do with them?...

MYTYL
Why don't they eat them at once?...

TYLTYL
Because they're not hungry....

MYTYL (_stupefied with astonishment_)
Not hungry?... Why not?...

TYLTYL
Well, they eat whenever they want to....

MYTYL (_incredulously_)
Every day?...

TYLTYL
They say so....

MYTYL
Will they eat them all?... Will they give any away?...

TYLTYL
To whom?...

MYTYL
To us....

TYLTYL
They don't know us....

MYTYL
Suppose we asked them....

TYLTYL
We mustn't.

MYTYL
Why not?...

TYLTYL
Because it's not right.

MYTYL (_clapping her hands_)
Oh, how pretty they are!...

TYLTYL (_rapturously_)
And how they're laughing and laughing!...

MYTYL
And the little ones dancing!...

TYLTYL
Yes, yes; let's dance too!... (_They stamp their feet for joy on the
stool_.)

MYTYL
Oh, what fun!...

TYLTYL
They're getting the cakes!... They can touch them!... They're eating,
they're eating, they're eating!...

MYTYL
The tiny ones, too!... They've got two, three, four apiece!...

TYLTYL (_drunk with delight_)
Oh, how lovely!... Oh, how lovely, how lovely!...

MYTYL (_counting imaginary cakes_)
I've got twelve!...

TYLTYL
And I four times twelve!... But I'll give you some....

(_A knock at the door of the cottage_.)

TYLTYL (_suddenly quieted and frightened_)
What's that?...

MYTYL (_scared_)
It's Daddy!...

(_As they hesitate before opening the door, the big latch is seen to rise
of itself, with a grating noise; the door half opens to admit a little old
woman dressed in green with a red hood on her head. She is humpbacked and
lame and near-sighted; her nose and chin meet; and she walks bent on a
stick. She is obviously a fairy_.)

THE FAIRY
Have you the grass here that sings or the bird that is blue?...

TYLTYL
We have some grass, but it can't sing....

MYTYL
Tyltyl has a bird.

TYLTYL
But I can't give it away....

THE FAIRY
Why not?...

TYLTYL
Because it's mine.

THE FAIRY
That's a reason, no doubt. Where is the bird?...

TYLTYL (_pointing to the cage_)
In the cage....

THE FAIRY (_putting on her glasses to examine the bird_)
I don't want it; it's not blue enough. You will have to go and find me the
one I want.

TYLTYL
But I don't know where it is....

THE FAIRY
No more do I. That's why you must look for it. I can do without the grass
that sings, at a pinch; but I must absolutely have the blue bird. It's for
my little girl, who is very ill.

TYLTYL
What's the matter with her?...

THE FAIRY
We don't quite know; she wants to be happy....

TYLTYL
Really?...

THE FAIRY
Do you know who I am?...

TYLTYL
You're rather like our neighbour, Madame Berlingot....

THE FAIRY (_growing suddenly angry_)
Not a bit!... There's not the least likeness!... This is intolerable!... I
am the Fairy Bérylune....

TYLTYL
Oh! Very well....

THE FAIRY
You will have to start at once.

TYLTYL
Are you coming with us?

THE FAIRY
I can't, because I put on the soup this morning and it always boils over
if I leave it for more than an hour.... (_Pointing successively to the
ceiling, the chimney and the window_) Will you go out this way, or that
way, or that way?...

TYLTYL (_pointing timidly to the door_)
I would rather go out that way....

THE FAIRY (_growing suddenly angry again_)
That's quite impossible; and it's a shocking habit!... (_Pointing to the
window_) We'll go out this way.... Well?... What are you waiting for?...
Get dressed at once.... (_The_ CHILDREN _do as they are told and
dress quickly_.) I'll help Mytyl....

TYLTYL
We have no shoes....

THE FAIRY
That doesn't matter. I will give you a little magic hat. Where are your
father and mother?....

TYLTYL (_pointing to the door on the right_)
They're asleep in there....

THE FAIRY
And your grandpapa and grandmamma?...

TYLTYL
They're dead....

THE FAIRY
And your little brothers and sisters.... Have you any?...

TYLTYL
Oh, yes; three little brothers....

MYTYL
And four little sisters....

THE FAIRY
Where are they?...

TYLTYL
They are dead, too....

THE FAIRY
Would you like to see them again?...

TYLTYL
Oh, yes!... At once!... Show them to us!...

THE FAIRY
I haven't got them in my pocket.... But this is very lucky; you will see
them when you go through the Land of Memory.... It's on the way to the Blue
Bird, just on the left, past the third turning.... What were you doing when
I knocked?...

TYLTYL
We were playing at eating cakes?...

THE FAIRY
Have you any cakes?... Where are they?...

TYLTYL
In the house of the rich children.... Come and look, it's so lovely. (_He
drags the_ FAIRY _to the window_.)

THE FAIRY (_at the window_)
But it's the others who are eating them!...

TYLTYL
Yes; but we can see them eat....

THE FAIRY
Aren't you cross with them?...

TYLTYL
What for?...

THE FAIRY
For eating all the cakes.... I think it's very wrong of them not to give
you some....

TYLTYL
Not at all; they're rich.... I say, isn't it beautiful over there?...

THE FAIRY
It's no more beautiful there than here.

TYLTYL
Ugh!... It's darker here and smaller and there are no cakes....

THE FAIRY
It's exactly the same, only you can't see....

TYLTYL
Yes, I can; and I have very good eyes. I can see the time on the church
clock and daddy can't...

THE FAIRY (_suddenly angry_)
I tell you that you can't see!... How do you see me?... What do I look
like?... (_An awkward silence from_ TYLTYL.) Well, answer me, will
you? I want to know if you can see!... Am I pretty or ugly?... (_The
silence grows more and more uncomfortable_.) Won't you answer?... Am I
young or old?... Are my cheeks pink or yellow?... Perhaps you'll say I have
a hump?...

TYLTYL (_in a conciliatory tone_)
No, no; It's not a big one....

THE FAIRY
Oh, yes, to look at you, any one would think it enormous.... Have I a hook
nose and have I lost one of my eyes?...

TYLTYL
Oh, no, I don't say that.... Who put it out?...

THE FAIRY (_growing more and more irritated_).
But it's not out!... You wretched, impudent boy!... It's much finer than
the other; it's bigger and brighter and blue as the sky.... And my hair,
do you see that?... It's fair as the corn in the fields, it's like virgin
gold!... And I've such heaps and heaps of it that it weighs my head
down.... It escapes on every side.... Do you see it on my hands? (_She
holds out two lean wisps of grey hair_.)

TYLTYL
Yes, I see a little....

THE FAIRY (_indignantly_)
A little!... Sheaves! Armfuls! Clusters! Waves of gold!... I know there are
people who say that they don't see any; but you're not one of those wicked,
blind people, I should hope?...

TYLTYL
Oh, no; I can see all that isn't hidden....

THE FAIRY
But you ought to see the rest with as little doubt!... Human beings are
very odd!... Since the death of the fairies, they see nothing at all and
they never suspect it.... Luckily, I always carry with me all that is
wanted to give new light to dimmed eyes.... What am I taking out of my
bag?...

TYLTYL
Oh, what a dear little green hat!... What's that shining in the cockade?...

THE FAIRY
That's the big diamond that makes people see....

TYLTYL
Really?...

THE FAIRY
Yes; when you've got the hat on your head, you turn the diamond a little;
from right to left, for instance, like this; do you see?... Then it presses
a bump which nobody knows of and which opens your eyes....

TYLTYL
Doesn't it hurt?...

THE FAIRY
On the contrary, it's enchanted.... You at once see even the inside of
things: the soul of bread, of wine, of pepper, for instance....

MYTYL
Can you see the soul of sugar, too?...

THE FAIRY (_suddenly cross_)
Of course you can!... I hate unnecessary questions.... The soul of sugar
is no more interesting than the soul of pepper.... There, I give you all I
have to help you in your search for the Blue Bird. I know that the flying
carpet or the ring which makes its wearer invisible would be more useful to
you.... But I have lost the key of the cupboard in which I locked them....
Oh, I was almost forgetting!... (_Pointing to the diamond_) When you
hold it like this, do you see?... One little turn more and you behold the
past.... Another little turn and you behold the future.... It's curious and
practical and it's quite noiseless....

TYLTYL
Daddy will take it from me....

THE FAIRY
He won't see it; no one can see it as long as it's on your head....
Will you try it?... (_She puts the little green hat on_ TYLTYL'S
_head_.) Now, turn the diamond.... One turn and then....

(TYLTYL _has no sooner turned the diamond than a sudden and wonderful
change comes over everything. The old_ FAIRY _alters then and there
into a princess of marvellous beauty; the flints of which the cottage walls
are built light up, turn blue as sapphires, become transparent and gleam
and sparkle like the most precious stones. The humble furniture takes life
and becomes resplendent; the deal table assumes as grave and noble an air
as a table made of marble; the face of the clock winks its eye and smiles
genially, while the door that contains the pendulum opens and releases the
Hours, which, holding one another by the hand and laughing merrily, begin
to dance to the sound of delicious music_.)

TYLTYL (_displaying a legitimate bewilderment and pointing to the Hours_)
Who are all those pretty ladies?...

THE FAIRY
Don't be afraid; they are the hours of your life and they are glad to be
free and visible for a moment....

TYLTYL
And why are the walls so bright?... Are they made of sugar or of precious
stones?...

THE FAIRY
All stones are alike, all stones are precious; but man sees only a few of
them....

(_While they are speaking, the scene of enchantment continues and is
completed. The souls of the Quartern-loaves, in the form of little men in
crust-coloured tights, flurried and all powdered with flour, scramble out
of the bread-pan and frisk round the table, where they are caught up by_
FIRE, _who, springing from the hearth in yellow and vermilion tights,
writhes with laughter as he chases the loaves_.)

TYLTYL
Who are those ugly little men?...

THE FAIRY
Oh, they're nothing; they are merely the souls of the Quartern-loaves, who
are taking advantage of the reign of truth to leave the pan in which they
were too tightly packed....

TYLTYL
And the big red fellow, with the nasty smell?...

THE FAIRY
Hush!... Don't speak too loud; that's Fire.... He's dangerous. (_This
dialogue does not interrupt the enchantment. The_ DOG _and the_
CAT, _lying rolled up at the foot of the cupboard, utter a loud and
simultaneous cry and disappear down a trap; and in their places rise two
persons, one of whom has the face of a bull-dog, the other that of a
tom-cat. Forthwith, the little man with the bull-dog face, whom we will
henceforward call the_ DOG, _rushes upon_ TYLTYL, _kisses him
violently and overwhelms him with noisy and impetuous caresses; while the
little man with the face of a tom-cat, whom we will simply call the_
CAT, _combs his hair, washes his hands and strokes his whiskers before
going up to_ MYTYL.)

THE DOG (_yelling, jumping about, knocking up against everything,
unbearable_)
My little god!... Good-morning, good-morning, my dear little god!... At
last, at last we can talk!... I had so much to tell you!... Bark and wag
my tail as I might, you never understood!... But now!... Good-morning,
good-morning!... I love you!... Shall I do some of my tricks?... Shall
I beg?... Would you like to see me walk on my front paws or dance on my
hind-legs?...

TYLTYL (_to the_ FAIRY)
Who is this gentleman with the dog's head?....

THE FAIRY
Don't you see? It's the soul of TYLÔ whom you have set free....

THE CAT (_going up to_ MYTYL _and putting out his hand to her, with
much ceremony and circumspection_)
Good-morning, Miss.... How well you look this morning!...

MYTYL
Good-morning, sir.... (_To the_ FAIRY) Who is it?...

THE FAIRY
Why, don't you see? Its the soul of Tylette offering you his hand.... Kiss
him....

THE DOG (_hustling the_ CAT)
Me, too!... I've kissed the little god!... I've kissed the little girl!...
I've kissed everybody!... Oh, grand!... What fun we shall have!... I'm
going to frighten Tylette I Bow, wow, wow!...

THE CAT
Sir, I don't know you....

THE FAIRY (_threatening the_ DOG _with her stick_)
Keep still, will you, or else you'll go back into silence until the end of
time....

(_Meanwhile, the enchantment has pursued its course: the spinning-wheel
has begun to turn madly in its corner and to spin brilliant rays of light;
the tap, in another corner, begins to sing in a very high voice and,
turning into a luminous fountain, floods the sink with sheets of pearls and
emeralds, through which darts the soul of_ WATER, _like a young
girl, streaming, dishevelled and tearful, who immediately begins to fight
with_ FIRE.)

TYLTYL
And who is that wet lady?...

THE FAIRY
Don't be afraid. It's Water just come from the tap....

(_The milk-jug upsets, falls from the table and smashes on the floor; and
from the spilt milk there rises a tall, white, bashful figure who seems to
be afraid of everything_.)

TYLTYL
And the frightened lady in her nightgown?...

THE FAIRY
That's Milk; she has broken her jug....

(_The sugar-loaf, at the foot of the cupboard, grows taller and wider and
splits its paper wrapper, whence issues a mawkish and hypocritical being,
dressed in a long coat half blue and half white, who goes up to_ MYTYL
_with a sanctimonious smile_.)

MYTYL (_greatly alarmed_)
What does he want?...

THE FAIRY
Why, he is the soul of Sugar!...

MYTYL (_reassured_)
Has he any barley-sugar?...

THE FAIRY
His pockets are full of it and each of his fingers is a sugar-stick....

(_The lamp falls from the table and, at the same moment, its flame
springs up again and turns into a luminous maid of incomparable beauty. She
is dressed in long transparent and dazzling veils and stands motionless in
a sort of ecstasy_.)

TYLTYL
It's the Queen!...

MYTYL
It's the Blessed Virgin!...

THE FAIRY
No, my children; it's Light....

(_Meanwhile, the saucepans on the shelves spin round like tops; the
linen-press throws open its folding-doors and unrolls a magnificent display
of moon-coloured and sun-coloured stuffs, with which mingles a no less
splendid array of rags and tatters that come down the ladder from the loft.
But, suddenly, three loud knocks are heard on the door at the right_.)

TYLTYL (_alarmed_)
That's daddy!... He's heard us!...

THE FAIRY
Turn the diamond!... From left to right!...

(TYLTYL _turns the diamond quickly_.)
Not so quick!... Heavens! It's too late!... You turned it too briskly;
they will not have time to resume their places and we shall have a lot of
annoyance....

(_The FAIRY becomes an old woman again, the walls of the cottage lose
their splendour. The Hours go back into the clock, the spinning-wheel
stops, etc. But, in the general hurry and confusion, while_ FIRE _runs
madly round the room, looking for the chimney, one of the loaves of bread,
who has been unable to squeeze into the pan, bursts into sobs and utters
roars of fright_.)

THE FAIRY
What's the matter?...

BREAD (_in tears_)
There's no room in the pan!...

THE FAIRY (_stooping over the pan_)
Yes, there is; yes, there is.... (_Pushing the other loaves, which have
resumed their original places_.) Come, quick, make room there....

(_The knocking at the door is renewed_.)

BREAD (_utterly scared, vainly struggling to enter the pan_)
I can't get in!... He'll eat me first!...

THE DOG (_frisking round_ TYLTYL)
My little god!... I am still here!... I can still talk!... I can still kiss
you!... Once more! Once more! Once more!...

THE FAIRY
What, you too?... Are you there still?...

THE DOG
What luck!... I was too late to return to silence; the trap closed too
quickly....

THE CAT
So did mine.... What is going to happen?... Is there any danger?...

THE FAIRY
Well, I'm bound to tell you the truth: all those who accompany the two
children will die at the end of the journey....

THE CAT (_to the_ DOG)
Come, let us get back into the trap....

THE DOG
No, no!... I won't!... I want to go with the little god!... I want to talk
to him all the time!...

THE CAT
Idiot!...

(_More knocking at the door_)

BREAD (_shedding bitter tears_)
I don't want to die at the end of the journey!... I want to get back at
once into my pan!...

FIRE (_who has done nothing but run madly round the room, hissing with
anguish_)
I can't find my chimney!...

WATER (_vainly trying to get into the tap_)
I can't get into the tap!...

SUGAR (_hovering round his paper wrapper_)
I've burst my packing-paper!...

MILK (_lymphatically and bashfully_)
Somebody's broken my little jug!...

THE FAIRY
Goodness me, what fools they are!... Fools and cowards too!... So you
would rather go on living in your ugly boxes, in your traps and taps, than
accompany the children in search of the bird?...

ALL (_excepting the_ DOG _and_ LIGHT)
Yes, yes! Now, at once!... My tap!... My pan!... My chimney!... My trap!...

THE FAIRY (_to_ LIGHT, _who is dreamily gazing at the wreckage of her
lamp_)
And you, Light, what do you say?

LIGHT
I will go with the children....

THE DOG (_yelling with delight_)
I too!... I too!...

THE FAIRY
That's right.... Besides, it's too late to go back; you have no choice now,
you must all start with us.... But you, Fire, don't come near anybody; you,
Dog, don't tease the Cat; and you, Water, hold yourself up and try not to
run all over the place....

(_A violent knocking is again heard at the door on the right_.)

TYLTYL (_listening_)
There's daddy again!... He's getting up this time; I can hear him
walking....

THE FAIRY
Let us go out by the window.... You shall all come to my house, where I
will dress the Animals and the Things properly.... (_To_ BREAD) You,
Bread, take the cage in which to put the Blue Bird.... It will be in your
charge.... Quick, quick, let us waste no time....

(_The window suddenly lengthens downwards, like a door. They all go
out; after which the window resumes its primitive shape and closes quite
innocently. The room has become dark again and the two cots are steeped in
shadow. The door on the right opens ajar and in the aperture appear the
heads of_ DADDY _and_ MUMMY TYL.)

DADDY TYL
It was nothing.... It's the cricket chirping....

MUMMY TYL
Can you see them?...

DADDY TYL
I can.... They are sleeping quite quietly....

MUMMY TYL
I can hear their breathing....

(_The door closes again_)


CURTAIN




ACT II.




SCENE I.--_At the_ FAIRY'S.


_A magnificent entrance-hall in the palace of the_ FAIRY BÉRYLUNE.
_Columns of gleaming marble with gold and silver capitals, staircases,
porticoes, balustrades, etc_.

_Enter from the back, on the right, sumptuously clad, the_ CAT, SUGAR
_and_ FIRE. _They come from a room which emits rays of light; it is
the_ FAIRY'S _wardrobe. The_ CAT _has donned the classic
costume of Puss-in-boots_; SUGAR, _a silk dress, half white and half
pale-blue; and_ FIRE _wears a number of many-coloured aigrettes and a
long vermilion mantle lined with gold. They cross the whole length of the
hall to the front of the stage, where the_ CAT _draws them up under a
portico on the right_.

THE CAT
This way, I know every inch of this palace. It was left to the Fairy
Bérylune by Bluebeard.... Let us make the most of our last minute of
liberty, while the children and Light pay their visit to the Fairy's little
daughter.... I have brought you here in order to discuss the position in
which we are placed.... Are we all here?...

SUGAR
I see the Dog coming out of the Fairy's wardrobe....

FIRE
What on earth has he got on?...

THE CAT
He has put on the livery of one of the footmen of Cinderella's coach.... It
was just the thing for him.... He has the soul of a flunkey.... But let us
hide behind the balustrade.... It's strange how I mistrust him.... He had
better not hear what I have to say to you....

SUGAR
It is too late.... He has discovered us.... Look, here is Water also coming
out of the wardrobe.... Goodness me, how fine she is!...

(_The_ DOG _and_ WATER _join the first group_.)

THE DOG (_frisking about_)
There! There!... Aren't we fine I.... Just look at these laces and this
embroidery!... It's real gold and no mistake!...

THE CAT (_to_ WATER)
Is that Catskin's "colour-of-time" dress?... I seem to recognise it....

WATER
Yes, it's the one that suited me best....

FIRE (_between his teeth_)
She's not brought her umbrella....

WATER
What's that?...

FIRE
Nothing, nothing....

WATER
I thought you might be speaking of a great red I saw the other day....

THE CAT
Come, don't let as quarrel; we have more important things to do.... We are
only waiting for Bread; where is he?

THE DOG
He was making an endless fuss about choosing his dress....

FIRE
Worth while, isn't it, for a fellow who looks a fool and carries an
enormous stomach?...

THE DOG
At last, he decided in favour of a Turkish robe, adorned with gems, a
scimitar and a turban....

THE CAT
There he is!... He has put on Bluebeard's finest dress...

_Enter_ BREAD, _in the costume described above. The silk robe is
crossed tightly over his huge stomach. In one hand he holds the hilt of a
scimitar passed through his sash and in the other the cage intended for the
Blue Bird_.

BREAD (_waddling conceitedly_)
Well?... What do you think of this?

THE DOG (_frisking round the_ LOAF)
How nice he looks! What a fool he looks! How nice he looks! How nice he
looks!...

THE CAT (_to the_ LOAF)
Are the children dressed?...

BREAD
Yes, Master Tyltyl has put on Hop-o'-my-Thumb's blue jacket and red
breeches; and Miss Mytyl has Gretel's frock and Cinderella's slippers....
But the great thing was the dressing of Light!...

THE CAT
Why?...

BREAD
The Fairy thought her so lovely that she did not want to dress her at
all!... Thereupon I protested in the name of our dignity as essential and
eminently respectable elements; and I ended by declaring that, under those
conditions, I should refuse to be seen with her....

FIRE
They ought to have bought her a lampshade!...

THE CAT
And what answer did the Fairy make?...

THE LOAF
She hit me with her stick on my head and stomach....

THE CAT
And then?...

BREAD
I allowed myself to be convinced; but, at the last moment, Light decided on
the moonbeam dress at the bottom of the chest with Catskin's treasures....

THE CAT
Come, stop chattering, time presses.... Our future is at stake.... You have
heard--the Fairy has just said so--that the end of this journey will, at
the same time, mark the end of our lives.... It is our business, therefore,
to prolong it as much as possible and by every possible means.... But there
is another thing: we must think of the fate of our race and the destiny of
our children....

BREAD
Hear, hear!... The Cat is right!...

THE CAT
Listen to me!... All of us here present, Animals, Things and Elements,
possess a soul which man does not yet know. That is why we retain a remnant
of independence; but, if he finds the Blue Bird, he will know all, he will
see all and we shall be completely at his mercy.... This is what I have
just learned from my old friend, Night, who is also the guardian of the
mysteries of Life.... It is to our interest, therefore, at all costs to
prevent the finding of that bird, even if we have to go so far as to
endanger the lives of the children themselves....

THE DOG (_indignantly_)
What's the fellow saying?... Just say that again, will you, to see if I
heard right?...

BREAD
Order! Order!... It's not your turn to speak!... I'm in the chair at this
meeting....

FIRE
Who made you chairman?...

WATER (_to_ FIRE)
Hold your tongue!... What are you interfering with?...

FIRE
I shall interfere where I choose.... And I want none of your remarks....

SUGAR (_concilatorily_)
Excuse me.... Do not let us quarrel.... This is a serious moment.... We
must, above all things, decide what measures to adopt....

BREAD
I quite agree with Sugar and the Cat....

THE DOG
This is ridiculous!... There is Man and that's all!... We have to obey him
and do as he tells us!... That is the one and only fact!... I recognise no
one but him!... Hurrah for Man!... Man for ever!... In life or death, all
for Man!... Man is God!...

BREAD
I quite agree with the Dog.

THE CAT (_to the_ DOG)
But at least give your reasons....

THE DOG
There are no reasons!... I love Man and that's enough!... If you do
anything against him, I will throttle you first and I will go and tell him
everything....

SUGAR (_intervening sweetly_)
Excuse me.... Let us not embitter the discussion.... From a certain point
of view, you are both of you right.... There is something to be said on
both sides....

BREAD
I quite agree with SUGAR!...

THE CAT
Are we not, all of us, Water, Fire you yourselves, Bread and the Dog, the
victims of a nameless tyranny?... Do you remember the time when, before the
coming of the despot, we wandered at liberty upon the face of the earth?...
Fire and Water were the sole masters of the world; and see what they have
come to!... As for us puny descendants of the great wild animals....
Look out!... Pretend to be doing nothing!... I see the Fairy and Light
coming.... Light has taken sides with Man; she is our worst enemy.... Here
they are....

_Enter, on the right, the_ FAIRY, _in the shape of an old woman,
and_ LIGHT, _followed by_ TYLTYL _and_ MYTYL.

THE FAIRY
Well?... What is it?... What are you doing in that corner?... You look like
conspirators.... It is time to start.... I have decided that Light shall be
your leader.... You will obey her as you would me and I am giving her my
wand.... The children will pay a visit to their late grandparents this
evening.... You will remain behind; that is more discreet.... They will
spend the evening in the bosom of their dead family.... Meanwhile, you will
be getting ready all that is wanted for to-morrow's journey, which will be
a long one.... Come, up, be off and every one to his post!...

THE CAT (_hypocritically_)
That is just what I was saying to them, madam.... I was encouraging them to
do their duty bravely and conscientiously; unfortunately, the Dog, who kept
on interrupting me....

THE DOG
What's that?... Just wait a bit I...

(_He is about to leap upon the_ CAT, _but_ TYLTYL _foreseeing
his intention, stops with a threatening gesture_.)

TYLTYL
Down, Tylô!... Take care; and, if ever I catch you again...

THE DOG
My little god, you don't know, it was he who...

TYLTYL (_threatening him_)
Be quiet!...

THE FAIRY
Come, that will do.... Let Bread hand the cage for this evening to
Tyltyl.... It is just possible that the Blue Bird may be hidden In the
Past, at the grandparents'.... In any case, it Is a chance which we must
not neglect.... Well, Bread, the cage?

BREAD (_solemnly_)
One moment, if you please, Mrs. Fairy....
(_Like an orator making a speech_)
I call upon all of you to bear witness that this silver cage, which was
entrusted to my care by....

THE FAIRY (_interrupting him_)
Enough!... No speeches!... We will go out this way and the children
that....

TYLTYL (_rather anxiously_)
Are we to go all alone?...

MYTYL
I feel hungry!...

TYLTYL
I, too!...

THE FAIRY (_to_ BREAD)
Open your Turkish robe and give them a slice of your good stomach....

(BREAD _opens his robe, draws his scimitar and cuts two slices out of his
stomach and hands them to the_ CHILDREN.)


SUGAR (_approaching the_ CHILDREN)
Allow me at the same time to offer you a few sugar-sticks....
(_He breaks off the five fingers of his left hand, one by one, and
presents them to the_ CHILDREN.)

MYTYL
What is he doing?... He is breaking all his fingers!...

SUGAR (_engagingly_)
Taste them, they are capital... They're made of real barley-sugar....

MYTYL (_tasting one of the fingers_)
Oh, how good they are!... Have you many of them?...

SUGAR (_modestly_)
Yes; as many as I want....

MYTYL
Does that hurt you much, when you break them off?...

SUGAR
Not at all.... On the contrary, it's a great advantage; they grow again at
once and so I always have new, clean fingers....

THE FAIRY
Come, children, don't eat too much sugar.... Don't forget that you are to
have supper presently with your grandpapa and grandmamma....

TYLTYL
Are they here?...

THE FAIRY
You shall see them at once....

TYLTYL
How can we see them, when they are dead?...

THE FAIRY
How can they be dead, when they live in your memory?... Men do not know
this secret, because they know so little; whereas you, thanks to the
diamond, are about to see that the dead who are remembered live as happily
as though they were not dead....

TYLTYL
Is Light coming with us?

THE FAIRY
No, it is more proper that this visit should be confined to the family....
I will wait near here, so as not to appear indiscreet.... They did not
invite me....

TYLTYL
Which way are we to go?...

THE FAIRY
Over there.... You are on the threshold of the Land of Memory.... As soon
as you have turned the diamond, you will see a big tree with a board on it,
which will show you that you are there.... But don't forget that you are
to be back, both of you, by a quarter to nine.... It is extremely
important.... Now mind and be punctual, for all would be lost if you were
late.... Good-bye for the present!...
(_Calling the_ CAT, _the_ DOG, LIGHT, _etc_.) This way.... And the little
ones that way....

(_She goes out to the right, with_ LIGHT, _the_ ANIMALS, _etc., while the_
CHILDREN _go out to the left_.)


CURTAIN




SCENE 2.--_The Land of Memory_.

_A thick fog, from which stands out, on the right, close to the
footlights, the trunk of a large oak, with a board nailed to it. A vague,
milky, impenetrable light prevails_. TYLTYL _and_ MYTYL _are at
the foot of the oak_.

TYLTYL
Here Is the tree!...

MYTYL
There's the board!...

TYLTYL
I can't read it.... Wait, I will climb up on this root.... That's it.... It
says, "Land of Memory."

MYTYL
Is this where it begins?...

TYLTYL
Yes, there's an arrow....

MYTYL
Well, where are grandad and granny?...

TYLTYL
Behind the fog.... We shall see....

MYTYL
I can see nothing at all!... I can't see my feet or my hands....
(_Whimpering_) I'm cold!... I don't want to travel any more.... I want
to go home....

TYLTYL
Come, don't keep on crying, just like Water.... You ought to be ashamed of
yourself.... A great big little girl like you.... Look, the fog is lifting
already.... We shall see what's behind it....

(_The mist begins to move; It grows thinner and lighter, disperses,
evaporates. Soon, in a more and more transparent light, appears, under a
leafy vault, a cheerful little peasant's cottage, covered with creepers.
The door and windows are open. There are bee-hives under a shed,
flower-pots on the window-sills, a cage with a sleeping blackbird. Beside
the door is a bench, on which an old peasant and his wife_, TYLTYL'S
_grandfather and grandmother, are seated, both sound asleep_.)

TYLTYL (_suddenly recognising them_)
It's grandad and granny!...

MYTYL (_clapping her hands_)
Yes! Yes!... So it is! So it is!...

TYLTYL (_still a little distrustful_)
Take care!... We don't know yet if they can stir.... Let's keep behind the
tree....

(GRANNY TYL _opens her eyes, raises her head, stretches herself, gives
a sigh and looks at_ GAFFER TYL, _who also wakes slowly from his
sleep_.)

GRANNY TYL
I have a notion that our grandchildren who are still alive are coming to
see us today....

GAFFER TYL
They are certainly thinking of as, for I feel anyhow and I have pins and
needles in my legs....

GRANNY TYL
I think they must be quite near, for I see tears of joy dancing before my
eyes....

GAFFER TYL
No, no, they are a long way off.... I still feel weak....

GRANNY TYL
I tell you they are here; I am quite strong....

TYLTYL _and_ MYTYL (_rushing up from behind the oak_)
Here we are!... Here we are!... Gaffer! Granny!... It's we!... It's we!...

GAFFER TYL
There!... You see?... What did I tell you?... I was sure they would come
to-day....

GRANNY TYL
Tyltyl!... Mytyl!... It's you!... It's she!... (_Trying to run to meet
them_) I can't run!... I've still got the rheumatics!...

GAFFER TYL (_hobbling along as fast as he can_)
No more can I.... That's because of my wooden leg, which I still wear
instead of the one I broke when I fell off the big oak....

(_The_ GRANDPARENTS _and the_ CHILDREN _exchange frantic
embraces_.)

GRANNY TYL
How tall and strong you've grown, Tyltyl!

GAFFER TYL (_stroking_ MYTYL'S _hair_)
And Mytyl!... Just look at her.... What pretty hair, what pretty eyes!...

GRANNY TYL
Come and kiss me again!... Come on to my lap....

GAFFER TYL
And what about me?...

GRANNY TYL
No, no.... Come to me first.... How are Daddy and Mummy Tyl?...

TYLTYL
Quite well, granny.... They were asleep when we went out....

GRANNY TYL (_gazing at them and covering them with caresses_)
Lord, how pretty they are and how nice and clean!... Was it mummy who
washed you?... And there are no holes in your stockings!... I used to darn
them once, you know.... Why don't you come to see us oftener?... It makes
us so happy!... It is months and months now that you've forgotten us and
that we have seen nobody....

TYLTYL
We couldn't, granny; and to-day its only because of the Fairy....

GRANNY TYL
We are always here, waiting for a visit from those who are alive.... They
come so seldom!... The last time you were here, let me see, when was it?...
It was on All-hallows, when the church-bells were ringing....

TYLTYL
All-hallows?... We didn't go out that day, for we both had very bad
colds....

GRANNY TYL
No; but you thought of us....

TYLTYL
Yes....

GRANNY TYL
Well, every time you think of us, we wake up and see you again....

TYLTYL
What, is it enough to...

GRANNY TYL
But come, you know that....

TYLTYL
No, I didn't know....

GRANNY TYL (_to_ GAFFER TYL)
It's astonishing, up there.... They don't know yet.... Do they never learn
anything?...

GAFFER TYL
It's as in our own time.... The Living are so stupid when they speak of the
Others....

TYLTYL
Do you sleep all the time?...

GAFFER TYL
Yes, we get plenty of sleep, while waiting for a thought of the Living to
come and wake us.... Ah, it is good to sleep when life is done.... But it
is pleasant also to wake up from time to time....

TYLTYL
So you are not really dead?...

GAFFER TYL
What do you say?... What is he saying?... Now he's using words we don't
understand.... Is it a new word, a new invention?...

TYLTYL
The word "dead"?...

GAFFER TYL
Yes, that was the word.... What does it mean?...

TYLTYL
Why, it means that one's no longer alive....

GAFFER TYL
How silly they are, up there!...

TYLTYL
Is it nice here?...

GAFFER TYL
Oh, yes; not bad, not bad; and, if one could just have a smoke....

TYLTYL
Aren't you allowed to smoke?...

GAFFER TYL
Yes, it's allowed; but I've broken my pipe....

GRANNY TYL
Yes, yes, all would be well, if only you would come and see us oftener....
Do you remember, Tyltyl?... The last time I baked you a lovely
apple-tart.... You ate such a lot of it that you made yourself ill....

TYLTYL
But I haven't eaten any apple-tart since last year.... There were no apples
this year....

GRANNY TYL
Don't talk nonsense.... Here, we have them always....

TYLTYL
That's different....

GRANNY TYL
What? That's different?... Why, nothing's different when we're able to kiss
each other....

TYLTYL (_looking first at his_ GRANDMOTHER _and then at his_ GRANDFATHER)
You haven't changed, grandad, not a bit, not a bit.... And granny hasn't
changed a bit either.... But you're better-looking....

GAFFER TYL
Well, we feel all right.... We have stopped growing older.... But you,
how tall you're growing!... Yes, you're shooting up finely.... Look,
over there, on the door, is the mark of the last time.... That was on
All-hallows.... Now then, stand up straight.... (TYLTYL _stands up
against the door_.) Four fingers taller!... That's immense!... (MYTYL
_also stands up against the door_.) And Mytyl, four and a half!...
Aha, ill weeds grow apace!... How they've grown, oh, how they've grown!...

TYLTYL (_looking around him with delight_)
Nothing is changed, everything is in its old place!... Only everything is
prettier!... There is the clock with the big hand which I broke the point
off....

GAFFER TYL
And here is the soup-tureen you chipped a corner off....

TYLTYL
And here is the hole which I made in the door, the day I found the
gimlet....

GAFFER TYL
Yes, you've done some damage in your time!... And here is the plum-tree in
which you were so fond of climbing, when I wasn't looking.... It still has
its fine red plums....

TYLTYL
But they are finer than ever!...

MYTYL
And here is the old blackbird!... Does he still sing?...

(_The blackbird wakes and begins to sing at the top of his voice_.)

GRANNY TYL
You see.... As soon as one thinks of him....

TYLTYL (_observing with amazement that the blackbird is quite blue_)
But he's blue!... Why, that's the bird, the Blue Bird which I am to take
back to the Fairy.... And you never told us that you had him here!... Oh,
he's blue, blue, blue as a blue glass marble!... (_Entreatingly_)
Grandad, granny, will you give him to me?...

GAFFER TYL
Yes, perhaps, perhaps.... What do you think, granny?...

GRANNY TYL
Certainly, certainly.... What use is he to us?... He does nothing but
sleep.... We never hear him sing....

TYLTYL
I will put him in my cage.... I say, where is my cage?... Oh, I know, I
left it behind the big tree.... (_He runs to the tree, fetches the cage
and puts the blackbird into it_.) So, really, you've really given him to
me?... How pleased the Fairy will be!... And Light too!...

GAFFER TYL
Mind you, I won't answer for the bird.... I'm afraid that he will never get
used again to the restless life up there and that he'll come back here by
the first wind that blows this way.... However, we shall see.... Leave him
there, for the present, and come and look at the cow....

TYLTYL (_noticing the hives_)
And how are the bees getting on?

GAFFER TYL
Oh, pretty well.... They are no longer alive, as you call it up there; but
they work hard....

TYLTYL (_going up to the hives_)
Oh, yes!... I can smell the honey!... How heavy the hives must be!... All
the flowers are so beautiful!... And my little dead sisters, are they here
too?...

MYTYL
And where are my three little brothers who were buried?...

(_At these words, seven little_ CHILDREN, _of different sizes, like
a set of Pan's pipes, come out of the cottage, one by one_.)

GRANNY TYL
Here they are, here they are!... As soon as you think of them, as soon as
you speak of them, they are there, the darlings!...

(TYLTYL _and_ MYTYL _run to meet the_ CHILDREN. _They hustle
and hug one another and dance and whirl about and utter screams of
joy_.)

TYLTYL
Hullo, Pierrot!... (_They clutch each other by the hair_.) Ah, so
we're going to fight again, as in the old days.... And Robert!... I say,
Jean, what's become of your top?... Madeleine and Pierette and Pauline!...
And here's Riquette!...

MYTYL
Oh, Riquette, Riquette!... She's still crawling on all fours!...

GRANNY TYL
Yes, she has stopped growing.

TYLTYL (_noticing the little_ DOG _yelping around them_)
There's Kiki, whose tail I cut off with Pauline's scissors.... He hasn't
changed either....

GAFFER TYL (_sententiously_)
No, nothing changes here....

TYLTYL
And Pauline still has a pimple on her nose....

GRANNY TYL
Yes, it won't go away; there's nothing to be done for it....

TYLTYL
Oh, how well they look, how fat and glossy they are!... What jolly cheeks
they have!... They look well fed....

GRANNY TYL
They have been much better since they ceased living.... There's nothing
more to fear, nobody is ever ill, one has no anxiety....

(_The clock inside the cottage strikes eight_.)

GRANNY TYL (_amazed_)
What's that?...

GAFFER TYL
I don't know, I'm sure.... It must be the clock....

GRANNY TYL
It can't be.... It never strikes....

GAFFER TYL
Because we no longer think of the time.... Was any one thinking of the
time?...

TYLTYL
Yes, I was.... What is the time?...

GAFFER TYL
I'm sure I can't tell.... I've forgotten how.... It struck eight times, so
I suppose it's what they call eight o'clock up there....

TYLTYL
Light expects me at a quarter to nine.... It's because of the Fairy....
It's extremely important.... I'm off!...

GRANNY TYL
Don't leave us like that, just as supper's ready!... Quick, quick, let's
lay the table outside.... I've got some capital cabbage-soup and a
beautiful plum-tart....

(_They get out the table, dishes, plates, etc., and lay for supper
outside the door, all helping_.)

TYLTYL
Well, as I've got the Blue Bird.... And then it's so long since I tasted
cabbage-soup.... Ever since I've been, travelling.... They don't have it at
the hotels....

GRANNY TYL
There!... That didn't take long!... Sit down, children.... Don't let us
lose time, if you're in a hurry....

(_They have lit the lamp and served the soup. The_ GRANDPARENTS _and
the_ CHILDREN _sit down round the table, jostling and elbowing one
another and laughing and screaming with pleasure_.)

TYLTYL (_eating like a glutton_)
How good it is!... Oh, how good it is!...I want some more! More!...

(_He brandishes his wooden spoon and noisily hits his plate with it_.)

GAFFER TYL
Come, come, a little more quiet.... You're just as ill-behaved as ever; and
you'll break your plate....

TYLTYL (_half-raising himself on his stool_)
I want more, more!... (_He seizes the tureen, drags it toward him and
upsets it and the soup, which trickles over the table and down over their
knees and scalds them. Yells and screams of pain_.)

GRANNY TYL
There!... I told you so!...

GAFFER TYL (_giving TYLTYL a loud box on the ear_)
That's one for you!...

TYLTYL (_staggered for a moment, next puts his hand to his cheek with an
expression of rapture_)
Oh, that's just like the slaps you used to give me when you were alive?...
Grandad, how nice it was and how good it makes one feel!... I must give you
a kiss!...

GAFFER TYL
Very well; there's more where that came from, if you like them....

(_The clock strikes half-past eight_)

TYLTYL (_starting up_)
Half-past eight!... (_He flings down his spoon_.) Mytyl, we've only
just got time!...

GRANNY TYL
Oh, I say!... Just a few minutes more!... Your house isn't on fire!... We
see you so seldom....

TYLTYL
No, we can't possibly.... Light is so kind.... And I promised her.... Come,
Mytyl, come!...

GAFFER TYL
Goodness gracious, how tiresome the Living are with all their business and
excitement!...

TYLTYL (_taking his cage and hurriedly kissing everybody all round_)
Good-bye, grandad.... Good-bye, granny.... Good-bye, brothers and sisters,
Pierrot, Robert, Pauline, Madeleine, Riquette and you, too, Kiki.... I feel
we mustn't stay.... Don't cry, granny; we will come back often....

GRANNY TYL
Come back every day!...

TYLTYL
Yes, yes; we will come back as often as we can....

GRANNY TYL
It's our only pleasure and it's such a treat for us when your thoughts
visit us!...

GAFFER TYL
We have no other amusements....

TYLTYL
Quick, quick!... My cage!... My bird!...

GAFFER TYL (_handing him the cage_)
Here they are!... You know, I don't warrant him; and if he's not the right
colour...

TYLTYL
Good-bye! Good-bye!...

THE BROTHERS AND SISTERS TYL
Good-bye, Tyltyl! Good-bye, Mytyl!... Remember the barley-sugar!...
Good-bye!... Come again!... Come again!...

(_They all wave their handkerchiefs while_ TYLTYL _and_ MYTYL
_slowly move away. But already, during the last sentences, the fog of the
beginning of the scene has been gradually re-forming, so that, at the end,
all has disappeared in the mist and, at the fall of the curtain_, TYLTYL
_and_ MYTYL _are again alone visible under the big oak_.)

TYLTYL
It's this way, Mytyl....

MYTYL
Where is Light?...

TYLTYL
I don't know.... (_Looking at the bird in the cage_.) But the bird is
no longer blue!... He has turned black!...

MYTYL
Give me your hand, little brother.... I feel so frightened and so cold....


CURTAIN




ACT III.




SCENE 1.--_The Palace of_ NIGHT.


_A large and wonderful hall of an austere, rigid, metallic and sepulchral
magnificence, giving the impression of a Greek temple with columns,
architraves, flagstones and ornaments of black marble, gold and ebony. The
hall is trapezium-shaped. Basalt steps, occupying almost the entire width,
divide it into three successive stages, which rise gradually toward the
back. On the right and left, between the columns, are doors of sombre
bronze. At the back, a monumental door of brass. The palace is lit only
by a vague light that seems to emanate mainly from the brilliancy of the
marble and the ebony. At the rise of the curtain_, NIGHT, _in the form
of a very old woman, clad in long, black garments, is seated on the steps
of the second stage between two children, of whom one, almost naked,
like Cupid, is smiling in a deep sleep, while the other is standing up,
motionless and veiled from head to foot_.

_Enter from the right, in the foreground, the_ CAT

NIGHT
Who goes there?

THE CAT (_sinking heavily upon the marble steps_)
It is I, Mother Night.... I am worn out....

NIGHT
What's the matter, child?... You look pale and thin and you are splashed
with mud to your very whiskers.... Have you been fighting on the tiles
again, in the snow and rain?...

THE CAT
It has nothing to do with the tiles!... It's our secret that's at stake!...
It's the beginning of the end!... I have managed to escape for a moment to
warn you; but I greatly fear that there is nothing to be done....

NIGHT
Why?... What has happened?...

THE CAT
I have told you of little Tyltyl, the woodcutter's son, and of the magic
diamond.... Well, he is coming here to demand the Blue Bird of you....

NIGHT
He hasn't got it yet.....

THE CAT
He will have it soon, unless we perform some miracle.... This is how the
matter stands: Light, who is guiding him and betraying us all, for she has
placed herself entirely on Man's side, Light has learned that the Blue
Bird, the real one, the only one that can live in the light of day, is
hidden here, among the blue birds of the dreams that live on the rays of
the moon and die as soon as they set eyes on the sun.... She knows that she
is forbidden to cross the threshold of your palace, but she is sending the
children; and, as you cannot prevent Man from opening the doors of
your secrets, I do not know how all this will end.... In any case, if,
unfortunately, they should lay their hands on the real Blue Bird, there
would be nothing for us but to disappear....

NIGHT
Oh dear, oh dear!.... What times we live in!... I never have a moment's
peace.... I cannot understand Man, these last few years.... What is he
aiming at?... Must he absolutely know everything?... Already he has
captured a third of my Mysteries, all my Terrors are afraid and dare not
leave the house, my Ghosts have taken flight, the greater part of my
Sicknesses are ill....

THE CAT
I know, Mother Night, I know, the times are hard and we are almost alone in
our struggle against Man.... But I hear them coming.... I see only one way:
as they are children, we must give them such a fright that they will not
dare to persist or to open the great door at the back, behind which they
would find the Birds of the Moon.... The secrets of the other caverns will
be enough to distract their attention and terrify them....

NIGHT (_listening to a sound outside_)
What do I hear?... Are there many of them?...

THE CAT
It is nothing; it is our friends, Bread and Sugar; Water is not very well
and Fire could not come, because he is related to Light.... The Dog is
the only one who is not on our side; but it is never possible to keep him
away....

(_Enter timidly, on the right, in the foreground, TYLTYL, MYTYL, BREAD,
SUGAR and the DOG_.)

THE CAT (_rushing up to TYLTYL_)
This way, little master, this way.... I have told Night, who is delighted
to see you.... You must forgive her, she is a little indisposed; that is
why she was not able to come to meet you....

TYLTYL
Good-day, Mrs. Night....

NIGHT (_in an offended voice_)
Good-day?... I am not used to that.... You might say, Good-night, or, at
least. Good-evening....

TYLTYL (_mortified_)
I beg your pardon, ma'am....I did not know....(_Pointing to the two_
CHILDREN.) Are those your two little boys?... They are very nice....

NIGHT
This is Sleep....

TYLTYL
Why is he so fat?...

NIGHT
That is because he sleeps well....

TYLTYL
And the other, hiding himself?... Why does he veil his face?...Is he
ill?... What is his name?...

NIGHT
That is Sleep's sister.... It is better not to mention her name....

TYLTYL
Why?...

NIGHT
Because her name is not pleasant to hear.... But let us talk of something
else.... The Cat tells me that you have come here to look for the Blue
Bird....

TYLTYL
Yes, ma'am, if you will allow me.... Will you tell me where he is?...

NIGHT
I don't know, dear.... All I can say is that he is not here.... I have
never seen him....

TYLTYL
Yes, yes.... Light told me that he was here; and Light knows what she is
saying.... Will you hand me your keys?...

NIGHT
But you must understand, dear, that I cannot give my keys like that to
the first comer.... I have the keeping of all Nature's secrets and I am
absolutely forbidden to deliver them to anybody, especially to a child....

TYLTYL
You have no right to refuse them to Man when he asks you for them....I know
that....

NIGHT
Who told you?...

TYLTYL
Light....

NIGHT
Light again! Always Light!... How dare she interfere, how dare she?...

THE DOG
Shall I take them from her by force, my little god?...

TYLTYL
Hold your tongue, keep quiet and try to behave.... (_To_NIGHT) Come,
madam, give me your keys, please....

NIGHT
Have you the sign, at least?... Where is it?...

TYLTYL (_touching his hat_)
Behold the Diamond!...

NIGHT (_resigning herself to the inevitable_)
Well, then... Here is the key that opens all the doors of the hall.... Look
to yourself if you meet with a misfortune.... I will not be responsible....

BREAD (_very anxiously_)
Is it dangerous?...

NIGHT
Dangerous?... I will go so far as to say that I myself do not know what I
shall do when certain of those bronze doors open upon the abyss.... All
around the hall, in each of those basalt caves, are all the evils, all the
plagues, all the sicknesses, all the terrors, all the catastrophes, all the
mysteries that have afflicted life since the beginning of the world.... I
have had trouble enough to Imprison them there with the aid of Destiny; and
it is not without difficulty, I assure you, that I keep some little order
among those undisciplined characters.... You have seen what happens when
one of them escapes and shows itself on earth....

BREAD
My great age, my experience and my devotion make me the natural protector
of these two children; therefore, Mrs. Night, permit me to ask you a
question....

NIGHT
Certainly....

BREAD
In case of danger, which is the way of escape?...

NIGHT
There is no way of escape.

TYLTYL (_taking the key and climbing the first steps_)
Let us begin here.... What is behind this bronze door?...

NIGHT
I think it is the Ghosts.... It is long since I opened the door and since
they came out....

TYLTYL (_placing the key in the lock_)
I will see.... (_To_ BREAD) Have you the cage for the Blue Bird?...

BREAD (_with chattering teeth_)
I'm not frightened, but don't you think it would be better not to open the
door, but to peep through the keyhole?...

TYLTYL
I don't want your advice....

MYTYL (_suddenly beginning to cry_)
I am frightened!... Where is Sugar?... I want to go home!...

SUGAR (_eagerly, obsequiously_)
Here I am, miss, here I am.... Don't cry, I will break off one of my
fingers so that you may have a sugar-stick....

TYLTYL
Enough of this!...

(_He turns the key and cautiously opens the door. Forthwith, five or
six_ GHOSTS _of strange and different forms escape and disperse on
every side_. MYTYL _gives a scream of fright_, BREAD, _terrified,
throws away the cage and goes and hides at the back of the hall, while_
NIGHT, _running after the_ GHOSTS, _cries out to_ TYLTYL.)

NIGHT
Quick! Quick!... Shut the door!... They will all escape and we should never
be able to catch them again!... They have felt bored in there, ever since
Man ceased to take them seriously....
(_She runs after the_ GHOSTS _and endeavours, with the aid of a whip
formed of snakes, to drive them back to the door of their prison_.)
Help me!... Here!... Here!...

TYLTYL (_to the_ DOG)
Help her, Tylô, at them!...

THE DOG (_leaping up and barking_)
Yes, yes, yes!...

TYLTYL
And Bread, where's Bread?...

BREAD (_at the back of the hall_)
Here.... I am near the door to prevent them from going out....

(_One of the_ GHOSTS _moves in that direction and he rushes away at
full speed, uttering yells of terror_.)

NIGHT (_to three_ GHOSTS _whom she has seized by the neck_)
This way, you!... (_To_ TYLTYL) Open the door a little.... (_She
pushes the_ GHOSTS _into the cave_.) There, that's it....
(_The_ DOG _brings up two more_.) And these two.... Come, quick,
in with you!... You know you're only allowed out on All-hallows....

(_She closes the door._)

TYLTYL (_going to another door_)
What's behind this one?....

NIGHT
What is the good?...I have already told you the Blue Bird has never been
here.... However, as you please.... Open the doors if you like.... It's the
Sicknesses....

TYLTYL (_with the key in the lock_.)
Must I be careful in opening?...

NIGHT
No, it is not worth while.... They are very quiet, the poor little
things.... They are not happy.... Man, for some time, has been waging
such a determined war upon them!... Especially since the discovery of the
microbes.... Open, you will see....

(TYLTYL _opens the door quite wide. Nothing appears_.)

TYLTYL
Don't they come out?

NIGHT
I told you they are almost all poorly and very much discouraged....
The doctors are so unkind to them.... Go in for a moment and see for
yourself....

(TYLTYL _enters the cavern and comes out again immediately_.)

TYLTYL
The Blue Bird is not there.... They look very ill, those Sicknesses of
yours.... They did not even lift their heads.... (_One little Sickness in
slippers, a dressing-gown and a cotton nightcap escapes from the cavern
and begins to frisk about the hall_.) Look!... There's a little one
escaping.... Which one is it?...

NIGHT
It's nothing, one of the smallest; it's Cold-in-the-Head.... It is one
of those which are least persecuted and which enjoy the best health....
(_Calling to_ COLD-IN-THE-HEAD) Come here, dear....It's too soon yet;
you must wait for the winter.... (COLD-IN-THE-HEAD, _sneezing, coughing
and blowing its nose, returns to the cavern and_ TYLTYL _shuts the
door_.)

TYLTYL (_going to the next door_)
Let us look at this one..... What is in here?...

NIGHT
Take care!... It is the Wars.... They are more terrible and powerful
than ever.... Heaven knows what would happen if one of them escaped!...
Fortunately, they are rather heavy and slow-moving.... But we must stand
ready to push back the door, all of us together, while you take a rapid
glance into the cavern....

(TYLTYL, _with a thousand precautions, opens the door ajar so that there
is only a little gap to which he can put his eye. He at once doubles his
back against the door, shouting_.)

TYLTYL
Quick! Quick!... Push with all your might!... They have seen me!... They
are all coming!... They are breaking down the door!...

NIGHT
Come, all together!... Push hard!... Bread, what are you doing?... Push,
all of you!... How strong they are!... Ah, that's it!... They are giving
way!... It was high time!... Did you see them?...

TYLTYL
Yes, yes!... They are huge and awful!... I don't think that they have the
Blue Bird....

NIGHT
You may be sure they haven't.... If they had, they would eat him at
once.... Well, have you had enough of it?... You see there is nothing to be
done....

TYLTYL
I must see everything.... Light said so....

NIGHT
Light said so!... It's an easy thing to say when one's afraid and stays at
home....

TYLTYL
Let us go to the next.... What is in here?...

NIGHT
This is where I lock up the Shades and the Terrors....

TYLTYL
Can I open the door?...

NIGHT
Certainly.... They are pretty quiet; they are like the Sicknesses....

TYLTYL (_half-opening the door, with a certain mistrustfulness, and
taking a look into the cavern_)
Are they not there?...

NIGHT (_looking into the cavern in her turn_)
Well, Shades, what are you doing?... Come out for a moment and stretch your
legs; it will do you good.... And the Terrors also.... There is nothing to
be afraid of.... (_A few_ SHADES _and a few_ TERRORS, _in the
shape of women, shrouded, the former in black veils and the latter in
greenish veils, piteously venture to take a few steps outside the cavern;
and then, upon a movement of_ TYLTYL'S, _hastily run back again_.)
Come, don't be afraid.... It's only a child; he won't hurt you....
(_To_ TYLTYL) They have become extremely timid, except the great ones,
those whom you see at the back....

TYLTYL (_looking into the depths of the cave_)
Oh, how terrifying they are!...

NIGHT
They are chained up.... They are the only ones that are not afraid of
Man.... But shut the door, lest they should grow angry....

TYLTYL (_going to the next door_)
I say!... This is a darker one.... What is here?

NIGHT
There are several Mysteries behind this one.... If you are absolutely bent
upon it, you may open it too.... But don't go in.... Be very cautious and
let us get ready to push back the door, as we did with the Wars....

TYLTYL (_half-opening the door; with unparalleled precautions and passing
his head fearsomely through the aperture_)
Oh!... How cold!... My eyes are smarting!... Shut it quickly!... Push, oh,
push! They are pushing against us!... (NIGHT, _the_ DOG, _the_ CAT _and_
SUGAR _push back the door_.) Oh, I saw!...

NIGHT
What?...

TYLTYL (_upset_)
I don't know, it was awful!... They were all seated like monsters without
eyes.... Who was the giant who tried to seize me?...

NIGHT
It was probably Silence; he has charge of this door.... It appears to have
been alarming?... You are quite pale still and trembling all over....

TYLTYL
Yes, I would never have believed.... I had never seen.... And my hands are
frozen....

NIGHT
It will be worse presently if you go on....

TYLTYL (_going to the next door_)
And this one?... Is this terrible also?...

NIGHT
No; there is a little of everything here.... It is where I keep the
unemployed Stars, my personal Perfumes, a few Glimmers that belong to me,
such as Will-o'-the-Wisps, Glow-worms and Fireflies, also the Dew, the Song
of the Nightingales and so on....

TYLTYL
Just so, the Stars, the Song of the Nightingales.... This must be the
door....

NIGHT
Open it, if you like; there Is nothing very bad inside....

(TYLTYL _throws the door wide open. The_ STARS, _in the shape of
beautiful young girls veiled in many-coloured radiancy, escape from their
prison, disperse over the hall and form graceful groups on the steps and
around the columns, bathed in a sort of luminous penumbra. The_ PERFUMES
OF THE NIGHT, _who are almost invisible, the_ WILL-O'-THE-WISPS,
_the_ FIREFLIES _and the transparent_ DEW _join them, while
the_ SONG OF THE NIGHTINGALES _streams from the cavern and floods the
Palace of_ NIGHT.)

MYTYL (_clapping her hands with delight_)
Oh, what pretty ladies!...

TYLTYL
And how well they dance!...

MYTYL
And how sweet they smell!...

TYLTYL
And how beautifully they sing!...

MYTYL
What are those, whom one can hardly see?...

NIGHT
Those are the Perfumes of my Shadow.

TYLTYL
And those others, over there, in spun glass?...

NIGHT
They are the Dew of the plains and forests.... But enough!... They would
never have done.... It is the devil's own business to get them back, once
they begin to dance.... (_Clapping her hands together_.) Now then,
Stars, quick!... This is not the time for dancing.... The sky is overcast
and heavily clouded.... Come, quick, in with you, or I will go and fetch a
ray of sunlight!... (_The_ STARS, PERFUMES, _etc., take to flight in
dismay and rush back into the cavern; and the door is closed upon them. At
the same time, the song of the_ NIGHTINGALE _ceases_.)

TYLTYL (_going to the door at the back_)
Here is the great middle door....

NIGHT (_gravely_)
Do not open that one...

TYLTYL
Why not?....

NIGHT
Because it's not allowed....

TYLTYL
Then it's here that the Blue Bird is hidden; Light told me so....

NIGHT (_maternally_)
Listen to me, child ... I have been kind and indulgent ... I have done for
you what I have never done for any one before ... I have given up all my
secrets to you.... I like you, I feel pity for your youth and innocence and
I am speaking to you as a mother.... Listen to me, my child, and believe
me; relinquish your quest, go no further, do not tempt fate, do not open
that door....

TYLTYL (_a little shaken_)
But why?...

NIGHT
Because I do not wish you to be lost.... Because not one of those, do you
hear, not one of those who have opened it, were it but by a hair's breadth,
has ever returned alive to the light of day.... Because every awful thing
imaginable, because all the terrors, all the horrors of which men speak on
earth are as nothing compared with the most harmless of those which assail
a man from the moment when his eye lights upon the first threats of the
abyss to which no one dares give a name.... So much so that I myself, if
you are bent, in spite of everything, upon touching that door, will ask you
to wait until I have sought safety in my windowless tower... Now it is for
you to know, for you to reflect....

(MYTYL, _all in tears, utters cries of inarticulate terror and tries to
drag_ TYLTYL _away_.)

BREAD (_with chattering teeth_)
Don't do it, master dear!... (_Flinging himself on his knees_) Take
pity on us!... I implore you on my knees.... You see that Night is
right....

THE CAT
You are sacrificing the lives of all of us....

TYLTYL
I must open the door....

MYTYL (_stamping her feet, amid her sobs_)
I won't!... I sha'n't!...

TYLTYL
Sugar and Bread, take Mytyl by the hand and run away with her.... I am
going to open the door....

NIGHT
Run for your lives!... Come quickly!... It is time!... (_She flees._)

BREAD (_fleeing wildly_)
At least wait till we are at the end of the hall!...

THE CAT (_also fleeing_)
Wait! Wait!...

(_They hide behind the columns at the other end of the hall_. TYLTYL
_remains alone with the DOG by the monumental door_.)

THE DOG (_panting and hiccoughing with suppressed fright_)
I shall stay, I shall stay!... I'm not afraid!... I shall stay!... I shall
stay with my little god!... I shall stay!... I shall stay!...

TYLTYL (_patting the_ DOG)
That's right, Tylô, that's right!... Kiss me.... You and I are two.... And
now, steady!...

(_He places the key in the lock. A cry of alarm comes from the other
end of the hall, where the runaways have taken refuge. The key has hardly
touched the door before its tall and wide leaves open in the middle, glide
apart and disappear on either side in the thickness of the walls, suddenly
revealing the most unexpected of gardens, unreal, infinite and ineffable,
a dream-garden bathed in nocturnal light, where, among stars and planets,
illumining all that they touch, flying ceaselessly from jewel to jewel and
from moonbeam to moonbeam, fairy-like blue birds hover perpetually and
harmoniously down to the confines of the horizon, birds innumerable to
the point of appearing to be the breath, the azured atmosphere, the very
substance of the wonderful garden_.)

TYLTYL (_dazzled, bewildered, standing in the light of the garden_)
Oh!... Heaven!... (_Turning to those who have fled_) Come quickly!...
They are here!... It's they, it's they, it's they!... We have them
at last!... Thousands of blue birds!... Millions!.... Thousands of
millions!... There will be too many!... Come, Mytyl!... Come, Tylô!...
Come, all!... Help me!... (_Darting in among the birds_.) You can
catch them by handfuls!... They are not shy!... They are not afraid of
us!.... Here! Here!.... (MYTYL _and the others run up. They all enter the
dazzling garden, except_ NIGHT _and the_ CAT.) You see!... There
are too many of them!... They fly into my hands!... Look, they are eating
the moonbeams!... Mytyl, where are you?.... There are so many blue wings,
so many feathers falling that one cannot see anything for them!.... Don't
bite them, Tylô!.... Don't hurt them!.... Take them very gently!....

MYTYL (_covered with blue birds_)
I have caught seven already!.... Oh, how they flap their wings!.... I can't
hold them!....

TYLTYL
Nor can I!.... I have too many of them!... They're escaping!.... They're
coming back!.... Tylô has some, too!.... They will drag us with them!....
They will take us up to the sky!.... Quick, let us go out this way!....
Light is waiting for us!.... How pleased she will be!.... This way, this
way!....

(_They escape from the garden, with their hands full of struggling birds,
and, crossing the whole hall amid the mad whirl of the azure wings, go out
on the right, where they first entered, followed by_ BREAD _and_
SUGAR, _who have caught no birds_. NIGHT _and the_ CAT, _left
alone, return to the back of the stage and look anxiously into the
garden_.)

NIGHT
Haven't they got him?...

THE CAT
No.... I see him there, on that moonbeam.... They could not reach him, he
kept too high....

(_The_ CURTAIN _falls. Immediately after, before the dropped
curtain_, ENTER, _at the same time, on the left_, LIGHT _and on
the right_, TYLTYL, MYTYL _and the_ DOG, _who run up all covered
by the birds which they have captured. But already the birds appear
lifeless and, with hanging heads and drooping wings, are nothing more in
their hands than inert remains._)

LIGHT
Well, have you caught him?...

TYLTYL
Yes, yes!...As many as we wanted!... There are thousands of them!... Here
they are!... Do you see them?... (_Looking at the birds, which he holds
out to_ LIGHT, _and perceiving that they are dead_) Why, they
are dead!... What have they done to them?... Yours too, Mytyl?... Tylô's
also?... (_Angrily flinging down the dead bodies of the birds_) Oh,
this is too bad?... Who killed them?... I am too unhappy!...

(_He hides his head in his arms and his whole frame is shaken with
sobs._)

LIGHT (_pressing him maternally in her arms_)
Do not cry, my child.... You did not catch the one that is able to live in
broad daylight.... He has gone elsewhere.... We shall find him again....

THE DOG (_looking at the dead birds_))
Are they good to eat?....

(_They all go out on the left_.)




SCENE 2.--_The Forest._

_A forest. It is night. The moon is shining. Old trees of various kinds,
notably an_ OAK, _a_ BEECH, _an_ ELM, _a_ POPLAR, _a_ FIR-TREE, _a_
CYPRESS, _a_ LIME-TREE, _a_ CHESTNUT-TREE, _etc_.

ENTER _the_ CAT.

THE CAT (_bowing to the trees in turn_)
To all the trees here present, greeting!....

THE TREES (_murmuring in their leaves_)
Greeting!....

THE CAT
This is a great day, a day of days!.... Our enemy is coming to set free
your energies and to deliver himself into your hands..... It is Tyltyl, the
son of the wood-cutter, who has done you so much harm.... He is seeking the
Blue Bird, whom you have kept hidden from Man since the beginning of
the world and who alone knows our secret.... (_A murmuring in the
leaves_.) What do you say?... Ah, it's the Poplar!... Yes, he possesses
a diamond which has the virtue of setting free our spirits for a moment;
he can compel us to hand over the Blue Bird and thenceforth we shall be
definitely at Man's mercy.... (_A murmuring in the leaves_.) Who is
speaking?... Ah, the Oak!... How are you?... (_A murmuring in the leaves
of the_ OAK.) Still got your cold?... Does the Liquorice no longer look
after you?... Can't you throw off your rheumatism?... Believe me, that's
because of the moss; you put too much of it on your feet.... Is the Blue
Bird still with you?... (_A murmuring in the leaves of the_ OAK.) I
beg your pardon?... Yes, there is no room for hesitation; we must take
the opportunity; he must he done away with.... (_A murmuring in the
leaves_.) I didn't quite catch.... Oh, yes, he is with his little
sister; she must die, too.... (_A murmuring in the leaves_.) Yes, they
have the Dog with them; there is no keeping him away.... (_A murmuring in
the leaves_.) What did you say?... Bribe him?... Impossible.... I have
tried everything.... (_A murmuring in the leaves_.) Ah, is that you,
Fir-Tree?... Yes, get four planks ready.... Yes, there are Fire, Sugar,
Water and Bread besides.... They are all with us, except Bread, who is
rather doubtful.... Light alone is on Man's side; but she won't come....
I made the children believe that they ought to steal away while she was
asleep.... There never was such an opportunity.... (_A murmuring in the
leaves_.) Ah, that's the Beech's voice!... Yes, you are right; we must
inform the animals.... Has the Rabbit got his drum?... Is he with you?...
Good, let him beat the troop at once.... Here they are!...

(_The roll of the_ RABBIT'S _drum is heard, diminishing in the
distance. Enter_ TYLTYL, MYTYL _and the_ DOG.)

TYLTYL
Is this the place?...

THE CAT (_obsequiously, eagerly, mealy-mouthed, rushing to meet the_
CHILDREN)
Ah, there you are, my little master!... How well you look and how pretty,
this evening!.... I went before you to announce your arrival.... All Is
going well. We shall have the Blue Bird to-night, I am sure.... I have just
sent the Rabbit to beat the troop in order to convoke the principal
animals of the country.... You can hear them already among the foliage....
Listen!... They are a little shy and dare not come near.... (_The sounds
are heard of different animals, such as cows, pigs, horses, donkeys, etc.
The_ CAT, _aside, to_ TYLTYL, _taking him apart_) But why
have you brought the Dog?... I have told you he is on the worst terms with
everybody, even the trees.... I fear that his odious presence will spoil
everything....

TYLTYL
I could not get rid of him.... (_To the_ DOG, _threatening him_)
Go away, you ugly thing!...

THE DOG
Who?... I?... Why?... What have I done?...

TYLTYL
I tell you, go away!... We don't want you here and there's an end of it....
You're a nuisance, there!...

THE DOG
I sha'n't say a word.... I shall follow you at a distance.... They sha'n't
see me.... Shall I beg?...

THE CAT (_aside, to_ TYLTYL)
Do you allow this disobedience?... Hit him on the nose with your stick; he
is really unbearable!...

TYLTYL (_beating the_ DOG)
There, that will teach you to be more obedient!...

THE DOG (_yelling_)
Ow! Ow! Ow!...

TYLTYL
What do you say?...

THE DOG
I must kiss you now you've beaten me!... (_He covers_ TYLTYL _with
violent kisses and embraces_.)

TYLTYL
Come.... That will do.... That's enough.... Go away!...

MYTYL
No, no; I want him to stay.... I am afraid of everything when he is not
there....

THE DOG (_leaping up and almost upsetting_ MYTYL, _whom he overwhelms with
hurried and enthusiastic kisses_)
Oh, the dear little girl!... How beautiful she is!... How good she is!...
How beautiful she is, how sweet she is!...I must kiss her!... Once more,
once more, once more!...

THE CAT
What an idiot!... Well, we shall see!... Let us lose no time.... Turn the
diamond....

TYLTYL
Where shall I stand?...

THE CAT
In this moonbeam; you will see better.... There, turn it gently!...

(TYLTYL _turns the Diamond. A long-drawn-out rustling shakes the leaves
and branches. The oldest and most stately trunks open to make way for the
soul which each of them contains. The appearance of these souls differs
according to the appearance and the character of the trees which they
represent. The soul of the_ ELM, _for instance, is a sort of pursy,
pot-bellied, crabbed gnome; the_ LIME-TREE _is placid, familiar and
jovial; the_ BEECH, _elegant and agile; the_ BIRCH, _white,
reserved and restless; the_ WILLOW, _stunted, dishevelled and
plaintive; the_ FIR-TREE, _tall, lean and taciturn; the_ CYPRESS,
_tragic; the_ CHESTNUT-TREE, _pretentious and rather dandified;
the_ POPLAR, _sprightly, cumbersome, talkative. Some emerge slowly
from their trunks, torpidly stretching themselves, as though they had been
imprisoned or asleep for ages; others leap out actively, eagerly; and all
come and stand in a circle round the two_ CHILDREN, _while keeping as
near as they can to the tree in which they were born_.)

THE POPLAR (_running up first and screaming at the top of his voice_)
Men?... Little men!... We shall be able to talk to them!... We've done with
silence!... Done with it!... Where do they come from?... Who are they?...
What are they?... (_To the_ LIME-TREE, _who comes forward quietly
smoking his pipe_) Do you know them, Daddy Lime-Tree?...

THE LIME-TREE
I do not remember ever having seen them....

THE POPLAR
Oh, yes, you must have!... You know all the men; you're always hanging
about their houses....

THE LIME-TREE (_examining the_ CHILDREN)
No, I assure you.... I don't know them.... They are too young still.... I
only know the lovers who come to see me by moonlight and the topers who
drink their beer under my branches....

THE CHESTNUT-TREE (_affectedly adjusting his eyeglass_)
Who are these?... Are they poor people from the country?...

THE POPLAR
Oh, as for you, Mr. Chestnut-Tree, ever since you have refused to show
yourself except in the streets of the big towns...

THE WILLOW (_hobbling along in a pair of wooden shoes_)
Oh dear, oh dear!... They have come to cut off my head and arms again for
fagots!...

THE POPLAR
Silence!... Here is the Oak leaving his palace!... He looks far from well
this evening.... Don't you think he is growing very old?... What can his
age be?... The Fir-tree says he is four thousand; but I am sure that he
exaggerates.... Listen; he will tell us all about it....

(_The_ OAK _comes slowly forward. He is fabulously old, crowned with
mistletoe and clad in a long green gown edged with moss and lichen. He is
blind; his white beard streams in the wind. He leans with one hand on a
knotty stick and with the other on a young_ OAKLING, _who serves as
his guide. The Blue Bird is perched on his shoulder. At his approach, the
other trees draw themselves up in a row and bow respectfully_.)

TYLTYL
He has the Blue Bird!... Quick! Quick!... Here!... Give it to me!...

THE TREES
Silence!...

THE CAT (_to_ TYLTYL)
Take of your hat. It's the Oak!...

THE OAK (_to_ TYLTYL)
Who are you?....

TYLTYL
I am Tyltyl, sir.... When can I have the Blue Bird?...

THE OAK
Tyltyl, the wood-cutter's son?...

TYLTYL
Yes, sir....

THE OAK
Your father has done us much harm.... In my family alone, he has put to
death six hundred of my sons, four hundred and seventy-five uncles and
aunts, twelve hundred cousins of both sexes, three hundred and eighty
daughters-in-law, and twelve thousand great-grandsons!...

TYLTYL
I know nothing about it, sir.... He did not do it on purpose....

THE OAK
What have you come here for; and why have you made our souls leave their
abodes?...

TYLTYL
I beg your pardon, sir, for disturbing you.... The Cat said that you would
tell us where the Blue Bird was....

THE OAK
Yes, I know that you are looking for the Blue Bird, that is to say, the
great secret of things and of happiness, so that Man may make our servitude
still harder....

TYLTYL
Oh, no, sir; it is for the Fairy Bérylune's little girl, who is very
ill....

THE OAK (_laying silence upon him with a gesture_)
Enough!... I do not hear the Animals.... Where are they?... All this
concerns them as much as us.... We, the Trees, must not assume the
responsibility alone for the grave measures that have become necessary....
On the day when MAN hears that we have done what we are about to do, there
will be terrible reprisals..... It is right, therefore, that our agreement
should be unanimous, so that our silence may be the same....

THE FIR-TREE (_looking over the top of the other trees_)
The Animals are coming.... They are following the Rabbit.... Here are the
souls of the Horse, the Bull, the Ox, the Cow, the Wolf, the Sheep, the
Pig, the Cock, the Goat, the Ass, and the Bear....

(_Enter the souls of the_ ANIMALS, _who, as the_ FIR-TREE
_utters their names, come forward and sit down among the trees, with the
exception of the soul of the_ GOAT, _who roams to and fro, and of
the_ PIG, _who snuffles among the roots_.)

THE OAK
Are all here present?...

THE RABBIT
The Hen could not leave her eggs, the Hare is out on a run, the Stag has a
pain in his horns, the Fox is ill--here is the doctor's certificate--the
Goose did not understand and the Turkey flew into a passion....

THE OAK
These abstentions are most regrettable.... However, we have a quorum....
You know, my brothers, the nature of our business. The child you see before
you, thanks to a talisman stolen from the powers of Earth, is able to take
possession of the Blue Bird and thus to snatch from us the secret which
we have kept since the origin of life.... Now we know enough of Man to
entertain no doubt as to the fate which he reserves for us once he is in
possession of this secret. That is why it seems to me that any hesitation
would be both foolish and criminal.... It is a serious moment; the child
must be done away with before it is too late....

TYLTYL
What is he saying?...

THE DOG (_prowling round the_ OAK _and showing his fangs_)
Do you see my teeth, you old cripple?...

THE BEECH (_indignantly_)
He is insulting the Oak!...

THE OAK
Is that the Dog?... Drive him out! We must suffer no traitors among us!...

THE CAT (_aside, to_ TYLTYL)
Send the Dog away.... It's a misunderstanding.... Leave it to me; I will
arrange things.... But send him away as quick as you can....

TYLTYL (_to the_ DOG)
Will you be off!...

THE DOG
Do let me worry the gouty old beggar's moss slippers!.... It will be such a
joke!...

TYLTYL
Hold your tongue!... And be off with you!... Be off, you ugly brute!...

THE DOG
All right, all right, I'm going.... I'll come back when you want me....

THE CAT (_aside, to_ TYLTYL)
It would be a good thing to chain him up, or he will commit some folly; the
Trees will be angry and all will end badly....

TYLTYL
What can I do?... I have lost his leash....

THE CAT
Here's the Ivy just coming along with strong bonds....

THE DOG (_growling_)
I'll come back, I'll come back!... Ugh! Goutytoes! Timbertoes!... Pack of
old stunted growths, pack of old roots!... It's the Cat who's at the bottom
of all this!... I'll be even with him!... What have you been whispering
about, you sneak, you tiger, you Judas!... Wow, wow, wow!....

THE CAT
You see, he insults everybody....

TYLTYL
Yes, he is unbearable and one can't hear one's self speak.... Mr. Ivy, will
you chain him up, please?...

THE IVY (_timorously going up to the_ DOG)
Won't he bite?...

THE DOG (_growling_)
On the contrary, on the contrary!... He's going to kiss you!... Just wait
and see!... Come along, come along, you old ball of twine, you!...

TYLTYL (_threatening him with his stick_)
Tylô!...

THE DOG (_cringing at_ TYLTYL'S _feet and wagging his tail_)
What am I to do, my little god?

TYLTYL
Lie down flat!... Obey the Ivy.... Let him bind you, or....

THE DOG (_growling between his teeth, while the_ IVY _binds him_)
Ball of twine I... Hunk of yarn!... Hangman's rope I... Calves' leash!...
Look, my little god I ... He's cutting my paws!... He's choking me!...

TYLTYL
I don't care!... It's your own fault.... Hold your tongue; be quiet; you're
unbearable!...

THE DOG
You're wrong, for all that.... They mean mischief.... Take care, my little
god!... He's closing my mouth!... I can't speak!...

THE IVY (_who has tied up the_ DOG _like a parcel_)
Where shall we put him?... I've muzzled him finely.... He can't utter a
word....

THE OAK
Fasten him tight down there behind my trunk; to my big root.... We will
decide later what had best be done with him....

(_The_ IVY _and the_ POPLAR _carry the_ DOG _behind
the_ OAK'S _trunk_.)

THE OAK
Is that done?... Well, now that we are rid of this inconvenient witness, of
this renegade, let us deliberate in accordance with justice and truth....
I will not conceal from you the deep and painful nature of my emotion....
This is the first time that it is given to us to judge Man and make him
feel our power.... I do not think that, after the harm which he has done
us, after the monstrous injustice which we have suffered, there can remain
the least doubt as to the sentence that awaits him....

ALL THE TREES and ALL THE ANIMALS
No! No! No!... No doubt at all!... Hanging!... Death!... The injustice has
been too great!... The abuse too wicked!... It has lasted too long!...
Crush him!... Eat him!... At once!... Here and now!...

TYLTYL (_to the_ CAT)
What is the matter with them?... Are they displeased?...

THE CAT
Don't be alarmed.... They are a little annoyed because Spring is late....
Leave it to me; I will settle it all....

THE OAK
This unanimity was inevitable.... We must now decide, in order to avoid
reprisals, which form of execution will be the most practical, the easiest,
the quickest and the safest, which will leave the fewest accusing traces
when Man finds the little bodies in the forest....

TYLTYL
What is all this about?... What is he driving at?... I am getting tired of
this.... He has got the Blue Bird; let him hand it over....

THE BULL (_coming forward_)
The most practical and the surest way is a good butt with the horns in the
pit of the stomach.... Shall I go at him?...

THE OAK
Who speaks?...

THE CAT
It's the Bull.

THE COW
It would be better to keep quiet.... I won't meddle with it.... I have all
the grass to browse in the field which you can see down there in the blue
light of the moon.... I have quite enough to do....

THE OX
I also.... However, I agree to everything beforehand....

THE BEECH
I can offer my highest branch to hang them on....

THE IVY
And I the slip-knot....

THE FIR-TREE
And I the four planks for their little coffin....

THE CYPRESS
And I a perpetual grant of a tomb....

THE WILLOW
The simplest way would be to drown them in one of my rivers.... I will take
charge of that....

THE LIME-TREE (_in a conciliatory tone_)
Come, come.... Is it really necessary to go to such extremities?... They
are very young.... We could quite simply prevent them from doing any harm
by keeping them prisoners in an enclosure which I will undertake to form by
planting myself all around....

THE OAK
Who speaks?... I seem to recognise the honeyed accents of the Lime-tree....

THE FIR-TREE
Yes, it's he....

THE OAK
So there is a renegade among us, as among the Animals?... Hitherto we have
only had to deplore the disloyalty of the Fruit-trees; but they are not
real trees....

THE PIG (_rolling his small eyes gluttonously_)
I think we should first eat the little girl.... She ought to be very
tender....

TYLTYL
What's he saying?... Just wait a bit, you...

THE CAT
I don't know what is the matter with them; but things are beginning to look
badly....

THE OAK
Silence!... What we have to decide is which of us shall have the honour of
striking the first blow, who shall ward off from, our tops the greatest
danger that has threatened us since the birth of Man....

THE FIR-TREE
That honour falls to you, our king and our patriarch....

THE OAK
Is that the Fir-tree speaking?... Alas, I am too old!... I am blind and
infirm and my numbed arms no longer obey me.... No, to you, brother, ever
green, ever upright, to you, who have witnessed the birth of most of these
trees, to you be the glory, in default of myself, of the noble act of our
deliverance....

THE FIR-TREE
I thank you, venerable father.... But as I shall, in any case, have the
honour of burying the two victims, I should be afraid of arousing the just
jealousy of my colleagues; and I think that, next to ourselves, the oldest
and the worthiest and the one that owns the best club is the Beech....

THE BEECH
You know I am worm-eaten and my club is no longer to be relied upon.... But
the Elm and the Cypress have powerful weapons....

THE ELM
I should be only too pleased; but I can hardly stand upright.... A mole
twisted my great toe last night....

THE CYPRESS
As for me, I am ready.... But, like my brother, the Fir-tree, I shall have,
if not the privilege of burying them, at least the advantage of weeping
over their tomb.... It would be an unlawful plurality of offices.... Ask
the Poplar....

THE POPLAR
Me?... Are you serious?... Why, my wood is more tender than the flesh of
a child!... And, besides, I don't know what's the matter with me.... I am
shivering with fever.... Just look at my leaves.... I must have caught cold
at sunrise this morning....

THE OAK (_bursting out with indignation_)
You are afraid of Man!... Even those unprotected and unarmed little
children inspire you with the mysterious terror which has always made us
the slaves that we are!... Enough of this! Things being as they are and the
opportunity unequalled, I shall go forth alone, old, crippled, trembling,
blind as I am, against the hereditary enemy!... Where is he?...

(_Groping with his stick, he moves towards_ TYLTYL.)

TYLTYL (_taking his knife from his pocket_)
Is it me he's after, that old one, with his big stick?...

ALL THE TREES (_uttering a cry of alarm at the sight of the knife, they
step in between and hold back the_ OAK)
The knife!... Take care!... The knife!...

THE OAK (_struggling_)
Let me be!... What does it matter?... The knife or the axe!... Who's
holding me back?... What! Are you all here?... What! You all want to....
(_Flinging down his_ _stick_) Well, so be it!... Shame upon
us!... Let the Animals deliver us!...

THE BULL
That's right!... I'll see to It!... And with one blow of the horns!...

THE OX _and_ THE COW (_holding him back by the tail_)
What are you doing?... Don't be a fool!... It's a bad business!... It will
end badly.... It is we who will pay for it.... Do let be.... It's the wild
animals' business....

THE BULL
No, no!... It's my business!... Wait and see!... Look here, hold me back or
there will be an accident!...

TYLTYL (_to_ MYTYL, _who is uttering piercing screams_)
Don't be afraid!... Stand behind me.... I have my knife....

THE COCK
He has plenty of pluck, the little chap!...

TYLTYL
So you've made up your minds, it's me you're going for?...

THE ASS
Why, of course, my little man; you've taken long enough to see it!...

THE PIG
You can say your prayers; your last hour has come.... But don't hide the
little girl.... I want to feast my eyes on her.... I'm going to eat her
first....

TYLTYL
What have I done to you?...

THE SHEEP
Nothing at all, my little man.... Eaten my little brother, my two sisters,
my three uncles, my aunt, my grandpapa and my grandmamma.... Wait, wait,
when you're down, you shall see that I have teeth also....

THE ASS
And I hoofs!...

THE HORSE (_haughtily pawing the ground_)
You shall see what you shall see!... Would you rather that I tore you with
my teeth or knocked you down with a kick?... (_He moves ostentatiously
towards_ TYLTYL, _who faces him and raises his knife. Suddenly the_
HORSE, _seized with panic, turns and rushes away_.) Ah, no!... That's
not fair!... That's against the rules!.... He's defending himself!...

THE COCK (_unable to hide his admiration_)
I don't care, the little chap's full of grit!...

THE PIG (_to the_ BEAR _and the_ WOLF)
Let us all rush on them together.... I will support you from the rear....
We will throw them down and share the little girl when she is on the
ground....

THE WOLF
Divert their attention in front.... I am going to make a turning
movement....

(_He goes round_ TYLTYL, _whom he attacks from behind and half
overthrows_.)

TYLTYL
You brute!... (_He raises himself on one knee brandishing his knife and
doing his best to cover his little sister, who utters yells of distress.
Seeing him half overturned, all the_ ANIMALS _and_ TREES _come up
and try to hit him_. TYLTYL _calls distractedly for assistance_.)
Help! Help!... Tylô! Tylô!... Where is the Cat?... Tylô!... Tylette!
Tylette!... Come! Come!...

THE CAT (_hypocritically, holding aloof_)
I can't come.... I have sprained my paw....

TYLTYL (_warding of the blows and defending himself as best he can_)
Help!... Tylô! Tylô!... I can't hold out!... There are too many of them!...
The Bear! The Pig! The Donkey! The Ass! The Fir-tree! The Beech!... Tylô!
Tylô! Tylô!...

(_Dragging his broken bonds after him, the_ DOG _leaps from behind
the trunk of the_ OAK _and, elbowing his way through_ TREES
_and_ ANIMALS, _flings himself before_ TYLTYL, _whom he defends
furiously_.)

THE DOG (_distributing great bites_)
Here! Here, my little god!... Don't be afraid! Have at them!... I know how
to use my teeth!... Here, there's one for you, Bear, in your fat hams!...
Now then, who wants some more?... Here, that's for the Pig and that's for
the Horse and that's for the Bull's tail!... There, I've torn the Beech's
trousers and the Oak's petticoat!... The Fir-tree's making tracks!... Whew,
it's warm work!...

TYLTYL (_overcome_)
I'm done for!... The Cypress has caught me a great blow on the head....

THE DOG
Ow!... That's the Willow!... He's broken my paw!...

TYLTYL
They're coming back, they're charging down upon us, all together!... This
time, it's the Wolf!...

THE DOG
Wait till I give him one for himself!...

THE WOLF
Fool!... Our brother!... His father drowned your seven puppies!...

THE DOG
Quite right!... And a good thing too!... It was because they looked like
you!...

ALL THE TREES AND ANIMALS
Renegade!... Idiot!... Traitor!... Felon!... Simpleton!... Judas!... Leave
him!... He's a dead man!... Come over to us!...

THE DOG (_drunk with ardour and devotion_)
Never! Never!... I alone against all of you!... Never! Never!... True to
the gods, to the best, to the greatest!... (_To_ TYLTYL) Take care,
here's the Bear!... Beware of the Bull!... I'll jump at his throat....
Ow!... That's a kick.... The Ass has broken two of my teeth....

TYLTYL
I'm done for, Tylô!... Ah!... That was a blow from the Elm.... Look, my
hand's bleeding.... That's the Wolf or the Pig....

THE DOG
Wait, my little god.... Let me kiss you.... There, a good lick.... That
will do you good.... Keep behind me.... They dare not come again.... Yes,
though.... Here they are coming back!... This time, it's serious!.... We
must stand firm!...

TYLTYL (_dropping to the ground_)
No, I can hold out no longer!...

THE DOG (_listening_)
They are coming!... I hear them, I scent them!...

TYLTYL
Where?... Who?...

THE DOG
There! There!... It's Light!... She has found us!... Saved, my little
king!... Kiss me!... We are saved!... Look!... They're alarmed!... They're
retreating!... They're afraid!...

TYLTYL
Light!... Light!... Come quick!... Hurry!... They have rebelled!... They
are all against us!...

_Enter_ LIGHT. _As she comes forward, the dawn rises over the
forest, which becomes light_.

LIGHT
What is it?... What has happened?... But, my poor boy, didn't you know?...
Turn the diamond!... They will return into silence and obscurity; and you
will no longer perceive their hidden feelings....

(TYLTYL _turns the diamond. Immediately, the souls of all the_ TREES
_rush back into the trunks, which close again. The souls of the_
ANIMALS _also disappear; and a peaceful_ COW _and_ SHEEP,
_etc., are seen browsing in the distance. The Forest becomes harmless
once more_, TYLTYL _looks around him in amazement_.)

TYLTYL
Where are they?... What was the matter with them?... Were they mad?...

LIGHT
No, they are always like that; but we do not know it because we do not see
it.... I told you so before; it is dangerous to wake them when I am not
there....

TYLTYL (_wiping his knife_)
Well, but for the Dog and if I had not had my knife!... I would never have
believed that they were so wicked!...

LIGHT
You see that Man is all alone against all in this world....

THE DOG
Are you very badly hurt, my little god?...

TYLTYL
Nothing serious.... As for Mytyl, they have not touched her.... But you, my
dear Tylô?... Your mouth is all over blood and your paw is broken!...

THE DOG
It is not worth speaking of.... It won't show to-morrow.... But it was a
tough fight!...

THE CAT (_appearing from behind a thicket, limping_)
I should think so!... The Ox caught me a blow with his horns in the
stomach.... You can't see the marks, but it's very painful.... And the Oak
broke my paw....

THE DOG
I should like to know which one....

MYTYL (_stroking the_ CAT)
My poor Tylette, did he really?.... Where were you?... I did not see
you....

THE CAT (_hypocritically_)
Mummy dear, I was wounded at the first, while attacking that horrid Pig,
who wanted to eat you.... And then the Oak gave me a great blow which
struck me senseless....

THE DOG (_to the_ CAT, _between his teeth_)
As for you, I want a word with you presently.... It will keep!...

THE CAT (_plaintively, to_ MYTYL)
Mummy dear, he's insulting me.... He wants to hurt me....

MYTYL (_to the_ DOG)
Leave him alone, will you, you ugly beast?...

(_They all go out_.)


CURTAIN




ACT IV




SCENE 1.--_Before the Curtain_.


_The curtain represents beautiful clouds_

(_Enter_ TYLTYL, MYTYL, LIGHT, _the_ DOG, _the_ CAT, BREAD,
FIRE, SUGAR, WATER _and_ MILK.)


LIGHT
I believe we have the Blue Bird this time. I ought to have thought of it
before. But the idea came to me, like a ray from the sky, this morning
only, when I recovered my strengthen the dawn.... We are at the entrance
to the enchanted palaces where all men's Joys, all men's Happinesses are
gathered together in the charge of Fate.

TYLTYL
Are there many of them? Shall we have any? Are they little?

LIGHT
Some are little and some are great; some are coarse and some are delicate;
some are very beautiful and others not so pleasant to look upon.... But the
ugliest were expelled from the garden some time ago and took refuge with
the Miseries. For we must not forget that the Miseries inhabit an adjoining
cave, which communicates with the Garden of Happiness and is separated from
it only by a sort of vapour or fine veil, lifted at every moment by
the winds that blow from the heights of Justice or from the depths of
Eternity.... What we have now to do is to organise ourselves and take
certain precautions. Generally, the Joys are very good; but, still, there
are some of them that are more dangerous and treacherous than the greatest
Miseries.

BREAD
I have an idea! If they are dangerous and treacherous, would it not be
better for us all to wait at the door, so that we may lend a hand to the
children should they be obliged to fly?....

THE DOG
Not at all! Not at all! I mean to go everywhere with my little gods! Let
those who are afraid remain at the door! We have no need (_looking at_
BREAD) of cowards (_looking at the_ CAT) or traitors!...

FIRE
I'm going!... I hear it's great fun!... They dance all the time....

BREAD
Do they have any eating as well?

WATER (_moaning_)
I have never known the smallest Happiness!... I should like to see some at
last!....

LIGHT
Hold your tongues! Who asked your opinions?... This is what I have decided:
the Dog, Bread and Sugar shall go with the children. Water shall stay
outside, because she is too cold, and Fire, because he is too turbulent. I
strongly urge Milk to remain at the door, because he is so impressionable.
As for the Cat, he can do as he likes.....

THE CAT
I shall take the opportunity of calling on the chief Miseries of my
acquaintance, who live next door to the Joys....

TYLTYL
And you, Light? Aren't you coming?

LIGHT
I cannot go into the Joys like this: most of them cannot endure me. But
I have here the thick veil with which I cover myself when I visit
happy people.... (_She unfolds a long veil and wraps herself in it
carefully_.) Not a ray of my you! must startle them, for there are many
Happinesses that are afraid and are not happy.... There... like this, even
the ugliest and coarsest of them will have nothing to fear....

(_The curtain opens and discloses the next Scene_)




SCENE 2.--_The Palace of Happiness_.

_When the curtain of clouds opens, the stage represents, in the forefront
of the palace, a sort of hall formed of tall marble columns, between which
hang heavy purple draperies, supported by golden ropes and concealing all
the background. The architecture suggests the most sensual and sumptuous
moments of the Venetian or Flemish Renascence, as seen in the pictures
of Veronese or Rubens, with garlands, horns of plenty, fringes, vases,
statues, gildings, lavishly distributed on every side. In the middle stands
a massive and marvellous table of jasper and silver-gilt, laden with
candlesticks, glass, gold and silver plate and fabulous viands. Around the
table, the biggest luxuries of the Earth sit eating, drinking, shouting,
singing, tossing and lolling about or sleeping among the haunches of
venison, the miraculous fruits, the overturned jars and ewers. They are
enormously, incredibly fat and red in the face, covered with velvet and
brocade, crowned with gold and pearls and precious stones. Beautiful female
slaves incessantly bring decorated dishes and foaming beverages. Vulgar,
blatantly hilarious music, in which the brasses predominate. The stage is
bathed in a red and heavy light_.

(TYLTYL, MYTYL, _the_ DOG, BREAD _and_ SUGAR _are a little
awestruck at first end crowd round_ LIGHT _in the foreground, to the
right. The_ CAT, _without a word, walks to the background, also to the
right, lifts a dark curtain and disappears_.)

TYLTYL
Who are those fat gentlemen enjoying themselves and eating such a lot of
good things?

LIGHT
They are the biggest Luxuries of the Earth, the ones that can be seen with
the naked eye. It is possible, though not very likely, that the Blue Bird
may have strayed among them for a moment. That is why you must not turn the
diamond yet. For form's sake, we will begin by searching this part of the
hall.

TYLTYL
Can we go up to them?

LIGHT
Certainly. They are not ill-natured, although they are vulgar and usually
rather ill-bred.

MYTYL
What beautiful cakes they have!....

THE DOG
And such game! And sausages! And legs of lamb and calves' liver!... There
is nothing nicer or lovelier in the world than liver!...

BREAD
Except quartern-loaves made of fine white flour! They have splendid
ones!... How lovely they are! How lovely they are!...

SUGAR
I beg your pardon, I beg your pardon, I beg a thousand pardons.... Allow
me, allow me.... I would not like to hurt anybody's feelings; but are you
not forgetting the sweetmeats, which form the glory of that table and
which, if I may say so, surpass in grandeur and magnificence all that
exists in this hall, or perhaps anywhere else?...

TYLTYL
How pleased and happy they look!... And they are shouting! And laughing!
And singing!... I believe they have seen us....

(_A dozen of the biggest_ LUXURIES _have risen from table and now,
holding their stomachs in their hands, advance laboriously towards the_
CHILDREN.)

LIGHT
Have no fear, they are very affable.... They will probably invite you to
dinner.... Do not accept, do not accept anything, lest you should forget
your mission....

TYLTYL
What? Not even a tiny cake? They look so good, so fresh, so well iced with
sugar, covered with candied fruits and brimming over with cream!...

LIGHT
They are dangerous and would break your will. A man should know how to
sacrifice something to the duty he is performing. Refuse politely, but
firmly.

THE BIGGEST OF THE LUXURIES (_holding out his hand to_ TYLTYL)
How do you do, Tyltyl?...

TYLTYL (_surprised_)
Why, do you know me?... Who are you?...

THE LUXURY
I am the biggest of the Luxuries, the Luxury of Being Rich; and I come, in
the name of my brothers, to beg you and your family to honour our endless
repast with your presence. You will find yourself surrounded by all that is
best among the real, big Luxuries of this Earth. Allow me to introduce
to you the chief of them. Here is my son-in-law, the Luxury of Being a
Landowner, who has a stomach shaped like a pear. This is the Luxury of
Satisfied Vanity, who has such a nice, puffy face, (_The_ LUXURY OF
SATISFIED VANITY _gives a patronising nod_.) These are the Luxury of
Drinking when you are not Thirsty and the Luxury of Eating when you are not
Hungry: they are twins and their legs are made of macaroni. (_They bow,
staggering_.) Here are the Luxury of Knowing Nothing, who is as deaf as
a post, and the Luxury of Understanding Nothing, who is as blind as a bat.
Here are the Luxury of Doing Nothing and the Luxury of Sleeping more
than Necessary: their hands are made of bread-crumb and their eyes of
peach-jelly. Lastly, here is Fat Laughter: his mouth is split from ear to
ear and he is irresistible....

(FAT LAUGHTER _bows, writhing and holding his sides_.)

TYLTYL (_pointing to a_ LUXURY _who is standing a little on one side_)
And who is that one, who dares not come up to us and who is turning his
back?...

THE LUXURY OF BEING RICH
Do not ask about him: he is a little awkward and is not fit to be
introduced to children.... (_Seizing_ TYLTYL'S _hands_) But come
along! They are beginning the banquet all over again.... It is the twelfth
time since this morning. We are only waiting for you.... Do you hear all
the revellers calling and shouting for you?... I cannot introduce you to
all of them, there are so many of them.... (_Offering his arm to the two
children_) Allow me to lead you to the two seats of honour....

TYLTYL
No, thank you very much, Mr. Luxury.... I am so sorry.... I can't come for
the moment.... We are in a great hurry, we are looking for the Blue Bird.
You don't happen to know, I suppose, where he is hiding?

THE LUXURY
The Blue Bird?... Wait a bit.... Yes, I remember.... Some one was telling
me about him the other day.... He is a bird, that is not good to eat, I
believe.... At any rate, he has never figured on our table.... That means
that we have a poor opinion of him. But don't trouble; we have much better
things.... You shall share our life, you shall see all that we do....

TYLTYL
What do you do?

THE LUXURY
Why, we occupy ourselves incessantly in doing nothing.... We never have a
moment's rest.... We have to drink, we have to eat, we have to sleep. It's
most engrossing....

TYLTYL
Is it amusing?

THE LUXURY
Why, yes.... It needs must be; it's all there is on this Earth....

LIGHT
Do you think so?...

THE LUXURY (_pointing to_ LIGHT, _aside, to_ TYLTYL)
Who is that ill-bred young person?...

(_During the whole of the preceding conversation a crowd of_ LUXURIES
_of the second order have been busying themselves with the_ DOG,
SUGAR _and_ BREAD _and have dragged them to the orgie_. TYLTYL
_suddenly sees them seated fraternally at the table with their hosts,
eating, drinking and flinging themselves about wildly_.)

TYLTYL
Why, look, Light!... They are sitting at the table!...

LIGHT
Call them back, or this will have a bad end!...

TYLTYL
Tylô!... Here, Tylô!... Come here at once, will you? Do you hear?... And
you too, Sugar and Bread, who told you to leave me?... What are you doing
there, without permission?

BREAD (_speaking with his mouth full_)
Can't you keep a civil tongue in your mouth?...

TYLTYL
What? Is Bread daring to be impertinent?... Why, what's come over you?...
And you, Tylô?... Is that the way you obey? Now then, come here, on your
knees, on your knees!... And look sharp!...

THE DOG (_muttering, from the end of the table_)
When I'm eating, I'm at home to nobody and I hear nothing....

SUGAR (_honey-mouthed_)
Pardon us, we could not possibly leave such charming hosts so abruptly:
they would be offended....

THE LUXURY
You see!... They are setting you an example.... Come, we are waiting for
you.... We won't hear of a refusal.... We shall have to resort to a gentle
violence.... Come, you Luxuries, help me!... Let us push them to the table
by force, so that they may be happy in spite of themselves!... (_All
the_ LUXURIES, _uttering cries of joy and skipping about as nimbly
as they are able, drag the_ CHILDREN, _who struggle, while_ FAT
LAUGHTER _seizes_ LIGHT _vigorously round the waist_.)

LIGHT
Turn the diamond, it is time!...

(TYLTYL _obeys_ LIGHT'S _order. Forthwith, the stage is lit up with
an ineffably pure, divinely roseate, harmonious and ethereal brightness.
The heavy ornaments in the foreground, the thick red hangings become
unfastened and disappear, revealing an immense and magnificent hall, a
sort of cathedral of gladness and serenity, tall, innocent and almost
transparent, whose endless fabric rests upon innumerous long and slender,
limpid and blissful columns, suggesting the architecture of the Palladian
churches or certain drawings by Carpaccio, notably the "Presentation of the
Virgin" in the Uffizi Gallery. The table of the orgie melts away without
leaving a trace; the velvets, the brocades, the garlands of the_
LUXURIES _rise before the luminous gust that invades the temple tear
asunder and fall, together with the grinning masks, at the feet of the
astounded revellers. These become visibly deflated, like burst bladders,
exchange glances, blink their eyes in the unknown rays that hurt them;
and, seeing themselves at last as they really are, that is to say, naked,
hideous, flabby and lamentable, they begin to utter yells of shame and
dismay, amid which those of_ FAT LAUGHTER _are clearly distinguishable
above all the rest. The_ LUXURY OF UNDERSTANDING NOTHING _alone
remains perfectly calm, while his friends rush about madly, trying to flee,
to hide themselves in corners which they hope to find dark. But there is
not a shadow left in the dazzling room. And so the majority, in their
despair, decide to pass through the threatening curtain which, in an angle
on the right, closes the vault of the Cave of Miseries. Each time that one
of them, in his panic, raises a skirt of the curtain, a storm of oaths,
imprecations and maledictions is heard to issue from the hollow depths of
the cave. As for the_ DOG, BREAD _and_ SUGAR, _they hang their
heads, join the group of the_ CHILDREN _and hide behind them very
sheepishly_.)

TYLTYL (_watching the_ LUXURIES _flying_)
Goodness, how ugly they are!... Where are they going?...

LIGHT
I really believe that they have lost their heads.... They are going to take
refuge with the Miseries, where I very much fear that they will be kept for
good....

TYLTYL (_looking around him, wonder-struck_)
Oh, what a beautiful hall, what a beautiful hall!... Where are we?...

LIGHT
We have not moved: it is your eyes that see differently.... We now behold
the truth of things; and we shall perceive the soul of the Joys that endure
the brightness of the diamond.

TYLTYL
How beautiful it is!... And what lovely weather!... It is just like
midsummer.... Hullo! It looks as though people were coming to talk to
us....

(_The halls begin to fill with angel forms that seem to be emerging from
a long slumber and glide harmoniously between the columns. They are clad
in shimmering dresses, of soft and subtle shades; rose-awakening,
water's-smile, amber-dew, blue-of-dawn, etc_.)

LIGHT
Here come some amiable and curious Joys who will direct us....

TYLTYL
Do you know them?...

LIGHT
Yes, I know them all; I often come to them, without their knowing who I
am....

TYLTYL
Oh, what a lot of them there are!... They are crowding from every side!

LIGHT
There were many more of them once. The Luxuries have done them great harm.

TYLTYL
No matter, there are a good few of them left....

LIGHT
You will see plenty of others, as the influence of the diamond spreads
through the halls.... There are many more Happinesses on Earth than people
think; but the generality of men do not discover them....

TYLTYL
Here are some little ones: let us run and meet them....

LIGHT
It is unnecessary: those which interest us will pass this way. We have no
time to make the acquaintance of all the rest....

(_A troop of little_ HAPPINESSES, _frisking and bursting with
laughter, run up from the back of the halls and dance round the_
CHILDREN _in a ring_.)

TYLTYL
How pretty, how very pretty they are!... Where do they come from, who are
they?...

LIGHT
They are the Children's Happinesses....

TYLTYL
Can one speak to them?

LIGHT
It would be no use. They sing, they dance, they laugh, but they do not talk
yet....

TYLTYL (_skipping about_)
How do you do? How do you do?... Oh, look at that fat one laughing!... What
pretty cheeks they have, what pretty frocks they have!... Are they all rich
here?...

LIGHT
Why, no, here, as everywhere, there are many more poor than rich....

TYLTYL
Where are the poor ones?...

LIGHT
You can't distinguish them.... A Child's Happiness is always arrayed in all
that is most beautiful in Heaven and upon Earth.

TYLTYL (_unable to restrain himself_)
I should like to dance with them....

LIGHT
It is absolutely impossible, we have no time.... I see that they have not
the Blue Bird.... Besides, they are in a hurry: you see, they have already
passed.... They too have no time to waste, for childhood is very short....

(_Another troop of_ HAPPINESSES, _a little taller than the last,
rush into the hall, singing at the top of their voice, "There they are!
There they are! They see us! They see us!" and, dance a merry fling around
the_ CHILDREN, _at the end of which the one who appears to be
the chief of the little band goes up to_ TYLTYL _with hand
outstretched_.)

THE HAPPINESS
How do you do, Tyltyl?...

TYLTYL
Another one who knows me!... (_To_ LIGHT) I am getting known wherever
I go!... (_To the_ HAPPINESS) Who are you?...

THE HAPPINESS
Don't you recognise me?... I'll wager that you don't recognise any one
here!

TYLTYL (_a little embarrassed_)
Why, no.... I don't know.... I don't remember seeing any of you.

THE HAPPINESS
There, do you hear?... I was sure of it!... He has never seen us!...

(_All the other_ HAPPINESSES _burst out laughing_) Why, my dear
Tyltyl, we are the only things you do know!... We are always around you!...
We eat, drink, wake up, breathe and live with you!...

TYLTYL
Oh, yes, just so, I know, I remember.... But I should like to know what
your names are....

THE HAPPINESS
I can see that you know nothing.... I am the chief of the Happinesses of
your home; and all these are the other Happinesses that live there....

TYLTYL
Then there are Happinesses in my home?

(_All the_ HAPPINESSES _burst out laughing_.)

THE HAPPINESS
You heard him!... Are there Happinesses in his home!... Why, you little
wretch, it is crammed with Happinesses in every nook and cranny!... We
laugh, we sing, we create enough joy to knock down the walls and lift the
roof; but, do what we may, you see nothing and you hear nothing.... I hope
that, in future, you will be a little more sensible.... Meantime, you shall
shake hands with the more noteworthy of us.... Then, when you reach home
again, you will recognise them more easily and, at the end of a fine day,
you will know how to encourage them with a smile, to thank them with a
pleasant word, for they really do all they can to make your life easy and
delightful.... Let me introduce myself first: the Happiness of Being Well,
at your service.... I am not the prettiest, but I am the most important.
Will you know me again?... This is the Happiness of Pure Air, who is almost
transparent.... Here is the Happiness of Loving one's Parents, who is clad
in grey and always a little sad, because no one ever looks at him.... Here
are the Happiness of the Blue Sky, who, of course, is dressed in blue, and
the Happiness of the Forest, who, also of course, is clad in green: you
will see him every time you go to the window.... Here, again, is the
good Happiness of Sunny Hours, who is diamond-coloured, and this is the
Happiness of Spring, who is bright emerald....

TYLTYL
And are you as fine as that every day?

THE HAPPINESS OF BEING WELL
Why, yes, it is Sunday every day, in every house, when people open their
eyes.... And then, when evening comes, here is the Happiness of the
Sunsets, who is grander than all the kings in the world and who is followed
by the Happiness of Seeing the Stars Rise, who is gilded like a god of
old.... Then, when the weather breaks, here are the Happiness of the Rain,
who is covered with pearls, and the Happiness of the Winter Fire, who opens
his beautiful purple mantle to frozen hands.... And I have not mentioned
the best among us, because he is nearly a brother of the great limpid
Joys whom you will see presently: his name is the Happiness of Innocent
Thoughts, and he is the brightest of as all.... And then here are.... But
really there are too many of them!... We should never have done; and I must
first send word to the Great Joys, who are right at the back, near the
gates of Heaven, and who have not yet heard of your arrival.... I will send
the Happiness of Running Barefoot in the Dew, who is the nimblest of us....
(_To the_ HAPPINESS OF RUNNING BAREFOOT IN THE DEW, _who comes
forward capering_) Off you go!...

LIGHT (_to_ TYLTYL)
In the meantime, you might enquire about the Blue Bird. It is just possible
that the chief Happiness of your home knows where he is....

TYLTYL
Where Is he?...

THE HAPPINESS
He doesn't know where the Blue Bird is!... (_All the_ HAPPINESSES OF
THE HOME _burst out laughing_.)

TYLTYL (_vexed_)
No, I do not know.... There's nothing to laugh at.... (_Fresh bursts of
laughter_.)

THE HAPPINESS
Come, don't be angry... and let us be serious.... He doesn't know: well,
what do you expect? He is no more absurd than the majority of men.... But
little Happiness of Running Barefoot in the Dew has told the Great Joys and
they are coming towards us....

(_Tall and beautiful angelic figures, clad in shimmering dresses, come
slowly forward_.)

TYLTYL
How beautiful they are!... Why are they not laughing?... Are they not
happy?...

LIGHT
It is not when one laughs that one is really happy....

TYLTYL
Who are they?...

THE HAPPINESS
They are the Great Joys....

TYLTYL
Do you know their names?...

THE HAPPINESS
Of course; we often play with them.... Here, first of all, before the
others, is the Great Joy of Being Just, who smiles each time an injustice
is repaired. I am too young: I have never seen her smile yet. Behind her is
the Joy of Being Good, who is the happiest, but the saddest; and it is very
difficult to keep her from going to the Miseries, whom she would like to
console; for, if she left us, we should be almost as miserable as the
Miseries themselves. On the right is the Joy of Fame, next to the Joy of
Thinking. After her comes the Joy of Understanding, who is always looking
for her brother, the Luxury of Understanding Nothing....

TYLTYL
But I have seen her brother!... He went to the Miseries with the Big
Luxuries....

THE HAPPINESS
I was certain of it.... He has turned out badly; keeping evil company has
corrupted him entirely.... But do not speak of it to his sister. She would
want to go and look for him and we should lose one of our most beautiful
Joys.... Here, among the greatest Joys, is the Joy of Seeing what is
Beautiful, who daily adds a few rays to the light that reigns amongst
us....

TYLTYL
And there, far away, far away, in the golden clouds, the one whom I can
hardly see when I stand as high as I can on tip-toe?...

THE HAPPINESS
That is the Great Joy of Loving.... But, do what you will, you are ever so
much too small to see her altogether....

TYLTYL
And over there, right at the back, those who are veiled and who do not come
near?...

THE HAPPINESS
Those are the Joys whom men do not yet know....

TYLTYL
What do the others want with us?... Why are they standing aside?...

THE HAPPINESS
It is before a new Joy who is arriving, perhaps the purest that we have
here....

TYLTYL
Who is it?

THE HAPPINESS
Don't you recognise her yet?... But take a better look at her, open your
two eyes down to the very heart of your soul!... She has seen you, she
has seen you!... She runs up to you, holding out her arms!... It is your
mother's Joy, it is the peerless Joy of Maternal Love!...

(_The other_ JOYS, _who have run up from every side, acclaim the_
JOY OF MATERNAL LOVE _with their cheers and then fall back before her in
silence_.)

THE JOY OF MATERNAL LOVE
Tyltyl! And Mytyl!... What, do I find you here?... I never expected it!...
I was very lonely at home; and here are you two climbing to that Heaven
where the souls of all mothers beam with joy!... But first kisses, heaps
and heaps of kisses!... Into my arms, the two of you; there is nothing on
earth that gives greater happiness!... Tyltyl, aren't you laughing?... Nor
you either, Mytyl?... Don't you know your mother's love when you see it?...
Why, look at me: are these not my eyes, my lips, my arms?...

TYLTYL
Yes, yes, I recognise them, but I did not know.... You are like Mummy, but
you are much prettier....

MATERNAL LOVE
Why, of course, I have stopped growing old.... And every day brings me
fresh strength and youth and happiness.... Each of your smiles makes me
younger by a year.... At home, that does not show; but here everything is
seen and it is the truth....

TYLTYL (_wonder-struck, gazing at her and kissing her by turns_)
And that beautiful dress of yours: what is it made of?... Is it silk,
silver or pearls?...

MATERNAL LOVE
No, it is made of kisses and caresses and loving looks.... Each kiss you
give me adds a ray of moon-light or sunshine to it....

TYLTYL
How funny, I should never have thought that you were so rich!... Where used
you to hide it?... Was it in the cupboard of which Daddy has the key?...

MATERNAL LOVE
No, no, I always wear it, but people do not see it, because people see
nothing when their eyes are closed.... All mothers are rich when they love
their children.... There are no poor mothers, no ugly ones, no old ones.
Their love is always the most beautiful of the Joys.... And, when they seem
most sad, it needs but a kiss which they receive or give to turn all their
tears into stars in the depths of their eyes....

TYLTYL (_looking at her with astonishment_)
Why, yes, it's true, your eyes are filled with stars.... And they are
really your eyes, only they are much more beautiful.... And this is your
hand too, with the little ring on it.... It even has the burn which you
gave it one evening when lighting the lamp.... But it is much whiter; and
how delicate the skin is!... There seems to be light flowing through it....
Doesn't it do any work like the one at home?...

MATERNAL LOVE
Why yes, it is the very same: did you never see that it becomes quite white
and fills with light the moment it fondles you?...

TYLTYL
It's wonderful, Mummy: you have the same voice also; but you speak much
better than you do at home....

MATERNAL LOVE
At home, one has too much to do and there is no time.... But what one does
not say one hears all the same.... Now that you have seen me, will you know
me again, in my torn dress, when you go back to the cottage tomorrow?...

TYLTYL
I don't want to go back.... As you are here, I want to stay also, as long
as you remain....

MATERNAL LOVE
But it's just the same thing: I am down below, we are all down below....
You have come up here only to realise and to learn, once and for all, how
to see me when you see me down below.... Do you understand, Tyltyl dear?...
You believe yourself in Heaven; but Heaven is wherever you and I kiss each
other.... There are not two mothers; and you have no other.... Every child
has only one; and it is always the same one and always the most beautiful;
but you have to know her and to know how to look.... But how did you manage
to come up here and to find a road for which men have been seeking ever
since they began to dwell upon the Earth?...

TYLTYL (_pointing to_ LIGHT, _who, discreetly, has drawn a little to one
side_)
She brought me....

MATERNAL LOVE
Who is she?...

TYLTYL
Light....

MATERNAL LOVE
I have never seen her.... I was told that she was very fond of you both and
very kind.... But why does she hide herself?... Does she never show her
face?...

TYLTYL
Oh, yes, but she is afraid that the Joys might be frightened if they saw
too clearly....

MATERNAL LOVE
But doesn't she know that we are waiting only for her! (_Calling the
other_ GREAT JOYS) Come, come, sisters! Come quickly, all of you! Light
has come to visit us at last!...

(_A stir among the_ GREAT JOYS, _who draw nearer, with cries of
"Light is here!... Light! Light!_...")

THE JOY OF UNDERSTANDING (_thrusting all the others aside, to come and
embrace_ LIGHT)
You are Light and we did not know it!... And we have been waiting for you
for years and years and years!... Do you recognise me?... I am the Joy of
Understanding, who have been seeking you for so long!... We are very happy,
but we cannot see beyond ourselves....

THE JOY OF BEING JUST (_embracing_ LIGHT _in her turn_)
Do you recognise me?... I am the Joy of Being Just, who have besought you
so long.... We are very happy, but we cannot see beyond our shadows.

THE JOY OF SEEING WHAT IS BEAUTIFUL (_also embracing_ LIGHT)
Do you recognise me?... I am the Joy of Seeing what is Beautiful, who have
loved you so dearly.... We are very happy, but we cannot see beyond our
dreams....

THE JOY OF UNDERSTANDING
Come, sister, come, do not keep us waiting any longer.... We are strong
enough, we are pure enough.... Put aside those veils which still conceal
from us the last truths and the last happinesses.... See, all my sisters
are kneeling at your feet.... You are our queen and our reward.

LIGHT (_drawing her veils closer_)
Sisters, my beautiful sisters, I am obeying my Master.... The hour is not
yet come; it will strike, perhaps, and I shall return without fear and
without shadow.... Farewell, rise and let us kiss once more, like sisters
lost and found, while waiting for the day that will soon appear....

MATERNAL LOVE (_embracing_ LIGHT)
You have been very good to my poor little ones....

LIGHT
I shall always be good to those who love one another....

THE JOY OF UNDERSTANDING (_going up to_ LIGHT)
Let the last kiss be laid upon my forehead....

(_They exchange a long kiss; and, when they separate and raise their
heads, tears are seen to stand in their eyes_.)

TYLTYL (_surprised_)
Why are you crying?... (_Looking at the other_ JOYS) I say! You're
crying too!... But why have all of you tears in your eyes?...

LIGHT
Hush, dear....


CURTAIN




ACT V




SCENE I.--_Before the Curtain_.


_Enter_ TYLTYL, MYTYL, LIGHT, _the_ DOG, _the_ CAT, BREAD,
FIRE, SUGAR, WATER _and_ MILK.

LIGHT
I have received a note from the Fairy Bérylune telling me that the Blue
Bird is probably here.

TYLTYL
Where?...

LIGHT
Here, in the graveyard behind that wall.... It appears that one of the dead
in the graveyard is hiding it in his tomb.... We must find out which one it
is.... We shall have to pass them under review....

TYLTYL
Under review?... How is that done?...

LIGHT
It is very simple: at midnight, so as not to disturb them too greatly, you
will turn the diamond. We shall see them come out of the ground; or else we
shall see those who do not come out lying in their tombs....

TYLTYL
Will they not be angry?...

LIGHT
Not at all; they will not even know.... They do not like being disturbed,
but, as it is their custom, in any case, to come out at midnight, that will
not inconvenience them....

TYLTYL
Why are Bread, Sugar and Milk so pale and why do they say nothing?...

MILK (_staggering_)
I feel I am going to turn....

LIGHT (_aside to TYLTYL_)
Do not mind them.... They are afraid of the dead....

FIRE (_frisking about_)
I'm not afraid of them!... I am used to burning them.... Time was when I
burnt them all; that was much more amusing than nowadays ...

TYLTYL
And why Is Tylô trembling?... Is he afraid, too?...

THE DOG
I?... I'm not trembling!... I am never afraid; but if you went away, I
should go too....

TYLTYL
And has the Cat nothing to say?...

THE CAT (_mysteriously_)
I know what's what....

TYLTYL (_to LIGHT_)
Are you coming with us?...

LIGHT
No; it is better that I should remain at the gate of the graveyard with the
Things and the Animals.... Some of them would be too frightened and I fear
that the others would misbehave.... Fire, in particular, would want to burn
the dead, as of old; and that is no longer done.... I shall leave you alone
with Mytyl....

TYLTYL
And may not Tylô stay with us?...

THE DOG
Yes, yes, I shall stay; I shall stay here I... I want to stay with my
little god!...

LIGHT
It is impossible.... The Fairy gave formal orders; besides, there is
nothing to fear....

THE DOG
Very well, very well, it makes no difference. If they are vicious, my
little god, all you have to do Is this ... (_he whistles_) and you
shall see.... It will be just as in the forest: Wow! Wow! Wow!...

LIGHT
Come, good-bye, dear children ... I shall not be far away.... (_She
kisses the_ CHILDREN.) Those who love me and whom I love always find me
again.... (_To the_ THINGS _and the_ ANIMALS) This way, all of
you....

(_She goes out with the_ THINGS _and the_ ANIMALS. _The_
CHILDREN _remain alone in the middle of the stage. The curtain, opens and
discloses the next scene_.)




SCENE 2.--_The Graveyard_.

_It is night. The moon is shining on a country graveyard.. Numerous
tombstones, grassy mounds, wooden crosses, stone slabs, etc_. TYLTYL
_and_ MYTYL _are standing by a short stone pillar_.

MYTYL
I am frightened!...

TYLTYL (_not too much at his ease_)
I am never frightened....

MYTYL
I say, are the dead wicked?...

TYLTYL
Why, no, they're not alive!...

MYTYL
Have you ever seen one?...

TYLTYL
Yes, once, long ago, when I was very young....

MYTYL
What was it like, say?...

TYLTYL
Quite white, very still and very cold and it didn't talk....

MYTYL
Are we going to see them, say?...

TYLTYL
Why, of course, Light said so....

MYTYL
Where are they?...

TYLTYL
Here, under the grass or under those big stones....

MYTYL
Are they there all the year round?...

TYLTYL
Yes.

MYTYL (_pointing to the slabs_)
Are those the doors of their houses?...

TYLTYL
Yes.

MYTYL
Do they go out when it's fine?...

TYLTYL
They can only go out at night....

MYTYL
Why?...

TYLTYL
Because they are in their shirts....

MYTYL
Do they go out also when it rains?...

TYLTYL
When it rains, they stay at home....

MYTYL
Is it nice in their homes, say?...

TYLTYL
They say it's very cramped....

MYTYL
Have they any little children?...

TYLTYL
Why, yes; they have all those that die....

MYTYL
And what do they live on?...

TYLTYL
They eat roots....

MYTYL
Shall we see them?...

TYLTYL
Of course; we see everything when I turn the diamond.

MYTYL
And what will they say?...

TYLTYL
They will say nothing, as they don't talk....

MYTYL
Why don't they talk?...

TYLTYL
Because they have nothing to say....

MYTYL
Why have they nothing to say?...

TYLTYL
You're a nuisance....

(_A pause_)

MYTYL
When will you turn the diamond?

TYLTYL
You heard Light say that I was to wait until midnight, because that
disturbs them less....

MYTYL
Why does that disturb them less?...

TYLTYL
Because that is when they go out to take the air....

MYTYL
Is it not midnight yet?...

TYLTYL
Do you see the church clock?...

MYTYL
Yes, I can even see the small hand....

TYLTYL
Well, midnight is just going to strike.... There!... Do you hear?...

(_The clock strikes twelve_)

MYTYL
I want to go away!...

TYLTYL
Not now.... I am going to turn the diamond....

MYTYL
No, no!... Don't!... I want to go away!... I am so frightened, little
brother!... I am terribly frightened!...

TYLTYL
But there is no danger....

MYTYL
I don't want to see the dead!... I don't want to see them!...

TYLTYL
Very well, you shall not see them; shut your eyes....

MYTYL (_clinging to_ TYLTYL'S _clothes_)
Tyltyl, I can't stay!... No, I can't possibly!... They are going to come
out of the ground!...

TYLTYL
Don't tremble like that.... They will only come out for a moment....

MYTYL
But you're trembling, too!... They will be awful!...

TYLTYL
It is time, the hour is passing....

(TYLTYL _turns the diamond. A terrifying minute of silence and
motionlessness elapses, after which, slowly, the crosses totter, the mounds
open, the slabs rise up...._)

MYTYL (_cowering against_ TYLTYL)
They are coming out!... They are there!...

(_Then, from all the gaping tombs, there rises gradually an efflorescence
at first frail and timid, like steam; then white and virginal and more and
more tufty, more and more tall and plentiful and marvellous. Little by
little, irresistibly, invading all things, it transforms the graveyard into
a sort of fairy-like and nuptial garden, over which rise the first rays of
the dawn. The dew glitters, the flowers open their blooms, the wind murmurs
in the leaves, the bees hum, the birds wake and flood the air with
the first raptures of their hymns to the sun and to life. Stunned and
dazzled,_ TYLTYL _and_ MYTYL, _holding each other by the hand,
take a few steps among the flowers while they seek for the trace of the
tombs_.)

MYTYL (_looking in the grass_)
Where are the dead?....

TYLTYL (_looking also_)
There are no dead....


CURTAIN




SCENE 3.--_The Kingdom of the Future_.

_The immense halls of the Azure Palace, where the children wait that
are yet to be born. Infinite perspectives of sapphire columns supporting
turquoise vaults. Everything, from the light and the lapis-lazuli
flagstones to the shimmering background into which the last arches run
and disappear, everything, down to the smallest objects, is of an unreal,
intense, fairy-like blue. Only the plinths and capitals of the columns,
the key-stones, a few seats and circular benches are of white marble or
alabaster. To the right, between the columns, are great opalescent doors.
These doors, which_ TIME _will throw back towards the end of the
scene, open upon actual life and the quays of the Dawn. Everywhere,
harmoniously peopling the hall, is a crowd of_ CHILDREN _robed in
long azure garments. Some are playing, others strolling to and fro, others
talking or dreaming; many are asleep, many also are working, between the
colonnades, at future inventions; and their tools, their instruments, the
apparatus which they are constructing, the plants, flowers and fruit which
they are cultivating or plucking are of the same supernatural and luminous
blue as the general atmosphere of the Palace. Figures of a taller stature,
clad in a paler and more diaphanous azure, figures of a sovereign and
silent beauty move among the_ CHILDREN _and would seem to be angels.

_Enter on the left, as though by stealth, gliding between the columns in
the foreground_, TYLTYL, MYTYL _and_ LIGHT. Their arrival causes
a certain movement among the_ BLUE CHILDREN, _who come running up on
every hand, form a group around the unwonted visitors and gaze upon them
with curiosity_.

MYTYL
Where are Sugar, the Cat and Bread?...

LIGHT
They cannot enter here; they would know the future and would not obey....

TYLTYL
And the Dog?...

LIGHT
It is not well, either, that he should know what awaits him in the course
of the ages....I have locked them all up in the vaults of the church....

TYLTYL
Where are we?...

LIGHT
We are in the Kingdom of the Future, in the midst of the children who are
not yet born. As the diamond allows us to see clearly in this region which
is hidden from men, we shall very probably find the Blue Bird here....

TYLTYL
Certainly the bird will be blue, since everything here is
blue....(_Looking all around him_.) Heaven, how beautiful it all
is!...

LIGHT
Look at the children running up....

TYLTYL
Are they angry?...

LIGHT
Not at all....You can see, they are smiling, but they are surprised....

THE BLUE CHILDREN (_running up in ever-increasing numbers_)
Live children!...Come and look at the little live children!...

TYLTYL
Why do they call us the little live children?

LIGHT
Because they themselves are not alive yet....

TYLTYL
What are they doing, then?...

LIGHT
They are awaiting the hour of their birth....

TYLTYL
The hour of their birth?...

LIGHT
Yes; it is from here that all the children come who are born upon our
earth. Each awaits his day.... When the fathers and mothers want children,
the great doors which you see there, on the right, are opened and the
little ones go down....

TYLTYL
What a, lot there are! What a lot there are!...

LIGHT
There are many more.... We do not see them all.... There are thirty
thousand halls like this, all full of them.... Just think, there are enough
to last to the end of the world!... No one could count them....

TYLTYL
And those tall blue persons, who are they?...

LIGHT
No one exactly knows.... They are believed to be guardians.... I have heard
that they will come upon earth after men.... But we are not allowed to ask
them....

TYLTYL
Why not?...

LIGHT
Because it is the earth's secret....

TYLTYL
And may one talk to the others, the little ones?...

LIGHT
Certainly; you must make friends.... Look, there is one who is more curious
than the rest.... Go up to him, speak to him....

TYLTYL
What shall I say to him?...

LIGHT
Whatever you like, as you would to a little playfellow....

TYLTYL
Can I shake hands with him?...

LIGHT
Of course, he won't hurt you.... But come, don't look so constrained.... I
will leave you alone, you will be more at ease by yourselves.... Besides, I
want to speak to the tall blue person....

TYLTYL (_going up to the_ BLUE CHILD _and holding out his hand_)
How do you do?... (_Touching the_ CHILD'S _blue dress with his
finger_.) What's that?...

THE CHILD (_gravely touching_ TYLTYL'S _hat_)
And that?...

TYLTYL
That?... That is my hat.... Have you no hat?...

THE CHILD
No; what is it for?...

TYLTYL
It's to say How-do-you-do with.... And then for when it rains or when it's
cold....

THE CHILD
What does that mean, when it's cold?...

TYLTYL
When you shiver like this: brrrr! brrrr!... When you blow into your hands
and go like this with your arms....

(_He vigorously beats his arms across his chest_.)

THE CHILD
Is it cold on earth?...

TYLTYL
Yes, sometimes, in the winter, when there is no fire....

THE CHILD
Why is there no fire?...

TYLTYL
Because it's expensive and it costs money to buy wood....

THE CHILD
What is money?...

TYLTYL
It's what you pay with....

THE CHILD
Oh....

TYLTYL
Some people have money and others have none....

THE CHILD
Why not?...

TYLTYL
Because they are not rich.... Are you rich?... How old are you?...

THE CHILD
I am going to be born soon.... I shall be born in twelve years.... Is it
nice to be born?...

TYLTYL
Oh, yes!... It's great fun!...

THE CHILD
How did you manage?...

TYLTYL
I can't remember.... It is so long ago!...

THE CHILD
They say it's lovely, the earth and the live people!...

TYLTYL
Yes, it's not bad.... There are birds and cakes and toys.... Some have them
all; but those who have none can look at them....

THE CHILD
They tell us that the mothers stand waiting at the door.... They are good,
aren't they?...

TYLTYL
Oh, yes!... They are better than anything in the world!... And the grannies
too; but they die too soon....

THE CHILD
They die?... What is that?...

TYLTYL
They go away one evening and do not come back....

THE CHILD
Why?...

TYLTYL
How can one tell?... Perhaps because they feel sad....

THE CHILD
Has yours gone?...

TYLTYL
My grandmamma?...

THE CHILD
Your mamma or your grandmamma, I don't know....

TYLTYL
Oh, but it's not the same thing!... The grannies go first; that's sad
enough.... Mine was very kind to me....

THE CHILD
What is the matter with your eyes?.... Are they making pearls?...

TYLTYL
No; it's not pearls....

THE CHILD
What is it, then?...

TYLTYL
It's nothing; it's all that blue, which dazzles me a little....

THE CHILD
What is that called?...

TYLTYL
What?...

THE CHILD
There, that, falling down....

TYLTYL
Nothing, it is a little water....

THE CHILD
Does it come from the eyes?...

TYLTYL
Yes, sometimes, when one cries....

THE CHILD
What does that mean, crying?...

TYLTYL
I have not been crying; it is the fault of that blue... But if I had cried,
it would be the same thing....

THE CHILD
Does one often cry?...

TYLTYL
Not little boys, but little girls do.... Don't you cry here?...

THE CHILD
No; I don't know how....

TYLTYL
Well, you will learn.... What are you playing with, those great blue
wings?...

THE CHILD
These?... That's for the invention which I shall make on earth....

TYLTYL
What invention?... Have you invented something?...

THE CHILD
Why, yes; haven't you heard?... When I am on earth, I shall have to invent
the thing that gives happiness....

TYLTYL
Is it good to eat?... Does it make a noise?...

THE CHILD
No; you hear nothing....

TYLTYL
That's a pity....

THE CHILD
I work at it every day.... It is almost finished.... Would you like to see
it?...

TYLTYL
Very much.... Where is it?...

THE CHILD
There, you can see it from here, between those two columns....

ANOTHER BLUE CHILD (_coming up to_ TYLTYL _and plucking his sleeve_)
Would you like to see mine, say?...

TYLTYL
Yes, what is it?...

THE SECOND CHILD
The thirty-three remedies for prolonging life.... There, in those blue
phials....

A THIRD CHILD (_stepping out from the crowd_)
I will show you a light which nobody knows of!... (_He lights himself
up entirely with an extraordinary flame_.) It's rather curious, isn't
it?...

A FOURTH CHILD (_pulling_ TYLTYL'S _arm_)
Do come and look at my machine which flies in the air like a bird without
wings!...

A FIFTH CHILD
No, no; mine first! It discovers the treasures hidden in the moon!...

THE BLUE CHILDREN (_crowding round_ TYLTYL _and_ MYTYL _and all crying
together_)
No, no, come and see mine!... No, mine is much finer!... Mine is a
wonderful invention!... Mine is made of sugar!... His is no good!... He
stole the idea from me!...

(_Amid these disordered exclamations, the_ LIVE CHILDREN _are
dragged towards the blue workshops, where each of the inventors sets his
ideal machine going. There ensues a cerulean whirl of wheels, disks,
flywheels, driving-wheels, pulleys, straps and strange and as yet unnamed
objects shrouded in the bluey mists of the unreal. A crowd of odd and
mysterious mechanisms dart forth and hover under the vaults or crawl at the
foot of the columns, while_ CHILDREN _unfold charts and plans, open
books, uncover azure statues and bring enormous flowers and gigantic fruits
that seem formed of sapphires and turquoises_.)

A LITTLE BLUE CHILD (_bending under the weight of some colossal blue
daisies_)
Look at my flowers!...

TYLTYL
What are they?... I don't know them....

THE LITTLE BLUE CHILD
They are daisies!...

TYLTYL
Impossible!... They are as big as tables!...

THE LITTLE BLUE CHILD
And they smell so good!...

TYLTYL (_smelling them_)
Wonderful!...

THE LITTLE BLUE CHILD
They will grow like that when I am on earth....

TYLTYL
When will that be?...

THE LITTLE BLUE CHILD
In fifty-three years, four months and nine days....

(_Two_ BLUE CHILDREN _arrive, carrying, like a lustre hanging on a
pole, an incredible bunch of grapes, each larger than a pear_.)

ONE OF THE CHILDREN (_carrying the grapes_)
What do you say to my fruits?...

TYLTYL
A bunch of pears!...

THE CHILD
No, they are grapes!... They will all be like that when I am thirty.... I
have found the way....

ANOTHER CHILD (_staggering under a basket of blue apples the size of
melons_)
And mine!... Look at my apples!...

TYLTYL
But those are melons!...

THE CHILD
No, no!... They are my apples and they are not the finest at that!... They
will all be alike when I am alive.... I have discovered the system!...

ANOTHER CHILD (_wheeling a blue barrow with blue melons bigger than
pumpkins_)
What do you say to my little melons?...

TYLTYL
But they are pumpkins!...

THE CHILD WITH THE MELONS
When I come on earth, the melons will be splendid!... I shall be the
gardener of the King of the Three Planets....

TYLTYL
The King of the Three Planets?

THE CHILD WITH THE MELONS
The great king who for thirty-five years will bring happiness to the Earth,
Mars and the Moon.... You can see him from here....

TYLTYL
Where is he?...

THE CHILD WITH THE MELONS
There, the little boy sleeping at the foot of that column.

TYLTYL
On the left?...

THE CHILD WITH THE MELONS
No, on the right.... The one on the left is the child who will bring pure
joy to the globe....

TYLTYL
How?...

THE CHILD (_the one that first talked to_ TYLTYL)
By means of ideas which people have not yet had....

TYLTYL
And the other, that little fat one with his fingers to his nose, what will
he do?...

THE CHILD
He is to discover the fire that will warm the earth when the sun is paler
than now....

TYLTYL
And the two holding each other by the hand and always kissing; are they
brother and sister?...

THE CHILD
No; they are very comical....They are the Lovers....

TYLTYL
What is that?...

THE CHILD
I don't know.... Time calls them that, to make fun of them.... They spend
the day looking into each other's eyes, kissing and bidding each other
farewell....

TYLTYL
Why?...

THE CHILD
It seems that they will not be able to leave together...

TYLTYL
And the little pink one, who looks so serious and is sucking his thumb,
what is he?...

THE CHILD
It appears that he is to wipe out injustice from the earth....

TYLTYL
Oh!...

THE CHILD
They say it's a tremendous work....

TYLTYL
And the little red-haired one, who walks as if he did not see where he was
going, is he blind?...

THE CHILD
Not yet; but he will become so....Look at him well; it seems that he is to
conquer Death....

TYLTYL
What does that mean?...

THE CHILD
I don't exactly know; but they say it's a great thing....

TYLTYL (_pointing to a crowd of_ CHILDREN _sleeping at the foot of
the columns, on the steps, the benches, etc_.)
And all those asleep, what a number of them there are asleep!... Do they do
nothing?...

THE CHILD
They are thinking of something....

TYLTYL
Of what?...

THE CHILD
They do not know yet; but they must take something with them to earth; we
are not allowed to go from here empty-handed....

TYLTYL
Who says so?...

THE CHILD
Time, who stands at the door.... You will see when he opens it.... He is
very tiresome....

A CHILD (_running up from the back of the hall and elbowing his way
through the crowd_)
How are you, TYLTYL?...

TYLTYL
Hullo!... How does he know my name?...

THE CHILD (_who has just run up and who now kisses_ TYLTYL _and_
MYTYL _effusively_.)
How are you?... All right?... Come, give me a kiss, and you too, Mytyl.
It's not surprising that I should know your name, seeing that I shall be
your brother.... They have only just told me that you were here.... I was
right at the other end of the hall, packing up my ideas.... Tell mummy that
I am ready....

TYLTYL
What?... Are you coming to us?...

THE CHILD
Certainly, next year, on Palm Sunday.... Don't tease me too much when I am
little.... I am very glad to have kissed you both beforehand.... Tell daddy
to mend the cradle.... Is it comfortable in our home?...

TYLTYL
Not bad.... And mummy is so kind!...

THE CHILD
And the food?...

TYLTYL
That depends.... We even have cakes sometimes, don't we, Mytyl?...

MYTYL
On New Year's Day and the fourteenth of July.... Mummy makes them....

TYLTYL
What have you got in that bag?... Are you bringing us something?...

THE CHILD
I am bringing three illnesses: scarlatina, whooping-cough and measles....

TYLTYL
Oh, that's all, is it?... And, after that, what will you do?...

THE CHILD
After that?... I shall leave you....

TYLTYL
It will hardly be worth while coming!...

THE CHILD
We can't pick and choose!...

(_At that moment, a sort of prolonged, powerful, crystalline vibration is
heard to rise and swell; it seems to emanate from the columns and the opal
doors, which are irradiated by a brighter light than before_.)

TYLTYL
What is that?...

THE CHILD
That's Time!... He is going to open the gates!...

(_A great change comes over the crowd of_ BLUE CHILDREN, _Most of
them leave their machines and their labours, numbers of sleepers awake and
all turn their eyes towards the opal doors and go nearer to them_.)

LIGHT (_joining_ TYLTYL)
Let us try to hide behind the columns.... It will not do for Time to
discover us....

TYLTYL
Where does that noise come from?...

A CHILD
It is the Dawn rising.... This is the hour when the children who are to be
born to-day go down to earth....

TYLTYL
How will they go down?... Are there ladders?...

THE CHILD
You shall see.... Time is drawing the bolts....

TYLTYL
Who is Time?...

THE CHILD
An old man who comes to call those who are going....

TYLTYL
Is he wicked?...

THE CHILD
No; but he hears nothing.... Beg as they may, if it's not their turn, he
pushes back all those who try to go....

TYLTYL
Are they glad to go?...

THE CHILD
We are sorry when we are left behind, but we are sad when we go.... There!
There!... He is opening the doors!...

(_The great opalescent doors turn slowly on their hinges. The sounds of
the earth are heard like a distant music. A red and green light penetrates
into the hall_; TIME, _a tall old man with a streaming beard, armed
with his scythe and hourglass, appears upon the threshold; and the
spectator perceives the extremity of the white and gold sails of a galley
moored to a sort of quay, formed by the rosy mists of the Dawn_.)

TIME (_on the threshold_)
Are they ready whose hour has struck?...

BLUE CHILDREN (_elbowing their way and running up from all sides_)
Here we are!... Here we are!... Here we are!...

TIME (_in a gruff voice to the_ CHILDREN _defiling before him to go out_)
One at a time!... Once again, there are many more of you than
are wanted!... It's always the same thing!... You can't deceive
me!...(_Pushing back a_ CHILD.) It's not your turn!... Go back and
wait till to-morrow.... Nor you either; go in and return in ten years.... A
thirteenth shepherd?... There are only twelve wanted; there is no need for
more; the days of Theocritus and Virgil are past.... More doctors?... There
are too many already; they are grumbling about it on earth.... And
where are the engineers?... They want an honest man, only one, as a
phenomenon.... Where is the honest man?... Is it you?... (THE CHILD _nods
yes_.) You appear to me to be a very poor specimen!... Hallo, you, over
there, not so fast, not so fast!... And you, what are you bringing?...
Nothing at all, empty-handed?... Then you can't go through.... Prepare
something, a great crime, if you like, or a fine sickness, I don't care ...
but you mast have something.... (_Catching sight of a little_ CHILD
_whom the others are pushing forward, while he resists with all his
strength_.) Well, what's the matter with you?... You know that the hour
has come.... They want a hero to fight against injustice; you're the one:
you most start....

THE BLUE CHILDREN
He doesn't want to, sir....

TIME
What?... He doesn't want to?... Where does the little monster think he
is?... No objections, we have no time to spare....

THE CHILD (_who is being pushed_)
No, no!...I don't want to go!... I would rather not be born!... I would
rather stay here!...

TIME
That is not the question.... When the hour comes, it comes!... Now then,
quick, forward!...

A CHILD (_stepping forward_)
Oh, let me pass!... I will go and take his place!... They say that my
parents are old and have been waiting for me so long!...

TIME
None of that!... You will start at your proper hour, at your proper
time.... We should never be done if we listened to you.... One wants to
go, another refuses; it's too soon or it's too late.... (_Pushing back
some_ CHILDREN _who have encroached upon the threshold_.) Not so
near, you children!... Back, you inquisitive ones!... Those who are not
starting have no business outside.... You are in a hurry now; later, when
your turn comes, you will be frightened and hang back.... Look, there are
four who are trembling like leaves.... (_To a_ CHILD _who, on the
point of crossing the threshold, suddenly goes back_.) Well, what is
it?... What's the matter?...

THE CHILD
I have forgotten the box containing the two crimes which I shall have to
commit....

ANOTHER CHILD
And I the little pot with my idea for enlightening the crowd....

A THIRD CHILD
I have forgotten the graft of my finest pear!...

TIME
Run quick and fetch them!... We have only six hundred and twelve seconds
left.... The galley of the Dawn is already flapping her sails to show that
she is waiting.... You will come too late and you won't be born!... Come,
quick, on board with you!... (_Laying hold of a_ CHILD _who tries to
pass between his legs to reach the quay_.) Oh, no, not you!... This is
the third time you've tried to be born before your turn.... Don't let me
catch you at it again, or you can wait forever with my sister Eternity;
and you know that it's not amusing there!... But come, are we ready?... Is
every one at his post?... (_Surveying the_ CHILDREN _standing on the
quay or already seated In the galley_.) There is still one missing....
It is no use his hiding, I see him in the crowd.... You can't deceive
me!... Come on, you, the little fellow whom they call the Lover, say
good-bye to your sweetheart....

(_The two_ CHILDREN _who are called the Lovers, fondly entwined,
their faces livid with despair, go up to_ TIME _and kneel at his
feet_.)

THE FIRST CHILD
Mr. Time, let me stay behind with her!...

THE SECOND CHILD
Mr. Time, let me go with him!...

TIME
Impossible!... We have only three hundred and ninety-four seconds left....

THE FIRST CHILD
I would rather not be born!...

TIME
You cannot choose....

THE SECOND CHILD (_beseechingly_)
Mr. Time, I shall come too late!...

THE FIRST CHILD
I shall be gone before she comes down!...

THE SECOND CHILD
I shall never see him again!...

THE FIRST CHILD
We shall be alone in the world!...

TIME
All this does not concern me.... Address your entreaties to Life.... I
unite and part as I am told....(_Seizing one of the_ CHILDREN.)
Come!...

THE FIRST CHILD (_struggling_)
No, no, no!... She, too!...

THE SECOND CHILD (_clinging to the clothes of the_ FIRST)
Leave him with me!... Leave him!...

TIME
Come, come, he is not going to die, but to live!... (_Dragging away
the_ FIRST CHILD.) Come along!...

THE SECOND CHILD (_stretching her arms out frantically to the_ CHILD
_that is being carried off_)
A sign!... A sign!... Tell me how to find you!...

THE FIRST CHILD
I shall always love you!...

THE SECOND CHILD
I shall be the saddest thing on earth!... You will know me by that!...

(_She falls and remains stretched on the ground_.)

TIME
You would do much better to hope.... And now, that is all....
(_Consulting his hour-glass_.) We have only sixty-three seconds
left....

(_Last and violent movements among the_ CHILDREN _departing and
remaining. They exchange hurried farewells_.)

THE BLUE CHILDREN
Good-bye, Pierre!... Good-bye, Jean!... Have you all you want?... Announce
my idea!... Have you got the new turnscrew?... Mind you speak of my
melons!... Have you forgotten nothing?... Try to know me again I... I shall
find you!... Don't lose your ideas!... Don't lean too far into space!...
Send me your news!... They say one can't... Oh, try, do try!... Try to
tell us if it's nice!... I will come to meet you I... I shall be born on a
throne!...

TIME (_shaking his keys and his scythe_)
Enough! Enough!... The anchor's raised!...

(_The sails of the galley pass and disappear. The voices of the_
CHILDREN _in the galley are heard in the distance_: "The Earth! The
Earth!... I can see it!... How beautiful it is!... How bright it is!... How
big it is!"... _Then, as though issuing from the depths of the abyss, an
extremely distant song of gladness and expectation_.)

TYLTYL (_to_ LIGHT)
What is that?... It is not they singing.... It sounds like other voices....

LIGHT
Yes, it is the song of the mothers coming out to meet them....

(_Meanwhile_, TIME _closes the opalescent doors. He turns to take
a last look at the hall and suddenly perceives_ TYLTYL, MYTYL
_and_ LIGHT.)

TIME (_dumbfoundered and furious_)
What's that?... What are you doing here?... Who are you?... Why are you not
blue?... How did you get in?... (_He comes forward, threatening them with
his scythe_.)

LIGHT (_to_ TYLTYL)
Do not answer!... I have the Blue Bird.... He is hidden under my cloak....
Let us escape.... Turn the diamond, he will lose our traces.... (_They
slip away on the left, between the columns in the foreground_.)


CURTAIN




ACT VI




SCENE I.--_The Leave-taking_.


_The stage represents a wall with a small door. It is the break of
day_.

(_Enter_ TYLTYL, MYTYL, LIGHT, BREAD, WATER, SUGAR, FIRE _and_
MILK) You would never guess where we are....

TYLTYL
Well, no, Light, because I don't know....

LIGHT
Don't you recognise that wall and that little door?...

TYLTYL
It is a red wall and a little green door.

LIGHT
And doesn't that remind you of anything?...

TYLTYL
It reminds me that Time shewed us the door....

LIGHT
How odd people are when they dream.... They do not recognise their own
hands....

TYLTYL
Who is dreaming?... Am I?...

LIGHT
Perhaps it's myself.... Who can tell?... However, this wall contains a
house which you have seen more than once since you were born....

TYLTYL
A house which I have seen more than once since I was born?...

LIGHT
Why yes, sleepy-head!... It is the house which we left one evening, just a
year ago, to a day....

TYLTYL
Just a year ago?... Why, then....

LIGHT
Come, come!... Don't open great eyes like sapphire caves.... It's the dear
old house of your father and mother....

TYLTYL (_going up to the door_)
But I think.... Yes, really.... It seems to me.... This little door.... I
recognise the wooden pin.... Are they in there?... Are we near mummy?... I
want to go in at once.... I want to kiss her at once!...

LIGHT
One moment.... They are sound asleep; you must not wake them with a
start.... Besides, the door will not open till the hour strikes....

TYLTYL
What hour?... Is there long to wait?...

LIGHT
Alas, no!... A few poor minutes....

TYLTYL
Aren't you glad to be back?... What is it, Light?... You are quite pale,
you look ill....

LIGHT
It's nothing, child.... I feel a little sad, because I am leaving you....

TYLTYL
Leaving us?...

LIGHT
I must.... I have nothing more to do here; the year is over, the Fairy is
coming back to ask you for the Blue Bird....

TYLTYL
But I haven't got the Blue Bird!... The one of the Land of Memory turned
quite black, the one of the Future turned quite pink, the Night's are dead
and I could not catch the one in the Forest.... Is it my fault if they
change colour, or die, or escape?... Will the Fairy be angry and what will
she say?...

LIGHT
We have done what we could.... It seems likely that the Blue Bird does not
exist or that he changes colour when he is caged....

TYLTYL
Where is the cage?...

BREAD
Here, master.... It was entrusted to my diligent care during our long
journey; to-day, now that my mission is drawing to an end, I restore it to
your hands, untouched and carefully closed, as I received it.... (_Like
an orator making a speech_) And now, in the name of all, I crave
permission to add a few words....

FIRE
He has not been called upon to speak!...

WATER
Order!...

BREAD
The malevolent interruptions of a contemptible enemy, of an envious
rival....

FIRE
An envious rival!... What would you be without me?... A lump of shapeless
and indigestible dough....

WATER
Order!...

FIRE
I won't be shouted down by you! ...

(_They threaten each other and are about to come to blows_.)

LIGHT (_raising her wand_)
Enough!...

BREAD
The insults and the ridiculous pretensions of an element whose notorious
misbehaviour and whose scandalous excesses drive the world to despair....

FIRE
You fat pasty-face!

BREAD (_raising his voice_)
Will not prevent me from doing my duty to the end.... I wish, therefore, in
the name of all...

FIRE
Not in mine!... I have a tongue of my own!...

BREAD
In the name of all and with a restrained but simple and deep emotion,
to take leave of two distinguished children, whose exalted mission ends
to-day.... When bidding them farewell, with all the grief and all the
fondness which a mutual esteem....

TYLTYL
What?... You are bidding us farewell?... Are you leaving us too?...

BREAD
Alas, needs must, since the hour when men's eyes are to be opened has not
yet come.... I am leaving you, it is true; but the separation will only be
apparent, you will no longer hear me speak....

FIRE
That will be no loss!...

WATER
Order! Silence!...

FIRE
I shall keep silence when you cease babbling in the kettles, the wells, the
brooks, the waterfalls and the taps....

LIGHT (_threatening them with her wand_)
That will do, do you hear?... You are all very quarrelsome; It is the
coming separation that sets your nerves on edge like this....

BREAD (_with great dignity_)
That does not apply to me.... I was saying, you will no longer hear me
speak, no longer see me in my living form.... Your eyes are about to close
to the invisible life of the Things; but I shall always be there. In the
bread-pan, on the shelf, on the table, beside the soup, I who am, if I may
say so, with Water and Fire, the most faithful companion, the oldest friend
of Man....

FIRE
Well, and what about me?...

LIGHT
Come, the minutes are passing, the hour is at hand which will send us back
into silence.... Be quick and kiss the children....

FIRE (_rushing forward_)
I first! I first!... (_Violently kissing the_ CHILDREN.) Good-bye,
Tyltyl and Mytyl!... Good-bye, my darlings.... Think of me if ever you want
any one to set fire to anything....

MYTYL
Oh! Oh!... He's burning me!...

TYLTYL
Oh! Oh!... He's scorched my nose!...

LIGHT
Come, Fire, moderate your transports.... Remember you're not in your
chimney....

WATER
What an idiot!...

BREAD
What a vulgarian!...

FIRE
There, look; I will put my hands in my pockets.... But don't forget me....
I am the friend of Man.... I shall always be there, in the hearth and in
the oven; and I will come sometimes and put out my tongue for you when
you are cold or sad.... I shall be warm in winter and roast chestnuts for
you....

WATER (_approaching the_ CHILDREN)
I shall kiss you without hurting you, tenderly, my children....

FIRE
Take care, you'll get wet!...

WATER
I am loving and gentle; I am kind to human beings....

FIRE
What about those you drown?...

WATER
Love the wells, listen to the brooks.... I shall always be there....

FIRE
She has flooded the whole place....

WATER
When you sit down, in the evening, beside the springs--there is more than
one here in the forest--try to understand what they are trying to say....

FIRE
Enough! Enough!... I can't swim!...

WATER
I shall no longer be able to tell you as clearly as I do to-day that I love
you; but you will not forget that that is what I am saying to you when you
hear my voice.... Alas!... I can say no more.... My tears choke me and
prevent my speaking....

FIRE
It doesn't sound like it!...

WATER
Think of me when you see the water-bottle.... Alas! I have to be silent
there; but my thoughts will always be of you.... You will find me also in
the ewer, the watering-can, the cistern and the tap....

MILK (_approaching timidly_)
And me in the milk-jug....

TYLTYL
What, you too, my dear Milk, so shy and so good?... Is everybody going?...

SUGAR (_naturally mawkish and sanctimonious_)
If you have a little corner left in your memory, remember sometimes that my
presence was sweet to you.... That is all I have to say.... Tears are not
in harmony with my temperament and they hurt me terribly when they fall on
my feet....

BREAD
Jesuit!...

FIRE (_yelping_)
Sugar-plum! Lollipop! Caramel!...

TYLTYL
But where are Tylette and Tylô gone to?... What are they doing?...

(_The_ CAT _is heard to utter shrill cries_.)

MYTYL (_alarmed_)
It's Tylette crying!... He is being hurt!...

(_Enter the_ CAT, _running, his hair on end and dishevelled, his
clothes torn, holding his handkerchief to his cheek, as though he had the
toothache. He utters angry groans and is closely pursued by the_ DOG,
_who overwhelms him with bites, blows and kicks_.)

THE DOG (_beating the_ CAT)
There!... Have you had enough?... Do you want any more?... There! There!
There!...

LIGHT, TYLTYL and MYTYL (_rushing forward to part them_)
Tylô!... Are you mad?... Well, I never!... Down!... Stop that, will you?...
How dare you?... Wait, wait!...

(_They part the_ DOG _and the_ CAT _by main force_.)

LIGHT
What is it?... What has happened?...

THE CAT (_blubbering and wiping his eyes_)
It's the Dog, Mrs. Light.... He insulted me, he put tin tacks in my food,
he pulled my tail, he beat me; and I had done nothing, nothing, nothing at
all!...

THE DOG (_mimicking him_)
Nothing, nothing, nothing at all!... (_In an undertone, with a mocking
grimace_) Never mind, you've had some, you've had some and you're going
to have some more!...

MYTYL (_pressing the_ CAT _in her arms_)
My poor Tylette, where has he hurt you?... Tell me.... I shall cry too....

LIGHT (_to the_ DOG, _severely_)
Your conduct is all the more, unworthy since you have chosen for this
disgraceful exhibition the already most painful moment when we are about to
part from these poor children....

THE DOG (_suddenly sobered_)
To part from these poor children?...

LIGHT
Yes; the hour which you know of is at hand.... We are going to return to
silence.... We shall no longer be able to speak to them....

THE DOG (_suddenly uttering real howls of despair and flinging himself
upon the_ CHILDREN, _whom he loads with violent and tumultuous caresses_.)
No! No!... I refuse!... I refuse!... I shall always talk!... You will
understand me now, will you not, my little god?... Yes! Yes! Yes!... And we
shall tell each other everything, everything, everything!... And I shall be
very good.... And I shall learn to read and write and play dominoes!... And
I shall always be very clean.... And I shall never steal anything in the
kitchen again.... Shall I do a wonderful trick for you?... Would you like
me to kiss the Cat?...

MYTYL (_to the_ CAT)
And you, Tylette?... Have you nothing to say to us?...

THE CAT (_in an affected and enigmatic tone_)
I love you both as much as you deserve....

LIGHT
Now let me, in my turn, children, give you a last kiss....

TYLTYL and MYTYL (_hanging on to_ LIGHT'S _dress_)
No, no, no, Light!... Stay here with us!... Daddy won't mind.... We will
tell mummy how kind you have been....

LIGHT
Alas! I cannot!... This door is closed to us and I must leave you....

TYLTYL
Where will you go all alone?...

LIGHT
Not very far, my children; over there, to the Land of the Silence of
Things....

TYLTYL
No, no; I won't have you go.... We will go with you.... I shall tell
mummy....

LIGHT
Do not cry, my dear little ones.... I have not a voice like Water; I have
only my brightness, which Man does not understand.... But I watch over him
to the end of his days.... Never forget that I am speaking to you in every
spreading moonbeam, in every twinkling star, in every dawn that rises, in
every lamp that is lit, in every good and bright thought of your soul....
(_Eight o'clock strikes behind the wall_.) Listen!... The hour is
striking!... Good-bye!... The door is opening!... In with you, in with
you!...

(_She pushes the_ CHILDREN _through the door, which has half-opened
and which closes again behind them_. BREAD _wipes away a furtive
tear_, SUGAR _and_ WATER, _etc., all in tears, flee precipitously
and disappear in the wings to the right and left. The_ DOG _howls
behind the scenes. The stage remains empty for a moment and then the
scenery representing the wall and the little door opens in the middle and
reveals the last scene_.)




SCENE 2.--_The Awakening_.

_The same setting as in_ ACT I, _but the objects, the walls and the
atmosphere all appear incomparably and magically fresher, happier, more
smiling. The daylight penetrates gaily through the chinks of the closed
shutters. To the right, at the back_, TYLTYL _and_ MYTYL _lie
sound asleep in their little beds. The_ DOG, _the_ CAT _and
the_ THINGS _are in the places which they occupied in_ ACT I,
_before the arrival of the_ FAIRY.

_Enter_ MUMMY TYL

MUMMY TYL (_in a cheerfully scolding voice_)
Up, come, get up, you little lazybones!... Aren't you ashamed of
yourselves?... It has struck eight and the sun is high above the trees!...
Lord, how they sleep, how they sleep!... (_She leans over and kisses
the_ CHILDREN.) They are quite rosy.... Tyltyl smells of lavender and
Mytyl of lilies-of-the-valley.... (_Kissing them again_) What sweet
things children are!... Still, they can't go on sleeping till midday.... I
mustn't let them grow up idle.... And, besides, I have heard that it's
not very healthy.... (_Gently shaking_ TYLTYL) Wake up, wake up,
Tyltyl....

TYLTYL (_waking up_)
What?... Light?... Where is she?... No, no, don't go away....

MUMMY TYL
Light?... Why, of course it's light... Has been for ever so long.... It's
as bright as noonday, though the shutters are closed.... Wait a bit till I
open them.... (_She pushes back the shutters and the dazzling daylight
invades the room_.) There! See!... What's the matter with you?... You
look quite blinded....

TYLTYL (_rubbing his eyes_)
Mummy, mummy!... It's you!...

MUMMY TYL
Why, of course, it's I.... Who did you think it was?...

TYLTYL
It's you.... Yes, yes, it's you!....

MUMMY TYL
Yes, yes, it's I.... I haven't changed my face since last night.... Why do
you stare at me in that wonderstruck way?... Is my nose turned upside down,
by any chance?...

TYLTYL
Oh, how nice it is to see you again!... It's so long, so long ago!... I
must kiss you at once.... Again! Again! Again!... And how comfortable my
bed is!... I am back at home!...

MUMMY TYL
What's the matter?... Why don't you wake up?... Don't tell me you're
ill.... Let me see, show me your tongue.... Come, get up and dress....

TYLTYL
Hullo, I've got my shirt on!...

MUMMY TYL
Of course you have.... Put on your breeches and your little jacket....
There they are, on the chair....

TYLTYL
Is that what I did on the journey?...

MUMMY TYL
What journey?...

TYLTYL
Why, last year....

MUMMY TYL
Last year?...

TYLTYL
Why, yes!...At Christmas, when I went away....

MUMMY TYL
When you went away?... You haven't left the room.... I put you to bed last
night, and here you are this morning.... Have you dreamed all that?...

TYLTYL
But you don't understand!... It was last year, when I went away with Mytyl,
the Fairy, Light--how nice Light is!--Bread, Sugar, Water, Fire: they did
nothing but quarrel!... You're not angry with me?... Did you feel very
sad?... And what did daddy say?... I could not refuse... I left a note to
explain....

MUMMY TYL
What are you talking about?... For sure, either you're ill or else you're
still asleep.... (_She gives him a friendly shake_.) There, wake
up.... There, is that better?...

TYLTYL
But, mummy, I assure you.... It's you that's still asleep....

MUMMY TYL
What! Still asleep, am I?... Why? I've been up since six o'clock.... I've
finished all the cleaning and lit the fire....

TYLTYL
But ask Mytyl if it's not true.... Oh, we have had such adventures!...

MUMMY TYL
Why Mytyl?... What do you mean?...

TYLTYL
She was with me.... We saw grandad and granny....

MUMMY TYL (_more and more bewildered_)
Grandad and granny?...

TYLTYL
Yes, in the Land of Memory.... It was on our way.... They are dead, but
they are quite well.... Granny made us a lovely plum-tart.... And then the
little brothers--Robert, Jean and his top--and Madeleine and Pierrette and
Pauline and Riquette, too....

MYTYL
Riquette still goes about on all fours!...

TYLTYL
And Pauline still has a pimple on her nose....

MUMMY TYL
Have you found the key of the cupboard where daddy hides his brandy
bottle?...

TYLTYL
Does daddy hide a brandy bottle?...

MUMMY TYL
Certainly. One has to hide everything when one has little meddlesome
good-for-nothings like you.... But come, out with it, confess that you took
it.... I would rather it was that.... I sha'n't tell daddy.... I sha'n't
beat you....

TYLTYL
But, mummy, I don't know where it is....

MUMMY TYL
Just walk in front of me, so that I may see if you can walk straight....
(TYLTYL _does so_) No, it's not that.... Dear heaven, what is the
matter with them?... I shall lose them too, as I lost the others!...
(_Suddenly mad with alarm, she calls out_) Daddy Tyl!... Come, quick!
The children are ill!...

(_Enter_ DADDY TYL, _very calmly, with an axe in his hand_.)

DADDY TYL
What is it?...

TYLTYL and MYTYL (_running up gaily to kiss their father_)
Hullo, daddy!... It's daddy!... Good-morning, daddy!... Have you had plenty
of work this year?...

DADDY TYL
Well, what's the matter?... They don't look ill; they look very well....

MUMMY TYL (_weeping_)
You can't trust their looks.... It will be as with the others.... They
looked quite well also to the end; and then God took them.... I don't know
what's the matter with them.... I put them to bed quite quietly last night;
and this morning, when they woke up, everything was wrong.... They don't
know what they're saying; they talk about a journey.... They have seen
Light and grandad and granny, who are dead, but who are quite well....

TYLTYL
But grandad still has his wooden leg....

MYTYL
And granny her rheumatics....

MUMMY TYL
Do you hear?... Run and fetch the doctor!...

DADDY TYL
Why, no, no.... They are not dead yet.... Come, let us look into this....
(_A knock at the front door_.) Come in!...

(_Enter_ NEIGHBOUR BERLINGOT, _a little old woman resembling the_
FAIRY _in_ ACT I _and leaning on a stick_.)

THE NEIGHBOUR
Good-morning and a Merry Christmas to you all!...

TYLTYL
It's the Fairy Bérylune!...

THE NEIGHBOUR
I have come to ask for a bit of fire for my Christmas stew.... It's very
chilly this morning.... Good-morning, children, how are you?...

TYLTYL
Fairy Bérylune, I could not find the Blue Bird....

THE NEIGHBOUR
What is he saying?...

MUMMY TYL
Don't ask me, Madame Berlingot.... They don't know what they are saying....
They have been like that since they woke up.... They must have eaten
something that wasn't good....

THE NEIGHBOUR
Why, Tyltyl, don't you remember Goody Berlingot, your Neighbour
Berlingot?...

TYLTYL
Why, yes, ma'am.... You are the Fairy Bérylune.... You're not angry with
us?...

THE NEIGHBOUR
Béry... what? Goodness gracious me!...

TYLTYL
Bérylune.

THE NEIGHBOUR
Berlingot, you mean Berlingot....

TYLTYL
Bérylune or Berlingot, as you please, ma'am.... But Mytyl knows....

MUMMY TYL
That's the worst of it, that Mytyl also....

DADDY TYL
Pooh, pooh!... That will soon go; I will give them a smack or two....

THE NEIGHBOUR
Don't; It's not worth while.... I know all about it; it's only a little fit
of dreaming.... They must have slept in the moonbeams.... My little girl,
who is very ill, is often like that....

MUMMY TYL
By the way, how is your little girl?...

THE NEIGHBOUR
Only so-so.... She can't get up.... The doctor says that it's her
nerves.... I know what would cure her, for all that. She was asking me for
it only this morning, for her Christmas box; it's a notion she has...

MUMMY TYL
Yes, I know; it's Tyltyl's bird.... Well, Tyltyl, aren't you going to give
it at last to that poor little thing?...

TYLTYL
What, mummy?...

MUMMY TYL
Your bird.... It's no use to you.... You don't even look at it now.... And
she has been dying to have it for ever so long!...

TYLTYL
Hullo, that's true, my bird!... Where is he?... Oh, there's the cage!...
Mytyl, do you see the cage?... It's the one which Bread carried.... Yes,
yes, it's the same one, but there's only one bird in it.... Has he
eaten the other, I wonder?... Hullo, why, he's blue!... But it's my
turtle-dove!... But he's much bluer than when I went away!... Why, that's
the blue bird we were looking for!... We went so far and he was here all
the time!... Oh, but it's wonderful!... Mytyl, do you see the bird? What
would Light say?... I will take down the cage.... (_He climbs on a chair
and takes down the cage and carries it to the_ NEIGHBOUR.) There, Madame
Berlingot, there you are.... He's not quite blue yet, but that will come,
you shall see!... Take him off quick to your little girl....

THE NEIGHBOUR
Really?... Do you mean it?... Do you give it me like that, straight away
and for nothing?... Lord, how happy she will be!... (_Kissing_ TYLTYL)
I must give you a kiss!... I fly!... I fly!...

TYLTYL
Yes, yes; be quick.... Some of them change their colour....

THE NEIGHBOUR
I will come back to tell you what she says....

(_She goes out_.)

TYLTYL (_after taking a long look around him_)
Daddy, mummy, what have you done to the house?... It's just as it was, but
it's much prettier....

DADDY TYL
How do you mean, it's prettier?...

TYLTYL
Why, yes, everything has been painted and made to look new, everything is
clean and polished.... It was not like that last year....

DADDY TYL
Last year?...

TYLTYL (_going to the window_)
And look at the forest!... How big and fine it is!... One would think
it was new!... How happy I feel here!... (_Going to the bread-pan and
opening it_) Where's Bread?.... I say, the loaves are very quiet.... And
then here's Tylô!... Hullo, Tylô, Tylô!... Ah, you had a fine fight!... Do
you remember, in the forest?...

MYTYL
And Tylette.... He knows me, but he has stopped talking....

TYLTYL
Mr. Bread.... (_Feeling his forehead_) Hullo, the diamond's gone!...
Who's taken my little green hat?... Never mind; I don't want it any
more.... Ah, Fire!... He's a good one!... He crackles and laughs to make
Water angry.... (_Running to the tap_) And Water?... Good-morning,
Water!... What does she say?... She still talks, but I don't understand her
as well as I did....

MYTYL
I don't see Sugar....

TYLTYL
Lord, how happy I am, happy, happy, happy!...

MYTYL
So am I, so am I!...

MUMMY TYL
What are you spinning round for like that?....

DADDY TYL
Don't mind them and don't distress yourself.... They are playing at being
happy....

TYLTYL
I liked Light best of all.... Where's her lamp?... Can we light it?...
(_Looking round him again_.) Goodness me, how lovely it all is and how
glad I feel!...

MUMMY TYL
Why?...

TYLTYL
I don't know, mummy....

(_A knock at the front-door_.)

DADDY TYL
Come in, come in!...

(_Enter the_ NEIGHBOUR, _holding by the hand a little girl of a
fair and wonderful beauty, who carries_ TYLTYL'S _dove pressed in her
arms_.)

THE NEIGHBOUR
Do you see the miracle?...

MUMMY TYL
Impossible!... Can she walk?...

THE NEIGHBOUR
Can she walk?... She can run, she can dance, she can fly!... When she saw
the bird, she jumped, just like that, with one bound, to the window, to see
by the light if it was really Tyltyl's dove.... And then, whoosh!... Out
into the street, like an angel!... It was as much as I could do to keep
pace with her....

TYLTYL (_going up to her, wonderstruck_)
Oh, how like Light she is!...

MYTYL
She is much smaller....

TYLTYL
Yes, indeed!... But she will grow bigger....

THE NEIGHBOUR
What are they saying?... Haven't they got over it yet?...

MUMMY TYL
They are better, they are mending.... It will be all right when they have
had their breakfasts....

THE NEIGHBOUR (_pushing the_ LITTLE GIRL _into_ TYLTYL'S _arms_).
Come along, child, come and thank Tyltyl....

(TYLTYL, _suddenly frightened, takes a step back_.)

MUMMY TYL
Well, Tyltyl, what's the matter?.... Are you afraid of the little girl?...
Come, give her a kiss, a good big kiss.... No, a better one than that....
You're not so shy as a rule!... Another one!... But what's the matter with
you?... You look as if you were going to cry....

(TYLTYL, _after kissing the_ LITTLE GIRL _rather awkwardly, stands
before her for a moment and the two children look at each other without
speaking; then_ TYLTYL _strokes the dove's head_.)

TYLTYL
Is he blue enough?...

THE LITTLE GIRL
Yes, I am so pleased with him....

TYLTYL
I have seen bluer ones.... But those which are quite blue, you know, do
what you will, you can't catch them....

THE LITTLE GIRL
That doesn't matter; he's lovely....

TYLTYL
Has he had anything to eat?...

THE LITTLE GIRL
Not yet.... What does he eat?...

TYLTYL
Anything: corn, bread, Indian corn, grasshoppers....

THE LITTLE GIRL
How does he eat, say?...

TYLTYL
With his beak. You'll see, I will show you....

(_He moves in order to take the bird from the_ LITTLE GIRL'S _hands.
She resists instinctively; and, taking advantage of the hesitation of their
movements, the_ DOVE _escapes and flies away_.)

THE LITTLE GIRL (_with a cry of despair_)
Mother!... He is gone!... (_She bursts into sobs_.)

TYLTYL
Never mind.... Don't cry.... I will catch him again.... (_Stepping to the
front of the stage and addressing the audience_.) If any of you should
find him, would you be so very kind as to give him back to us?... We need
him for our happiness, later on....


CURTAIN
﻿PERSONS


ARKËL, _King of Allemonde._

GENEVIÈVE, _mother of Pélléas and Golaud_.

PÉLLÉAS,}
        }_grandsons of Arkël._
GOLAUD, }

MÉLISANDE.

LITTLE YNIOLD, _son of Golaud (by a former marriage)._

A PHYSICIAN.

THE PORTER.

_Servants, Beggars, etc._




Pélléas and Mélisande.

       *       *       *       *       *




ACT FIRST.




SCENE I.--_The gate of the castle._


MAIDSERVANTS _(within)._

Open the gate! Open the gate!

PORTER _(within)._

Who is there? Why do you come and wake me up? Go out by the little
gates; there are enough of them!...

A MAIDSERVANT _(within)._

We have come to wash the threshold, the gate, and the steps; open,
then! open!

ANOTHER MAIDSERVANT _(within)._

There are going to be great happenings!

THIRD MAIDSERVANT _(within)._

There are going to be great fêtes! Open quickly!...

THE MAIDSERVANTS.

Open! open!

PORTER.

Wait! wait! I do not know whether I shall be able to open it;... it is
never opened.... Wait till it is light....

FIRST MAIDSERVANT.

It is light enough without; I see the sunlight through the chinks....

PORTER.

Here are the great keys.... Oh! oh! how the bolts and the locks
grate!... Help me! help me!...

MAIDSERVANTS.

We are pulling; we are pulling....

SECOND MAIDSERVANT.

It will not open....

FIRST MAIDSERVANT.

Ah! ah! It is opening! it is opening slowly!

PORTER.

How it shrieks! how it shrieks! it will wake up everybody....

SECOND MAIDSERVANT.

_[Appearing on the threshold.]_ Oh, how light it is already
out-of-doors!

FIRST MAIDSERVANT.

The sun is rising on the sea!

PORTER.

It is open.... It is wide open!... [_All the maidservants appear on
the threshold and pass over it._]

FIRST MAIDSERVANT.

I am going to wash the sill first....

SECOND MAIDSERVANT.

We shall never be able to clean all this.

OTHER MAIDSERVANTS.

Fetch the water! fetch the water!

PORTER.

Yes, yes; pour on water; pour on water; pour on all the water of the
Flood! You will never come to the end of it....




SCENE II.--_A forest._ MÉLISANDE _discovered at the brink of a
spring._


_Enter_ GOLAUD.

GOLAUD.

I shall never be able to get out of this forest again.--God knows
where that beast has led me. And yet I thought I had wounded him to
death; and here are traces of blood. But now I have lost sight of him;
I believe I am lost myself--my dogs can no longer find me--I shall
retrace my steps....--I hear weeping.... Oh! oh! what is there yonder
by the water's edge?... A little girl weeping by the water's edge?
[_He coughs._]--She does not hear me. I cannot see her face. [_He
approaches and touches_ MÉLISANDE _on the shoulder._] Why weepest
thou? [MÉLISANDE _trembles, starts up, and would flee._]--Do not be
afraid. You have nothing to fear. Why are you weeping here all alone?

MÉLISANDE.

Do not touch me! do not touch me!

GOLAUD.

Do not be afraid.... I will not do you any.... Oh, you are beautiful!

MÉLISANDE.

Do not touch me! do not touch me! or I throw myself in the water!...

GOLAUD.

I will not touch you.... See, I will stay here, against the tree. Do
not be afraid. Has any one hurt you?

MÉLISANDE

Oh! yes! yes! yes!... [_She sobs profoundly._]

GOLAUD.

Who has hurt you?

MÉLISANDE.

Every one! every one!

GOLAUD. What hurt have they done you?

MÉLISANDE.

I will not tell! I cannot tell!...

GOLAUD.

Come; do not weep so. Whence come you?

MÉLISANDE.

I have fled!... fled ... fled....

GOLAUD.

Yes; but whence have you fled?

MÉLISANDE.

I am lost!... lost!... Oh! oh! lost here.... I am not of this
place.... I was not born there....

GOLAUD.

Whence are you? Where were you born?

MÉLISANDE.

Oh! oh! far away from here!... far away ... far away....

GOLAUD.

What is it shining so at the bottom of the water?

MÉLISANDE.

Where?--Ah! it is the crown he gave me. It fell as I was weeping....

GOLAUD.

A crown?--Who was it gave you a crown?--I will try to get it....

MÉLISANDE.

No, no; I will have no more of it! I will have no more of it!... I had
rather die ... die at once....

GOLAUD.

I could easily pull it out. The water is not very deep.

MÉLISANDE.

I will have no more of it! If you take it out, I throw myself in its
place!...

GOLAUD.

No, no; I will leave it there. It could be reached without difficulty,
nevertheless. It seems very beautiful.--Is it long since you fled?

MÉLISANDE.

Yes, yes!... Who are you?

GOLAUD.

I am Prince Golaud,--grandson of Arkël, the old King of Allemonde....

MÉLISANDE.

Oh, you have gray hairs already....

GOLAUD.

Yes; some, here, by the temples....

MÉLISANDE

And in your beard, too.... Why do you look at me so?

GOLAUD.

I am looking at your eyes.--Do you never shut your eyes?

MÉLISANDE.

Oh, yes; I shut them at night....

GOLAUD.

Why do you look so astonished?

MÉLISANDE.

You are a giant?

GOLAUD.

I am a man like the rest....

MÉLISANDE.

Why have you come here?

GOLAUD.

I do not know, myself. I was hunting in the forest, I was chasing a
wild boar. I mistook the road.--You look very young. How old are you?

MÉLISANDE.

I am beginning to be cold....

GOLAUD.

Will you come with me!

MÉLISANDE.

No, no; I will stay here....

GOLAUD.

You cannot stay here all alone. You cannot stay here all night
long.... What is your name?

MÉLISANDE.

Mélisande.

GOLAUD.

You cannot stay here, Mélisande. Come with me....

MÉLISANDE.

I will stay here....

GOLAUD.

You will be afraid, all alone. We do not know what there may be here
... all night long ... all alone ... it is impossible. Mélisande,
come, give me your hand....

MÉLISANDE.

Oh, do not touch me!...

GOLAUD.

Do not scream.... I will not touch you again. But come with me. The
night will be very dark and very cold. Come with me....

MÉLISANDE.

Where are you going?...

GOLAUD.

I do not know.... I am lost too....
                                                                 [_Exeunt._




SCENE III.--_A hall in the castle_. ARKËL _and_ GENEVIÈVE
_discovered_.


GENEVIÈVE.

Here is what he writes to his brother Pélléas: "I found her all in
tears one evening, beside a spring in the forest where I had lost
myself. I do not know her age, nor who she is, nor whence she comes,
and I dare not question her, for she must have had a sore fright; and
when you ask her what has happened to her, she falls at once a-weeping
like a child, and sobs so heavily you are afraid. Just as I found her
by the springs, a crown of gold had slipped from her hair and fallen
to the bottom of the water. She was clad, besides, like a princess,
though her garments had been torn by the briers. It is now six months
since I married her and I know no more about it than on the day of
our meeting. Meanwhile, dear Pélléas, thou whom I love more than a
brother, although we were not born of the same father; meanwhile make
ready for my return.... I know my mother will willingly forgive me.
But I am afraid of the King, our venerable grandsire, I am afraid of
Arkël, in spite of all his kindness, for I have undone by this strange
marriage all his plans of state, and I fear the beauty of Mélisande
will not excuse my folly to eyes so wise as his. If he consents
nevertheless to receive her as he would receive his own daughter,
the third night following this letter, light a lamp at the top of the
tower that overlooks the sea. I shall perceive it from the bridge
of our ship; otherwise I shall go far away again and come back no
more...." What say you of it?

ARKËL.

Nothing. He has done what he probably must have done. I am very old,
and nevertheless I have not yet seen clearly for one moment into
myself; how would you that I judge what others have done? I am not
far from the tomb and do not succeed in judging myself.... One always
mistakes when one does not close his eyes. That may seem strange to
us; but that is all. He is past the age to marry and he weds like a
child, a little girl he finds by a spring.... That may seem strange to
us, because we never see but the reverse of destinies ... the reverse
even of our own.... He has always followed my counsels hitherto; I had
thought to make him happy in sending him to ask the hand of Princess
Ursula.... He could not remain alone; since the death of his wife he
has been sad to be alone; and that marriage would have put an end to
long wars and old hatreds.... He would not have it so. Let it be as he
would have it; I have never put myself athwart a destiny; and he knows
better than I his future. There happen perhaps no useless events....

GENEVIÈVE.

He has always been so prudent, so grave and so firm.... If it were
Pélléas, I should understand.... But he ... at his age.... Who is it
he is going to introduce here?--An unknown found along the roads....
Since his wife's death, he has no longer lived for aught but his son,
the little Yniold, and if he were about to marry again, it was because
you had wished it.... And now ... a little girl in the forest.... He
has forgotten everything....--What shall we do?...

_Enter_ PÉLLÉAS.

ARKËL.

Who is coming in there?

GENEVIÈVE.

It is Pélléas. He has been weeping.

ARKËL.

Is it thou, Pélléas?--Come a little nearer, that I may see thee in the
light....

PÉLLÉAS.

Grandfather, I received another letter at the same time as my
brother's; a letter from my friend Marcellus.... He is about to die
and calls for me. He would see me before dying....

ARKËL.

Thou wouldst leave before thy brother's return?--Perhaps thy friend is
less ill than he thinks....

PÉLLÉAS

His letter is so sad you can see death between the lines.... He says
he knows the very day when death must come.... He tells me I can
arrive before it if I will, but that there is no more time to lose.
The journey is very long, and if I await Golaud's return, it will be
perhaps too late....

ARKËL.

Thou must wait a little while, nevertheless.... We do not know what
this return has in store for us. And besides, is not thy father here,
above us, more sick perhaps than thy friend.... Couldst thou choose
between the father and the friend?...                              [_Exit._

GENEVIÈVE.

Have a care to keep the lamp lit from this evening, Pélléas....

[_Exeunt severally._




SCENE IV.--_Before the castle. Enter_ GENEVIÈVE _and_ MÉLISANDE.


MÉLISANDE.

It is gloomy in the gardens. And what forests, what forests all about
the palaces!...

GENEVIÈVE.

Yes; that astonished me too when I came hither; it astonishes
everybody. There are places where you never see the sun. But one gets
used to it so quickly.... It is long ago, it is long ago.... It is
nearly forty years that I have lived here.... Look toward the other
side, you will have the light of the sea....

MÉLISANDE.

I hear a noise below us....

GENEVIÈVE.

Yes; it is some one coming up toward us.... Ah! it is Pélléas.... He
seems still tired from having waited so long for you....

MÉLISANDE.

He has not seen us.

GENEVIÈVE.

I think he has seen us but does not know what he should do....
Pélléas, Pélléas, is it thou?...

_Enter_ PÉLLÉAS

PÉLLÉAS.

Yes!... I was coming toward the sea....

GENEVIÈVE.

So were we; we were seeking the light. It is a little lighter here
than elsewhere; and yet the sea is gloomy.

PÉLLÉAS

We shall have a storm to-night. There has been one every night for
some time, and yet it is so calm now.... One might embark unwittingly
and come back no more.

MÉLISANDE.

Something is leaving the port....

PÉLLÉAS.

It must be a big ship.... The lights are very high, we shall see it in
a moment, when it enters the band of light....

GENEVIÈVE.

I do not know whether we shall be able to see it ... there is still a
fog on the sea....

PÉLLÉAS.

The fog seems to be rising slowly....

MÉLISANDE.

Yes; I see a little light down there, which I had not seen....

PÉLLÉAS.

It is a lighthouse; there are others we cannot see yet.

MÉLISANDE.

The ship is in the light.... It is already very far away....

PÉLLÉAS.

It is a foreign ship. It looks larger than ours....

MÉLISANDE.

It is the ship that brought me here!...

PÉLLÉAS.

It flies away under full sail....

MÉLISANDE.

It is the ship that brought me here. It has great sails.... I
recognized it by its sails.

PÉLLÉAS.

There will be a rough sea to-night.

MÉLISANDE.

Why does it go away to-night?... You can hardly see it any longer....
Perhaps it will be wrecked....

PÉLLÉAS.

The sight falls very quickly....                              [_A silence._

GENEVIÈVE.

No one speaks any more?... You have nothing more to say to each
other?... It is time to go in. Pélléas, show Mélisande the way. I mast
go see little Yniold a moment.                                     [_Exit._

PÉLLÉAS.

Nothing can be seen any longer on the sea....

MÉLISANDE.

I see more lights.

PÉLLÉAS.

It is the other lighthouses.... Do you hear the sea?... It is the wind
rising.... Let us go down this way. Will you give me your hand?

MÉLISANDE.

See, see, my hands are full....

PÉLLÉAS.

I will hold you by the arm, the road is steep and it is very gloomy
there.... I am going away perhaps to-morrow....

MÉLISANDE.

Oh!... why do you go away?                                       [_Exeunt._




ACT SECOND.




SCENE I.--_A fountain in the park.


Enter_ PÉLLÉAS _and_ MÉLISANDE.

PÉLLÉAS.

You do not know where I have brought you?--I often come to sit here,
toward noon, when it is too hot in the gardens. It is stifling to-day,
even in the shade of the trees.

MÉLISANDE.

Oh, how clear the water is!...

PÉLLÉAS.

It is as cool as winter. It is an old abandoned spring. It seems to
have been a miraculous spring,--it opened the eyes of the blind,--they
still call it "Blind Man's Spring."

MÉLISANDE.

It no longer opens the eyes of the blind?

PÉLLÉAS.

Since the King has been nearly blind himself, no one comes any
more....

MÉLISANDE.

How alone one is here!... There is no sound.

PÉLLÉAS.

There is always a wonderful silence here.... One could hear the water
sleep.... Will you sit down on the edge of the marble basin? There is
one linden where the sun never comes....

MÉLISANDE.

I am going to lie down on the marble.--I should like to see the bottom
of the water....

PÉLLÉAS.

No one has ever seen it.--It is as deep, perhaps, as the sea.--It is
not known whence it comes.--Perhaps it comes from the bottom of the
earth....

MÉLISANDE.

If there were anything shining at the bottom, perhaps one could see
it....

PÉLLÉAS.

Do not lean over so....

MÉLISANDE.

I would like to touch the water....

PÉLLÉAS.

Have a care of slipping.... I will hold your hand....

MÉLISANDE.

No, no, I would plunge both hands in it.... You would say my hands
were sick to-day....

PÉLLÉAS.

Oh! oh! take care! take care! Mélisande!... Mélisande!...--Oh! your
hair!...

MÉLISANDE _(starting upright)._ I cannot,... I cannot reach it....

PÉLLÉAS.

Your hair dipped in the water....

MÉLISANDE.

Yes, it is longer than my arms.... It is longer than I....    [_A silence._

PÉLLÉAS.

It was at the brink of a spring, too, that he found you?

MÉLISANDE.

Yes....

PÉLLÉAS.

What did he say to you?

MÉLISANDE.

Nothing;--I no longer remember....

PÉLLÉAS.

Was he quite near you?

MÉLISANDE.

Yes; he would have kissed me.

PÉLLÉAS.

And you would not?

MÉLISANDE.

No.

PÉLLÉAS.

Why would you not?

MÉLISANDE.

Oh! oh! I saw something pass at the bottom of the water....

PÉLLÉAS.

Take care! take care!--You will fall! What are you playing with?

MÉLISANDE.

With the ring he gave me....

PÉLLÉAS.

Take care; you will lose it....

MÉLISANDE.

No, no; I am sure of my hands....

PÉLLÉAS.

Do not play so, over so deep a water....

MÉLISANDE.

My hands do not tremble.

PÉLLÉAS.

How it shines in the sunlight I--Do not throw it so high in the
air....

MÉLISANDE.

Oh!...

PÉLLÉAS.

It has fallen?

MÉLISANDE.

It has fallen into the water!...

PÉLLÉAS.

Where is it? where is it?...

MÉLISANDE.

I do not see it sink?...

PÉLLÉAS.

I think I see it shine....

MÉLISANDE.

My ring?

PÉLLÉAS.

Yes, yes; down yonder....

MÉLISANDE.

Oh! oh! It is so far away from us!... no, no, that is not it ... that
is not it.... It is lost ... lost.... There is nothing any more but
a great circle on the water.... What shall we do? What shall we do
now?...

PÉLLÉAS.

You need not be so troubled for a ring. It is nothing.... We shall
find it again, perhaps. Or else we will find another....

MÉLISANDE.

No, no; we shall never find it again; we shall never find any others
either.... And yet I thought I had it in my hands.... I had already
shut my hands, and it is fallen in spite of all.... I threw it too
high, toward the sun....

PÉLLÉAS.

Come, come, we will come back another day;... come, it is time. They
will come to meet us. It was striking noon at the moment the ring
fell.

MÉLISANDE.

What shall we say to Golaud if he ask where it is?

PÉLLÉAS.

The truth, the truth, the truth....                              [_Exeunt._




SCENE II.--_An apartment in the castle._ GOLAUD _discovered, stretched
upon his bed;_ MÉLISANDE, _by his bedside_.


GOLAUD.

Ah! ah! all goes well; it will amount to nothing. But I cannot
understand how it came to pass. I was hunting quietly in the forest.
All at once my horse ran away, without cause. Did he see anything
unusual?... I had just heard the twelve strokes of noon. At the
twelfth stroke he suddenly took fright and ran like a blind madman
against a tree. I heard no more. I do not yet know what happened. I
fell, and he must have fallen on me. I thought I had the whole forest
on my breast; I thought my heart was crushed. But my heart is sound.
It is nothing, apparently....

MÉLISANDE.

Would you like a little water?

GOLAUD.

Thanks, thanks; I am not thirsty.

MÉLISANDE.

Would you like another pillow?... There is a little spot of blood on
this.

GOLAUD.

No, no; it is not worth while. I bled at the mouth just now. I shall
bleed again perhaps....

MÉLISANDE.

Are you quite sure?... You are not suffering too much?

GOLAUD.

No, no; I have seen a good many more like this. I was made of iron
and blood.... These are not the little bones of a child; do not alarm
yourself....

MÉLISANDE.

Close your eyes and try to sleep. I shall stay here all night....

GOLAUD.

No, no; I do not wish you to tire yourself so. I do not need anything;
I shall sleep like a child.... What is the matter, Mélisande? Why do
you weep all at once?...

MÉLISANDE _(bursting into tears)._

I am ... I am ill too....

GOLAUD.

Thou art ill?... What ails thee, then; what ails thee, Mélisande?...

MÉLISANDE.

I do not know.... I am ill here.... I had rather tell you to-day; my
lord, my lord, I am not happy here....

GOLAUD.

Why, what has happened, Mélisande? What is it?... And I suspecting
nothing.... What has happened?... Some one has done thee harm?... Some
one has given thee offence?

MÉLISANDE.

No, no; no one has done me the least harm.... It is not that.... It
is not that.... But I can live here no longer. I do not know why.... I
would go away, go away!... I shall die if I am left here....

GOLAUD.

But something has happened? You must be hiding something from me?...
Tell me the whole truth, Mélisande.... Is it the King?... Is it my
mother?... Is it Pélléas?...

MÉLISANDE.

No, no; it is not Pélléas. It is not anybody.... You could not
understand me....

GOLAUD.

Why should I not understand?... If you tell me nothing, what will you
have me do?... Tell me everything and I shall understand everything.

MÉLISANDE.

I do not know myself what it is.... I do not know just what it is....
If I could tell you, I would tell you.... It is something stronger
than I....

GOLAUD.

Come; be reasonable, Mélisande.--What would you have me do?--You are
no longer a child.--Is it I whom you would leave?

MÉLISANDE.

Oh! no, no; it is not that.... I would go away with you.... It is
here that I can live no longer.... I feel that I shall not live a long
while....

GOLAUD.

But there must be a reason nevertheless. You will be thought mad.
It will be thought child's dreams.--Come, is it Pélléas, perhaps?--I
think he does not often speak to you.

MÉLISANDE.

Yes, yes; he speaks to me sometimes. I think he does not like me; I
have seen it in his eyes.... But he speaks to me when he meets me....

GOLAUD.

You must not take it ill of him. He has always been so. He is a little
strange. And just now he is sad; he thinks of his friend Marcellus,
who is at the point of death, and whom he cannot go to see.... He will
change, he will change, you will see; he is young....

MÉLISANDE.

But it is not that ... it is not that....

GOLAUD.

What is it, then?--Can you not get used to the life one leads here?
Is it too gloomy here?--It is true the castle is very old and very
sombre.... It is very cold, and very deep. And all those who dwell in
it, are already old. And the country may seem gloomy too, with all
its forests, all its old forests without light. But that may all be
enlivened if we will. And then, joy, joy, one does not have it every
day; we must take things as they come. But tell me something; no
matter what; I will do everything you could wish....

MÉLISANDE.

Yes, yes; it is true.... You never see the sky here. I saw it for the
first time this morning....

GOLAUD.

It is that, then, that makes you weep, my poor Mélisande?--It is only
that, then?--You weep, not to see the sky?--Come, come, you are no
longer at the age when one may weep for such things.... And then, is
not the summer yonder? You will see the sky every day.--And then, next
year.... Come, give me your hand; give me both your little hands. [_He
takes her hands._] Oh! oh! these little hands that I could crush like
flowers....--Hold! where is the ring I gave you?

MÉLISANDE.

The ring?

GOLAUD.

Yes; our wedding-ring, where is it?

MÉLISANDE.

I think.... I think it has fallen....

GOLAUD.

Fallen?--Where has it fallen?--You have not lost it?

MÉLISANDE.

No, no; it fell ... it must have fallen.... But I know where it is....

GOLAUD.

Where is it?

MÉLISANDE.

You know ... you know well ... the grotto by the seashore?...

GOLAUD.

Yes.

MÉLISANDE.

Well then, it is there.... It must be it is there.... Yes, yes; I
remember.... I went there this morning to pick up shells for little
Yniold.... There were some very fine ones.... It slipped from my
finger ... then the sea came in; and I had to go out before I had
found it.

GOLAUD.

Are you sure it is there?

MÉLISANDE.

Yes, yes; quite sure.... I felt it slip ... then, all at once, the
noise of the waves....

GOLAUD.

You must go look for it at once.

MÉLISANDE.

I must go look for it at once?

GOLAUD.

Yes.

MÉLISANDE.

Now?--at once?--in the dark?

GOLAUD.

Now, at once, in the dark. You must go look for it at once. I had
rather have lost all I have than have lost that ring. You do not know
what it is. You do not know whence it came. The sea will be very high
to-night. The sea will come to take it before you.... Make haste. You
must go look for it at once....

MÉLISANDE.

I dare not.... I dare not go alone....

GOLAUD.

Go, go with no matter whom. But you must go at once, do you
understand?--Make haste; ask Pélléas to go with you.

MÉLISANDE.

Pélléas?--With Pélléas?--But Pélléas would not....

GOLAUD.

Pélléas will do all you ask of him. I know Pélléas better than you do.
Go, go; hurry! I shall not sleep until I have the ring.

MÉLISANDE.

Oh! oh! I am not happy!... I am not happy!...
                                                          [_Exit, weeping._




SCENE III.--_Before a grotto._


_Enter_ PÉLLÉAS _and_ MÉLISANDE.

[_Speaking with great agitation._] Yes; it is here; we are there. It
is so dark you cannot tell the entrance of the grotto from the rest
of the night.... There are no stars on this side. Let us wait till
the moon has torn through that great cloud; it will light up the whole
grotto, and then we can enter without danger. There are dangerous
places, and the path is very narrow between two lakes whose bottom has
not yet been found. I did not think to bring a torch or a lantern, but
I think the light of the sky will be enough for us.--You have never
gone into this grotto?

MÉLISANDE.

No....

PÉLLÉAS.

Let us go in; let us go in.... You must be able to describe the place
where you lost the ring, if he questions you.... It is very big and
very beautiful. There are stalactites that look like plants and men.
It is full of blue darks. It has not yet been explored to the end.
There are great treasures hidden there, it seems. You will see the
remains of ancient shipwrecks there. But you must not go far in it
without a guide. There have been some who never have come back. I
myself dare not go forward too far. We will stop the moment we no
longer see the light of the sea or the sky. When you strike a little
light there, you would say the vault was covered with stars like the
sky. It is bits of crystal or salt, they say, that shine so in the
rock.--Look, look, I think the sky is going to clear.... Give me your
hand; do not tremble, do not tremble so. There is no danger; we will
stop the moment we no longer see the light of the sea.... Is it the
noise of the grotto that frightens you? It is the noise of night or
the noise of silence.... Do you hear the sea behind us?--It does not
seem happy to-night.... Ah! look, the light!...

    [The moon lights up abundantly the entrance and part of the
    darkness of the grotto; and at a certain depth are seen three
    old beggars with white hair, seated side by side, leaning upon
    each other and asleep against a bowlder.]

MÉLISANDE.

Ah!

PÉLLÉAS.

What is it?

MÉLISANDE.

There are ... there are....
                                       [_She points out the three Beggars._

PÉLLÉAS.

Yes, yes; I have seen them too....

MÉLISANDE.

Let us go!... Let us go!...

PÉLLÉAS.

Yes ... it is three old poor men fallen asleep.... There is a famine in
the country.... Why have they come to sleep here....

MÉLISANDE.

Let us go!... Come, come.... Let us go!...

PÉLLÉAS.

Take care; do not speak so loud.... Let us not wake them.... They are
still sleeping heavily.... Come.

MÉLISANDE.

Leave me, leave me; I prefer to walk alone....

PÉLLÉAS.

We will come back another day....                                [_Exeunt._




SCENE IV.--_An apartment in the castle,_ ARKËL _and_ PÉLLÉAS
_discovered._


ARKËL.

You see that everything retains you here just now and forbids you this
useless journey. We have concealed your father's condition from you
until now; but it is perhaps hopeless; and that alone should suffice
to stop you on the threshold. But there are so many other reasons....
And it is not in the day when our enemies awake, and when the people
are dying of hunger and murmur about us, that you have the right
to desert us. And why this journey? Marcellus is dead; and life has
graver duties than the visit to a tomb. You are weary, you say,
of your inactive life; but activity and duty are not found on the
highways. They must be waited for upon the threshold, and let in as
they go by; and they go by every day. You have never seen them? I
hardly see them any more myself; but I will teach you to see them, and
I will point them out to you the day when you would make them a sign.
Nevertheless, listen to me; if you believe it is from the depths of
your life this journey is exacted, I do not forbid your undertaking
it, for you must know better than I the events you must offer to your
being or your fate. I shall ask you only to wait until we know what
must take place ere long....

PÉLLÉAS.

How long must I wait?

ARKËL.

A few weeks; perhaps a few days....

PÉLLÉAS.

I will wait....




ACT THIRD




SCENE I.--_An apartment in the castle._ PÉLLÉAS _and_ MÉLISANDE
_discovered_, MÉLISANDE _plies her distaff at the back of the room._


PÉLLÉAS.

Yniold does not come back; where has he gone?

MÉLISANDE

He had heard something in the corridor; he has gone to see what it is.

PÉLLÉAS.

Mélisande....

MÉLISANDE

What is it?

PÉLLÉAS.

... Can you see still to work there?...

MÉLISANDE

I work as well in the dark....

PÉLLÉAS.

I think everybody is already asleep in the castle. Golaud does not
come back from the chase. It is late, nevertheless.... He no longer
suffers from his fall?...

MÉLISANDE.

He said he no longer suffered from it.

PÉLLÉAS.

He must be more prudent; his body is no longer as supple as at twenty
years.... I see the stars through the window and the light of the moon
on the trees. It is late; he will not come back now. [_Knocking at the
door._] Who is there?... Come in!...

_Little_ YNIOLD _opens the door and enters the room._

It was you knocking so?... That is not the way to knock at doors. It
is as if a misfortune had arrived; look, you have frightened little
mother.

LITTLE YNIOLD.

I only knocked a tiny little bit.

PÉLLÉAS.

It is late; little father will not come back to-night; it is time for
you to go to bed.

LITTLE YNIOLD.

I shall not go to bed before you do.

PÉLLÉAS.

What?... What is that you are saying?

LITTLE YNIOLD.

I say ... not before you ... not before you....

[_Bursts into sobs and takes refuge by_ MÉLISANDE.]

MÉLISANDE.

What is it, Yniold?... What is it?... why do you weep all at once?

YNIOLD _(sobbing)._

Because ... oh! oh! because ...

MÉLISANDE.

Because what?... Because what?... Tell me ...

YNIOLD.

Little mother ... little mother ... you are going away....

MÉLISANDE.

But what has taken hold of you, Yniold?... I have never dreamed of
going away....

YNIOLD.

Yes, you have; yes, you have; little father has gone away.... Little
father does not come back, and you are going to go away too.... I have
seen it ... I have seen it....

MÉLISANDE.

But there has never been any idea of that, Yniold.... Why, what makes
you think that I would go away?...

YNIOLD.

I have seen it ... I have seen it.... You have said things to uncle
that I could not hear....

PÉLLÉAS.

He is sleepy.... He has been dreaming.... Come here, Yniold; asleep
already?... Come and look out at the window; the swans are fighting
with the dogs....

YNIOLD _(at the window)._

Oh! oh! they are chasing the dogs!... They are chasing them!... Oh!
oh! the water!... the wings!... the wings!... they are afraid....

PÉLLÉAS. _(coming back by_ MÉLISANDE_)._

He is sleepy; he is struggling against sleep; his eyes were
closing....

MÉLISANDE _(singing softly as she spins)._

  Saint Daniel and Saint Michaël....
  Saint Michaël and Saint Raphaël....

YNIOLD _(at the window)._

Oh! oh! little mother!...

MÉLISANDE _(rising abruptly)._

What is it, Yniold?... What is it?...

YNIOLD.

I saw something at the window?...
                              [PÉLLÉAS _and_ MÉLISANDE _run to the window._

PÉLLÉAS.

What is there at the window?... What have you seen?...

YNIOLD.

Oh! oh! I saw something!...

PÉLLÉAS.

But there is nothing. I see nothing....

MÉLISANDE.

Nor I....

PÉLLÉAS.

Where did you see something? Which way?...

YNIOLD.

Down there, down there!... It is no longer there....

PÉLLÉAS.

He does not know what he is saying. He must have seen the light of the
moon on the forest. There are often strange reflections,... or else
something must have passed on the highway ... or in his sleep. For
see, see, I believe he is quite asleep....

YNIOLD _(at the window)._

Little father is there! little father is there!

PÉLLÉAS _(going to the window)._

He is right; Golaud is coming into the courtyard....

YNIOLD.

Little father!... little father!... I am going to meet him!...
                                              [_Exit, running,--A silence._

PÉLLÉAS.

They are coming up the stair....

_Enter_ GOLAUD _and little_ YNIOLD _with a lamp._

GOLAUD.

You are still waiting in the dark?

YNIOLD.

I have brought a light, little mother, a big light!... [_He lifts
the lamp and looks at_ MÉLISANDE.] You have been weeping, little
mother?... You have been, weeping?... [_He lifts the lamp toward_
PÉLLÉAS _and looks in turn at him._] You too, you too, you have been
weeping?... Little father, look, little father; they have both been
weeping....

GOLAUD.

Do not hold the light under their eyes so....



SCENE II.--_One of the towers of the castle.--watchman's round passes
under a window in the tower._


MÉLISANDE _(at the window, combing her unbound hair)._

  My long locks fall foaming
    To the threshold of the tower,--
  My locks await your coming
    All along the tower,
    And all the long, long hour,
    And all the long, long hour.

  _Saint Daniel and Saint Michaël,_
  _Saint Michaël and Saint Raphaël._

  I was born on a Sunday,
    A Sunday at high noon....

_Enter_ PÉLLÉAS _by the watchman's round._

PÉLLÉAS.

Holà! Holà! ho!...

MÉLISANDE.

Who is there?

PÉLLÉAS.

I, I, and I!... What art thou doing there at the window, singing like
a bird that is not native here?

MÉLISANDE.

I am doing my hair for the night...

PÉLLÉAS.

Is it that I see upon the wall?... I thought you had some light....

MÉLISANDE.

I have opened the window; it is too hot in the tower.... It is
beautiful to-night....

PÉLLÉAS.

There are innumerable stars; I have never seen so many as to-night;...
but the moon is still upon the sea.... Do not stay in the shadow,
Mélisande; lean forward a little till I see your unbound hair....

MÉLISANDE.

I am frightful so....
                                            [_She learn out at the window._

PÉLLÉAS.

Oh! oh! Mélisande!... oh, thou art beautiful!... thou art beautiful
so!... Lean out! lean out!... Let me come nearer thee....

MÉLISANDE

I cannot come nearer thee.... I am leaning out as far as I can....

PÉLLÉAS.

I cannot come up higher;... give me at least thy hand to-night ...
before I go away.... I leave to-morrow....

MÉLISANDE.

No, no, no!...

PÉLLÉAS.

Yes, yes, yes; I leave, I shall leave to-morrow.... Give me thy hand,
thy hand, thy little hand upon my lips....

MÉLISANDE.

I give thee not my hand if thou wilt leave....

PÉLLÉAS.

Give, give, give!...

MÉLISANDE.

Thou wilt not leave?...

PÉLLÉAS.

I will wait; I will wait....

MÉLISANDE.

I see a rose in the shadows....

PÉLLÉAS.

Where?... I see only the boughs of the willow hanging over the
wall....

MÉLISANDE.

Further down, further down, in the garden; further down, in the sombre
green....

PÉLLÉAS.

It is not a rose.... I will go see by and by, but give me thy hand
first; first thy hand....

MÉLISANDE.

There, there;... I cannot lean out further....

PÉLLÉAS.

I cannot reach thy hand with my lips....

MÉLISANDE.

I cannot lean out further.... I am on the point of falling....--Oh!
oh! my hair is falling down the tower!...

[_Her tresses fall suddenly over her head, as she is leaning out so,
and stream over_ PÉLLÉAS]

PÉLLÉAS.

Oh! oh! what is it?... Thy hair, thy hair is falling down to me!...
All thy locks, Mélisande, all thy locks have fallen down the tower!...
I hold them in my hands; I hold them in my mouth.... I hold them in
my arms; I put them about my neck.... I will not open my hands again
to-night....

MÉLISANDE.

Let me go! let me go!... Thou wilt make me fall!...

PÉLLÉAS.

No, no, no;... I have never seen such hair as thine, Mélisande!...
See, see, see; it comes from so high and yet it floods me to the
heart!... And yet it floods me to the knees!... And it is sweet, sweet
as if it fell from heaven!... I see the sky no longer through thy
locks. Thou seest, thou seest?... I can no longer hold them with both
hands; there are some on the boughs of the willow.... They are alive
like birds in my hands,... and they love me, they love me more than
thou!...

MÉLISANDE.

Let me go; let me go!... Some one might come....

PÉLLÉAS.

No, no, no; I shall not set thee free to-night.... Thou art my
prisoner to-night; all night, all night!...

MÉLISANDE.

Pélléas! Pélléas!...

PÉLLÉAS.

I tie them, I tie them to the willow boughs.... Thou shalt not go away
now;... thou shalt not go away now.... Look, look, I am kissing thy
hair.... I suffer no more in the midst of thy hair.... Hearest thou my
kisses along thy hair?... They mount along thy hair.... Each hair must
bring thee some.... Thou seest, thou seest, I can open my hands.... My
hands are free, and thou canst not leave me now....

MÉLISANDE.

Oh! oh! thou hurtest me.... [_Doves come out of the tower and fly
about them in the night._]--What is that, Pélléas?--What is it flying
about me?

PÉLLÉAS.

It is the doves coming oat of the tower.... I have frightened them;
they are flying away....

MÉLISANDE.

It is my doves, Pélléas.--Let us go away, let me go; they will not
come back again....

PÉLLÉAS.

Why will they not come back again?

MÉLISANDE

They will be lost in the dark.... Let me go; let me lift my head....
I hear a noise of footsteps.... Let me go!--It is Golaud!... I believe
it is Golaud!... He has heard us....

PÉLLÉAS.

Wait! Wait!... Thy hair is about the boughs.... It is caught there in
the darkness.... Wait, wait!... It is dark....

_Enter_ GOLAUD, _by the watchman's round._

GOLAUD.

What do you here?

PÉLLÉAS.

What do I here?... I....

GOLAUD.

You are children.... Mélisande, do not lean out so at the window; you
will fall.... Do you not know it is late?--It is nearly midnight.--Do
not play so in the darkness.--You are children.... [_Laughing
nervously._] What children!... What children!...
                                                     [_Exit, with_ PÉLLÉAS.




SCENE III.--_The-vaults of the castle.


Enter_ GOLAUD _and_ PÉLLÉAS.

GOLAUD.

Take care; this way, this way.--You have never penetrated into these
vaults?

PÉLLÉAS.

Yes; once, of old; but it was long ago....

GOLAUD.

They are prodigious great; it is a succession of enormous crypts that
end, God knows where. The whole castle is builded on these crypts. Do
you smell the deathly odor that reigns here?--That is what I wished,
to show you. In my opinion, it comes from the little underground lake
I am going to have you see. Take care; walk before me, in the light of
my lantern. I will warn you when we are there, [_They continue to walk
in silence._] Hey! hey! Pélléas! stop! stop!--[_He seizes him by the
arm._] For God's sake!... Do you not see?--One step more, and you had
been in the gulf!...

PÉLLÉAS

But I did not see it!... The lantern no longer lighted me....

GOLAUD.

I made a misstep.... but if I had not held you by the arm.... Well,
this is the stagnant water that I spoke of to you.... Do you
perceive the smell of death that rises?--Let us go to the end of this
overhanging rock, and do you lean over a little. It will strike you in
the face.

PÉLLÉAS.

I smell it already;... you would say a smell of the tomb.

GOLAUD.

Further, further.... It is this that on certain days has poisoned
the castle. The King will not believe it comes from here.--The crypt
should be walled up in which this standing water is found. It is time,
besides, to examine these vaults a little. Have you noticed those
lizards on the walls and pillars of the vaults?--There is a labor
hidden here you would not suspect; and the whole castle will be
swallowed up one of these nights, if it is not looked out for. But
what will you have? nobody likes to come down this far.... There are
strange lizards in many of the walls.... Oh! here ... do you perceive
the smell of death that rises?

PÉLLÉAS.

Yes; there is a smell of death rising about us....

GOLAUD.

Lean over; have no fear.... I will hold you ... give me ... no, no,
not your hand ... it might slip ... your arm, your arm!... Do you see
the gulf? [_Moved._]--Pélléas? Pélléas?...

PÉLLÉAS.

Yes; I think I see the bottom of the gulf.... Is it the light that
trembles so?... You ... [_He straightens up, turns, and looks at_
GOLAUD.]

GOLAUD (_with a trembling voice_).

Yes; it is the lantern.... See, I shook it to lighten the walls....

PÉLLÉAS.

I stifle here;... let us go out....

GOLAUD.

Yes; let us go out....
                                                      [_Exeunt in silence._




SCENE IV.--_A terrace at the exit of the vaults. Enter_ GOLAUD _and_
PÉLLÉAS.


PÉLLÉAS.

Ah! I breathe at last!... I thought, one moment, I was going to be ill
in those enormous crypts; I was on the point of falling.... There is
a damp air there, heavy as a leaden dew, and darkness thick as a
poisoned paste.... And now, all the air of all the sea!... There is a
fresh wind, see; fresh as a leaf that has just opened, over the little
green waves.... Hold! the flowers have just been watered at the foot
of the terrace, and the smell of the verdure and the wet roses comes
up to us.... It must be nearly noon; they are already in the shadow of
the tower.... It is noon; I hear the bells ringing, and the children
are going down to the beach to bathe.... I did not know that we had
stayed so long in the caverns....

GOLAUD.

We went down towards eleven o'clock....

PÉLLÉAS.

Earlier; it must have been earlier; I heard it strike half-past ten.

GOLAUD.

Half-past ten or a quarter to eleven....

PÉLLÉAS.

They have opened all the windows of the castle. It will be unusually
hot this afternoon.... Look, there is mother with Mélisande at a
window of the tower....

GOLAUD.

Yes; they have taken refuge on the shady side.--Speaking of Mélisande,
I heard what passed and what was said last night. I am quite aware all
that is but child's play; but it need not be repeated. Mélisande is
very young and very impressionable; and she must be treated the more
circumspectly that she is perhaps with child at this moment.... She
is very delicate, hardly woman; and the least emotion might bring on
a mishap. It is not the first time I have noticed there might be
something between you.... You are older than she; it will suffice to
have told you.... Avoid her as much as possible; without affectation
moreover; without affectation....--What is it I see yonder on the
highway toward the forest?...

PÉLLÉAS.

Some herds they are leading to the city....

GOLAUD.

They cry like lost children; you would say they smelt the butcher
already.--It will be time for dinner.--What a fine day! What a capital
day for the harvest!...
                                                                 [_Exeunt._




SCENE V.--_Before the castle._


_Enter_ GOLAUD _and little_ YNIOLD.

GOLAUD.

Come, we are going to sit down here, Yniold; sit on my knee; we shall
see from here what passes in the forest. I do not see you any more
at all now. You abandon me too; you are always at little mother's....
Why, we are sitting just under little mother's windows.--Perhaps she
is saying her evening prayer at this moment.... But tell me, Yniold,
she is often with your uncle Pélléas, isn't she?

YNIOLD.

Yes, yes; always, little father; when you are not there, little
father....

GOLAUD.

Ah!--look; some one is going by with a lantern in the garden.--But I
have been told they did not like each other.... It seems they often
quarrel;... no? Is it true?

YNIOLD.

Yes, yes; it is true.

GOLAUD.

Yes?--Ah! ah!--But what do they quarrel about?

YNIOLD.

About the door.

GOLAUD.

What? about the door?--What are you talking about?--No, come, explain
yourself; why do they quarrel about the door?

YNIOLD.

Because it won't stay open.

GOLAUD.

Who wants it to stay open?--Come, why do they quarrel?

YNIOLD.

I don't know, little father; about the light.

GOLAUD.

I am not talking to you about the light; we will talk of that by and
by. I am talking to you about the door. Answer what I ask you; you
must learn to talk; it is time.... Do not put your hand in your mouth
so;... come....

YNIOLD.

Little father! little father!... I won't do it any more.... [_He
cries._]

GOLAUD.

Come; what are you crying for now? What has happened?

YNIOLD.

Oh! oh! little father, you hurt me....

GOLAUD.

I hurt you?--Where did I hurt you? I did not mean to....

YNIOLD.

Here, here; on my little arm....

GOLAUD.

I did not mean to; come, don't cry any more, and I will give you
something to-morrow.

YNIOLD.

What, little father?

GOLAUD.

A quiver and some arrows; but tell me what you know about the door.

YNIOLD.

Big arrows?

GOLAUD.

Yes, yes; very big arrows.--But why don't they want the door to be
open?--Come, answer me sometime!--no, no; do not open your mouth to
cry. I am not angry. We are going to have a quiet talk, like Pélléas
and little mother when they are together. What do they talk about when
they are together?

YNIOLD.

Pélléas and little mother?

GOLAUD.

Yes; what do they talk about?

YNIOLD.

About me; always about me.

GOLAUD.

And what do they say about you?

YNIOLD.

They say I am going to be very big.

GOLAUD.

Oh, plague of my life!... I am here like a blind man searching for
his treasure at the bottom of the ocean!... I am here like a new-born
child lost in the forest, and you ... Come, come, Yniold, I was
wandering; we are going to talk seriously. Do Pélléas and little
mother never speak of me when I am not there?...

YNIOLD.

Yes, yes, little father; they are always speaking of you.

GOLAUD.

Ah!... And what do they say of me?

YNIOLD.

They say I shall grow as big as you are.

GOLAUD.

You are always by them?

YNIOLD.

Yes, yes, always, always, little father.

GOLAUD.

They never tell you to go play somewhere else?

YNIOLD.

No, little father; they are afraid when I am not there.

GOLAUD.

They are afraid?... What makes you think they are afraid?

YNIOLD.

Little mother always says, "Don't go away; don't go away!"... They are
unhappy, but they laugh....

GOLAUD.

But that does not prove they are afraid.

YNIOLD.

Yes, yes, little father; she is afraid....

GOLAUD.

Why do you say she is afraid?

YNIOLD.

They always weep in the dark.

GOLAUD.

Ah! ah!...

YNIOLD.

That makes one weep too.

GOLAUD.

Yes, yes!...

YNIOLD.

She is pale, little father.

GOLAUD.

Ah! ah!... patience, my God, patience!...

YNIOLD.

What, little father?

GOLAUD.

Nothing, nothing, my child.--I saw a wolf go by in the forest.--Then
they get on well together?--I am glad to learn they are on good
terms.--They kiss each other sometimes--No?...

YNIOLD.

Kiss each other, little father?--No, no,--ah! yes, little father, yes;
yes; once ... once when it rained....

GOLAUD.

They kissed?--But how, how did they kiss?

YNIOLD.

So, little father, so!... [_He gives him a kiss on the mouth,
laughing._] Ah! ah! your beard, little father!... It pricks! it
pricks! it pricks! It is getting all gray, little father, and your
hair, too; all gray, all gray, all gray.... [_The window under which
they are sitting is lighted up at this moment, and the light falls
upon them._] Ah! ah! little mother has lit her lamp. It is light,
little father; it is light....

GOLAUD.

Yes; it is beginning to be light....

YNIOLD.

Let us go there too, little father; let us go there too....

GOLAUD.

Where do you want to go?

YNIOLD.

Where it is light, little father.

GOLAUD.

No, no, my child; let us stay in the dark a little longer.... One
cannot tell, one cannot tell yet.... Do you see those poor people down
there trying to kindle a little fire in the forest?--It has rained.
And over there, do you see the old gardener trying to lift that tree
the wind has blown down across the road?--He cannot; the tree is too
big; the tree is too heavy, and it will lie where it fell. All that
cannot be helped.... I think Pélléas is mad....

YNIOLD.

No, little father, he is not mad; he is very good.

GOLAUD.

Do you want to see little mother?

YNIOLD.

Yes, yes; I want to see her!

GOLAUD.

Don't make any noise; I am going to hoist you up to the window. It is
too high for me, for all I am so big.... [_He lifts the child._] Do
not make the least noise; little mother would be terribly afraid....
Do you see her?--Is she in the room?

YNIOLD.

Yes.... Oh, how light it is!

GOLAUD.

She is alone?

YNIOLD.

Yes;... no, no; Uncle Pélléas Is there, too.

GOLAUD.

He--...!

YNIOLD.

Ah! ah! little father! you have hurt me!...

GOLAUD.

It is nothing; be still; I will not do it any more; look, look,
Yniold!... I stumbled; speak lower. What are they doing?--

YNIOLD.

They are not doing anything, little father; they are waiting for
something.

GOLAUD.

Are they near each other?

YNIOLD.

No, little father.

GOLAUD.

And ... and the bed? are they near the bed?

YNIOLD.

The bed, little father?--I can't see the bed.

GOLAUD.

Lower, lower; they will hear you. Are they speaking?

YNIOLD.

No, little father; they do not speak.

GOLAUD.

But what are they doing?--They must be doing something....

YNIOLD.

They are looking at the light.

GOLAUD.

Both?

YNIOLD.

Yes, little father.

GOLAUD.

They do not say anything?

YNIOLD.

No, little father; they do not close their eyes.

GOLAUD.

They do not come near each other?

YNIOLD.

No, little father; they do not stir.

GOLAUD.

They are sitting down?

YNIOLD.

No, little father; they are standing upright against the wall.

GOLAUD.

They make no gestures?--They do not look at each other?--They make no
signs?...

YNIOLD.

No, little father.--Oh! oh! little father; they never close their
eyes.... I am terribly afraid....

GOLAUD.

Be still. They do not stir yet?

YNIOLD.

No, little father.--I am afraid, little father; let me come down!...

GOLAUD.

Why, what are you afraid of?--Look! look!...

YNIOLD.

I dare not look any more, little father!... Let me come down!...

GOLAUD.

Look! look!...

YNIOLD.

Oh! oh! I am going to cry, little father!--Let me come down! let me
come down!,..

GOLAUD.

Come; we will go see what has happened.
                                                                 [_Exeunt._




ACT FOURTH




SCENE I.--_A corridor in the castle._


_Enter_ PÉLLÉAS _and_ MÉLISANDE, _meeting_.

PÉLLÉAS.

Where goest thou? I must speak to thee to-night. Shall I see thee?

MÉLISANDE.

Yes.

PÉLLÉAS.

I have just left my father's room. He is getting better. The physician
has told us he is saved.... And yet this morning I had a presentiment
this day would end ill. I have had a rumor of misfortune in my ears
for some time.... Then, all at once there was a great change; to-day
it is no longer anything but a question of time. All the windows in
his room have been thrown open. He speaks; he seems happy. He does not
speak yet like an ordinary man, but already his ideas no longer all
come from the other world.... He recognized me. He took my hand and
said with that strange air he has had since he fell sick: "Is it thou,
Pélléas? Why, why, I had not noticed it before, but thou hast the
grave and friendly look of those who will not live long.... You must
travel; you must travel...." It is strange; I shall obey him.... My
mother listened to him and wept for joy.--Hast thou not been aware of
it?--The whole house seems already to revive, you hear breathing, you
hear speaking, you hear walking.... Listen; I hear some one speaking
behind that door. Quick, quick! answer quickly! where shall I see
thee?

MÉLISANDE.

Where wouldst thou?

PÉLLÉAS.

In the park; near "Blind Man's Spring."--Wilt thou?--Wilt thou come?

MÉLISANDE.

Yes.

PÉLLÉAS.

It will be the last night;--I am going to travel, as my father said.
Thou wilt not see me more....

MÉLISANDE.

Do not say that, Pélléas.... I shall see thee always; I shall look
upon thee always....

PÉLLÉAS.

Thou wilt look in vain.... I shall be so far away thou couldst no
longer see me.... I shall try to go very far away.... I am full of
joy, and you would say I had all the weight of heaven and earth on my
body to-day....

MÉLISANDE.

What has happened, Pélléas?--I no longer understand what you say....

PÉLLÉAS.

Go, go; let us separate. I hear some one speaking behind that door....
It is the strangers who came to the castle this morning.... They are
going out.... Let us go; it is the strangers....       [_Exeunt severally._




SCENE II.--_An apartment in the castle._ ARKËL _and_ MÉLISANDE
_discovered._


ARKËL.

Now that Pélléas's father is saved, and sickness, the old handmaid of
Death, has left the castle, a little joy and a little sunlight will
at last come into the house again.... It was time!--For, since thy
coming, we have only lived here whispering about a closed room.... And
truly I have pitied thee, Mélisande.... Thou camest here all joyous,
like a child seeking a gala-day, and at the moment thou enteredst in
the vestibule I saw thy face change, and probably thy soul, as the
face changes in spite of us when we enter at noon into a grotto too
gloomy and too cold.... And since,--since, on account of all that, I
have often no longer understood thee.... I observed thee, thou went
there, listless perhaps, but with the strange, astray look of one
awaiting ever a great trouble, in the sunlight, in a beautiful
garden.... I cannot explain.... But I was sad to see thee so; for thou
art too young and too beautiful to live already day and night under
the breath of death.... But now all that will change. At my age,--and
there perhaps is the surest fruit of my life,--at my age I have gained
I know not what faith in the fidelity of events, and I have always
seen that every young and beautiful being creates about itself young,
beautiful, and happy events.... And it is thou who wilt now open the
door for the new era I have glimpses of.... Come here; why dost thou
stay there without answering and without lifting thine eyes?--I have
kissed thee but once only hitherto,--the day of thy coming; and yet
old men need sometimes to touch with their lips a woman's forehead or
a child's cheek, to believe still in the freshness of life and avert
awhile the menaces.... Art thou afraid of my old lips? How I have
pitied thee these months!...

MÉLISANDE.

Grandfather, I have not been unhappy....

ARKËL.

Perhaps you were of those who are unhappy without knowing it,... and
they are the most unhappy.... Let me look at thee, so, quite near, a
moment;... we have such need of beauty beside Death....

_Enter_ GOLAUD.

GOLAUD.

Pélléas leaves to-night.

ARKËL.

Thou hast blood on thy forehead.--What hast thou done?

GOLAUD.

Nothing, nothing.... I have passed through a hedge of thorns.

MÉLISANDE.

Bend down your head a little, my lord.... I will wipe your
forehead....

GOLAUD (_repulsing her_).

I will not that you touch me, do you understand? Go, go!--I am not
speaking to you.--Where is my sword?--I came to seek my sword....

MÉLISANDE.

Here; on the praying-stool.

GOLAUD.

Bring it. [_To_ ARKËL.]--They have just found another peasant dead of
hunger, along by the sea. You would say they all meant to die under
our eyes.--[_To_ MÉLISANDE.] Well, my sword?--Why do you tremble
so?--I am not going to kill you. I would simply examine the blade. I
do not employ the sword for these uses. Why do you examine me like a
beggar?--I do not come to ask alms of you. You hope to see something
in my eyes without my seeing anything in yours?--Do you think I may
know something?--[_To_ ARKËL.]--Do you see those great eyes?--It is as
if they were proud of their richness....

ARKËL.

I see there only a great innocence....

GOLAUD.

A great innocence!... They are greater than innocence!... They are
purer than the eyes of a lamb.... They would give God lessons in
innocence! A great innocence! Listen: I am so near them I feel the
freshness of their lashes when they wink; and yet I am less far away
from the great secrets of the other world than from the smallest
secret of those eyes!... A great innocence!... More than innocence!
You would say the angels of heaven celebrated there an eternal
baptism!... I know those eyes! I have seen them at their work! Close
them! close them! or I shall close them for a long while!...--Do
not put your right hand to your throat so; I am saying a very simple
thing.... I have no under-thought.... If I had an under-thought, why
should I not say it? Ah! ah!--do not attempt to flee!--Here!--Give
me that hand!--Ah! your hands are too hot.... Go away! Your flesh
disgusts me!... Here!--There is no more question of fleeing now!--[_He
seizes her by the hair._]--You shall follow me on your knees!--On your
knees!--On your knees before me!--Ah! ah! your long hair serves
some purpose at last!... Right,... left!--Left,... right!--Absalom!
Absalom.--Forward! back! To the ground! to the ground!... You see, you
see; I laugh already like an old man....

ARKËL (_running up_).

Golaud!...

GOLAUD (_affecting a sudden calm_).

You will do as you may please, look you.--I attach no importance
to that.--I am too old; and, besides, I am not a spy. I shall await
chance; and then ... Oh! then!... simply because it is the custom;
simply because it is the custom....                                [_Exit._

ARKËL.

What ails him?--He is drunk?

MÉLISANDE (_in tears_).

No, no; he does not love me any more.... I am not happy!... I am not
happy!...

ARKËL.

If I were God, I would have pity on men's hearts....




SCENE III.--_A terrace of the castle. Little_ YNIOLD _discovered,
trying to lift a bowlder._


LITTLE YNIOLD.

Oh, this stone is heavy!... It is heavier than I am.... It is
heavier than everybody.... It is heavier than everything that ever
happened.... I can see my golden ball between the rock and this
naughty stone, and I cannot reach it.... My little arm is not long
enough,... and this stone won't be lifted.... I can't lift it,... and
nobody could lift it.... It is heavier than the whole house;... you
would think it had roots in the earth.... [_The Bleatings of a flock
heard far away._]--Oh! oh! I hear the sheep crying.... [_He goes to
look, at the edge of the terrace._] Why! there is no more sun.... They
are coming ... the little sheep ... they are coming.... There is a lot
of them!... There is a lot of them!... They are afraid of the dark....
They crowd together! they crowd together!... They can hardly walk any
more.... They are crying! they are crying! and they go quick!... They
go quick!... They are already at the great crossroads. Ah! ah! They
don't know where they ought to go any more.... They don't cry any
more.... They wait.... Some of them want to go to the right....
They all want to go to the right.... They cannot!... The shepherd is
throwing earth at them.... Ah! ah! They are going to pass by here....
They obey! They obey! They are going to pass under the terrace....
They are going to pass under the rocks.... I am going to see them near
by.... Oh! oh! what a lot of them!... What a lot of them!... The
whole road is full of them.... They all keep still now ... Shepherd!
shepherd! why don't they speak any more?

THE SHEPHERD (_who is out of sight_).

Because it is no longer the road to the stable....

YNIOLD.

Where are they going?--Shepherd! shepherd!--where are they going?--He
doesn't hear me any more. They are too far away already.... They go
quick.... They are not making a noise any more.... It is no longer the
road to the stable.... Where are they going to sleep to-night?--Oh!
oh!--It is too dark.... I am going to tell something to somebody....
                                                                   [_Exit._




SCENE IV.--_A fountain in the park._


_Enter_ PÉLLÉAS.

PÉLLÉAS.

It is the last evening ... the last evening. It must all end. I have
played like a child about a thing I did not guess.... I have played
a-dream about the snares of fate.... Who has awakened me all at once?
I shall flee, crying out for joy and woe like a blind man fleeing
from his burning house.... I am going to tell her I shall flee....
My father is out of danger; and I have no more reason to lie to
myself.... It is late; she does not come.... I should do better to
go away without seeing her again.... I must look well at her this
time.... There are some things that I no longer recall.... It seems at
times as if I had not seen her for a hundred years.... And I have not
yet looked upon her look.... There remains nought to me if I go away
thus. And all those memories ... it is as if I were to take away a
little water in a muslin bag.... I must see her one last time, to the
bottom of her heart.... I must tell her all that I have never told
her.

_Enter_ MÉLISANDE.

MÉLISANDE.

Pélléas!

Mélisande!--Is it thou, Mélisande?

MÉLISANDE.

Yes.

PÉLLÉAS.

Come hither; do not stay at the edge of the moonlight.--Come hither.
We have so many things to tell each other.... Come hither in the
shadow of the linden.

MÉLISANDE.

Let me stay in the light....

PÉLLÉAS.

We might be seen from the windows of the tower. Come hither; here, we
have nothing to fear.--Take care; we might be seen....

MÉLISANDE.

I wish to be seen....

PÉLLÉAS.

Why, what doth ail thee?--Thou wert able to come out without being
seen?

MÉLISANDE.

Yes; your brother slept....

PÉLLÉAS.

It is late.--In an hour they will close the gates. We must be careful.
Why art thou come so late?

MÉLISANDE.

Your brother had a bad dream. And then my gown was caught on the nails
of the gate. See, it is torn. I lost all this time, and ran....

PÉLLÉAS.

My poor Mélisande!... I should almost be afraid to touch thee.... Thou
art still out of breath, like a hunted bird.... It is for me, for me,
thou doest all that?... I hear thy heart beat as if it were mine....
Come hither ... nearer, nearer me....

MÉLISANDE.

Why do you laugh?

PÉLLÉAS.

I do not laugh;--or else I laugh for joy, unwittingly.... It were a
weeping matter, rather....

MÉLISANDE.

We have come here before.... I recollect....

PÉLLÉAS.

Yes ... yes.... Long months ago.--I knew not then.... Knowest thou why
I asked thee to come here to-night?

MÉLISANDE.

No.

PÉLLÉAS.

It is perhaps the last time I shall see thee.... I must go away
forever....

MÉLISANDE.

Why sayest thou always thou wilt go away?...

PÉLLÉAS.

I must tell thee what thou knowest already?--Thou knowest not what I
am going to tell thee?

MÉLISANDE.

Why, no; why, no; I know nothing--...

PÉLLÉAS.

Thou knowest not why I must go afar.... Thou knowest not it is
because ... [_He kisses her abruptly._] I love thee....

MÉLISANDE (_in a low voice_).

I love thee too....

PÉLLÉAS.

Oh! oh! What saidst thou, Mélisande?... I hardly heard it!... Thou
sayest that in a voice coming from the end of the world!... I hardly
heard thee.... Thou lovest me?--Thou lovest me too?... Since when
lovest thou me?...

MÉLISANDE.

Since always.... Since I saw thee....

PÉLLÉAS.

Oh, how thou sayest that!... Thy voice seems to have blown across the
sea in spring!... I have never heard it until now;... one would say
it had rained on my heart!... Thou sayest that so frankly!... Like an
angel questioned!... I cannot believe it, Mélisande!... Why shouldst
thou love me?--Nay, why dost thou love me?--Is what thou sayest
true?--Thou dost not mock me?--Thou dost not lie a little, to make me
smile?...

MÉLISANDE.

No; I never lie; I lie but to thy brother....

PÉLLÉAS.

Oh, how thou sayest that!... Thy voice! thy voice!... It is cooler and
more frank than the water is!... It is like pure water on my lips!...
It is like pure water on my hands.... Give me, give me thy hands!...
Oh, how small thy hands are!... I did not know thou wert so
beautiful!... I have never seen anything so beautiful before thee....
I was fall of unrest; I sought throughout the house.... I sought
throughout the country.... And I found not beauty.... And now I have
found thee!... I have found thee!.,. I do not think there could be on
the earth a fairer woman!... Where art thou?--I no longer hear thee
breathe....

MÉLISANDE.

Because I look on thee....

PÉLLÉAS.

Why dost thou look so gravely on me?--We are already in the
shadow.--It is too dark under this tree. Come into the light. We
cannot see how happy we are. Come, come; so little time remains to
us....

MÉLISANDE.

No, no; let us stay here.... I am nearer thee in the dark....

PÉLLÉAS.

Where are thine eyes?--Thou art not going to fly me?--Thou dost not
think of me just now.

MÉLISANDE.

Oh, yes; oh, yes; I only think of thee....

PÉLLÉAS.

Thou wert looking elsewhere....

MÉLISANDE.

I saw thee elsewhere....

PÉLLÉAS.

Thy soul is far away.... What ails thee, then?--Meseems thou art not
happy....

MÉLISANDE.

Yes, yes; I am happy, but I am sad....

PÉLLÉAS.

One is sad often when one loves....

MÉLISANDE.

I weep always when I think of thee....

PÉLLÉAS.

I too.... I too, Mélisande.... I am quite near thee; I weep for joy,
and yet ...[_He kisses her again._]--Thou art strange when I kiss thee
so.... Thou art so beautiful that one would think thou wert about to
die....

MÉLISANDE.

Thou too....

PÉLLÉAS.

There, there.... We do not what we will.... I did not love thee the
first time I saw thee....

MÉLISANDE.

Nor I ... nor I.... I was afraid....

PÉLLÉAS.

I could not admit thine eyes.... I would have gone away at once ...
and then....

MÉLISANDE.

And I,--I would not have come.... I do not yet know why,--I was afraid
to come....

PÉLLÉAS.

There are so many things one never knows. We are ever waiting; and
then.... What is that noise?--They are closing the gates!...

MÉLISANDE.

Yes, they have closed the gates....

PÉLLÉAS.

We cannot go back now?--Hearest thou the bolts?--Listen! listen!...
the great chains!... the great chains!... It is too late; it is too
late!...

MÉLISANDE.

All the better! all the better! all the better!...

PÉLLÉAS.

Thou--...? Behold, behold!... It is no longer we who will it so!...
All's lost, all's saved! all is saved to-night!--Come, come.... My
heart beats like a madman,--up to my very throat.... [_They embrace._]
Listen! listen! my heart is almost strangling me.... Come! come!...
Ah, how beautiful it is in the shadows!...

MÉLISANDE.

There is some one behind us!...

PÉLLÉAS.

I see no one....

MÉLISANDE.

I heard a noise....

PÉLLÉAS.

I hear only thy heart in the dark....

MÉLISANDE.

I heard the crackling of dead leaves....

PÉLLÉAS.

Because the wind is silent all at once.... It fell as we were
kissing....

MÉLISANDE.

How long our shadows are to-night!...

PÉLLÉAS.

They embrace to the very end of the garden. Oh, how they kiss far away
from us!... Look! look!...

MÉLISANDE.(_a stifled voice_).

A-a-h!--He is behind a tree!

PÉLLÉAS.

Who?

MÉLISANDE.

Golaud!

PÉLLÉAS.

Golaud!--where?--I see nothing....

MÉLISANDE.

There ... at the end of our shadows.

PÉLLÉAS.

Yes, yes; I saw him.... Let us not turn abruptly....

MÉLISANDE.

He has his sword....

PÉLLÉAS.

I have not mine....

MÉLISANDE.

He saw us kiss....

PÉLLÉAS.

He does not know we have seen him.... Do not stir; do not turn your
head.... He would rush headlong on us.... He will remain there while
he thinks we do not know. He watches us.... He is still motionless....
Go, go at once this way.... I will wait for him.... I will stop
him....

MÉLISANDE.

No, no, no!...

PÉLLÉAS.

Go! go! he has seen all!... He will kill us!...

MÉLISANDE.

All the better! all the better! all the better!...

PÉLLÉAS.

He comes! he comes!... Thy mouth!... Thy mouth!...

MÉLISANDE.

Yes!... yes! yes!...
                                                  [_They kiss desperately._

PÉLLÉAS

Oh! oh! All the stars are falling!...

MÉLISANDE.

Upon me too! upon me too!...

PÉLLÉAS.

Again! Again!... Give! give!...

MÉLISANDE.

All! all! all!...

    [Golaud rushes upon them, sword in hand, and strikes Pélléas, who
    falls at the brink of the fountain. Mélisande flees terrified.]

MÉLISANDE. (_fleeing_).

Oh! oh! I have no courage I ... I have no courage!...

                         [GOLAUD _pursues her through the wood in silence._




ACT FIFTH.




SCENE I.--_A lower hall in the castle. The women servants discovered,
gathered together, while without children are playing before one of
the ventilators of the hall._


AN OLD SERVANT.

You will see, you will see, my daughters; it will be to-night.--Some
one will come to tell us by and by....

ANOTHER SERVANT.

They will not come to tell us.... They don't know what they are doing
any longer....

THIRD SERVANT.

Let us wait here....

FOURTH SERVANT.

We shall know well enough when we must go up....

FIFTH SERVANT.

When the time is come, we shall go up of ourselves....

SIXTH SERVANT.

There is no longer a sound heard in the house....

SEVENTH SERVANT.

We ought to make the children keep still, who are playing before the
ventilator.

EIGHTH SERVANT.

They will be still of themselves by and by.

NINTH SERVANT.

The time has not yet come....

_Enter an old Servant._

THE OLD SERVANT.

No one can go in the room any longer. I have listened more than
an hour.... You could hear the flies walk on the doors.... I heard
nothing....

FIRST SERVANT.

Has she been left alone in the room?

THE OLD SERVANT.

No, no; I think the room is full of people.

FIRST SERVANT.

They will come, they will come, by and by....

THE OLD SERVANT.

Lord! Lord! It is not happiness that has come into the house.... One
may not speak, but if I could say what I know...

SECOND SERVANT.

It was you who found them before the gate?

THE OLD SERVANT.

Why, yes! why, yes! it was I who found them. The porter says it was
he who saw them first; but it was I who waked them. He was sleeping on
his face and would not get up.--And now he comes saying, "It was I who
saw them first." Is that just?--See, I burned myself lighting a lamp
to go down cellar.--Now what was I going to do down cellar?--I can't
remember any more what I was going to do down cellar.--At any rate I
got up very early; it was not yet very light; I said to myself, I will
go across the courtyard, and then I will open the gate. Good; I
go down the stairs on tiptoe, and I open the gate as if it were an
ordinary gate.... My God! My God! What do I see? Divine a little what
I see!...

FIRST SERVANT.

They were before the gate?

THE OLD SERVANT.

They were both stretched out before the gate!... Exactly like poor
folk that are too hungry.... They were huddled together like little
children who are afraid.... The little princess was nearly dead, and
the great Golaud had still his sword in his side.... There was blood
on the sill....

SECOND SERVANT.

We ought to make the children keep still.... They are screaming with
all their might before the ventilator....

THIRD SERVANT.

You can't hear yourself speak....

FOURTH SERVANT.

There is nothing to be done: I have tried already; they won't keep
still....

FIRST SERVANT.

It seems he is nearly cured?

THE OLD SERVANT.

Who?

FIRST SERVANT.

The great Golaud.

THIRD SERVANT.

Yes, yes; they have taken him to his wife's room. I met them just
now, in the corridor. They were holding him up as if he were drunk. He
cannot yet walk alone.

THE OLD SERVANT.

He could not kill himself; he is too big. But she is hardly wounded,
and it is she who is going to die.... Can you understand that?

FIRST SERVANT.

You have seen the wound?

THE OLD SERVANT.

As I see you, my daughter.--I saw everything, you understand.... I saw
it before all the others.... A tiny little wound under her little left
breast,--a little wound that wouldn't kill a pigeon. Is it natural?

FIRST SERVANT.

Yes, yes; there is something underneath....

SECOND SERVANT.

Yes; but she was delivered of her babe three days ago....

THE OLD SERVANT.

Exactly!... She was delivered on her death-bed; is that a little
sign?--And what a child! Have you seen it?--A wee little girl a beggar
would not bring into the world.... A little wax figure that came much
too soon;... a little wax figure that must live in lambs' wool....
Yes, yes; it is not happiness that has come into the house....

FIRST SERVANT.

Yes, yes; it Is the hand of God that has been stirring....

SECOND SERVANT.

Yes, yes; all that did not happen without reason....

THIRD SERVANT.

It is as good lord Pélléas ... where is he?--No one knows....

THE OLD SERVANT.

Yes, yes; everybody knows.... But nobody dare speak of it.... One does
not speak of this;... one does not speak of that;... one speaks no
more of anything;... one no longer speaks truth.... But _I_ know he
was found at the bottom of Blind Man's Spring;... but no one, no one
could see him.... Well, well, we shall only know all that at the last
day....

FIRST SERVANT.

I dare not sleep here any longer....

THE OLD SERVANT.

Yes, yes; once ill-fortune is in the house, one keeps silence in
vain....

THIRD SERVANT.

Yes; it finds you all the same....

THE OLD SERVANT.

Yes, yes; but we do not go where we would....

FOURTH SERVANT.

Yes, yes; we do not do what we would....

FIRST SERVANT.

They are afraid of us now....

SECOND SERVANT.

They all keep silence....

THIRD SERVANT.

They cast down their eyes in the corridors.

FOURTH SERVANT.

They do not speak any more except in a low voice.

FIFTH SERVANT.

You would think they had all done it together.

SIXTH SERVANT.

One doesn't know what they have done....

SEVENTH SERVANT.

What is to be done when the masters are afraid?...            [_A silence_.

FIRST SERVANT.

I no longer hear the children screaming.

SECOND SERVANT.

They are sitting down before the ventilator.

THIRD SERVANT.

They are huddled against each other.

THE OLD SERVANT.

I no longer hear anything in the house....

FIRST SERVANT.

You no longer even hear the children breathe....

THE OLD SERVANT.

Come, come; it is time to go up....
                                                      [_Exeunt in silence._




SCENE II.--_An apartment in the castle._


ARKËL, GOLAUD, _and the_ PHYSICIAN _discovered in one corner of the
room._ MÉLISANDE _is stretched upon her bed._

THE PHYSICIAN.

It cannot be of that little wound she is dying; a bird would not have
died of it.... It is not you, then, who have killed her, good my lord;
do not be so disconsolate.... She could not have lived.... She was
born without reason ... to die; and she dies without reason.... And
then, it is not sure we shall not save her....

ARKËL.

No, no; it seems to me we keep too silent, in spite of ourselves, in
her room.... It is not a good sign.... Look how she sleeps ... slowly,
slowly;... it is as if her soul was cold forever....

GOLAUD.

I have killed her without cause! I have killed her without cause!...
Is it not enough to make the stones weep?... They had kissed like
little children.... They had simply kissed.... They were brother and
sister.... And I, and I at once!... I did it in spite of myself, look
you.... I did it in spite of myself....

THE PHYSICIAN.

Stop; I think she is waking....

MÉLISANDE.

Open the window;... open the window....

ARKËL

Shall I open this one, Mélisande?

MÉLISANDE.

No, no; the great window ... the great window.... It is to see....

ARKËL.

Is not the sea air too cold to-night? Do it; do it....

MÉLISANDE.

Thanks.... Is it sunset?

ARKËL.

Yes; it is sunset on the sea; it is late.--How are you, Mélisande?

MÉLISANDE.

Well, well.--Why do you ask that? I have never been better.--And yet
it seems to me I know something....

ARKËL.

What sayest thou?--I do not understand thee....

MÉLISANDE.

Neither do I understand all I say, you see.... I do not know what I
am saying.... I do not know what I know.... I no longer say what I
would....

ARKËL.

Why, yes! why, yes!... I am quite happy to hear thee speak so; thou
hast raved a little these last days, and one no longer understood
thee.... But now all that is far away....

MÉLISANDE.

I do not know....--Are you all alone in the room, grandfather?

ARKËL.

No; there is the physician, besides, who cured thee....

MÉLISANDE.

Ah!...

ARKËL.

And then there is still some one else....

MÉLISANDE.

Who is it?

ARKËL.

It is ... thou must not be frightened.... He does not wish thee the
least harm, be sure.... If thou'rt afraid, he will go away.... He is
very unhappy....

MÉLISANDE.

Who is it?

ARKËL.

It is thy ... thy husband.... It is Golaud....

MÉLISANDE.

Golaud is here? Why does he not come by me?

GOLAUD (_dragging himself toward the bed._)

Mélisande ... Mélisande....

MÉLISANDE.

Is it you, Golaud? I should hardly recognize you any more.... It is
the evening sunlight in my eyes.... Why look you on the walls? You
have grown thin and old.... Is it a long while since we saw each
other?

GOLAUD (_to_ ARKËL _and the_ PHYSICIAN).

Will you withdraw a moment, if you please, if you please?... I will
leave the door wide open.... One moment only.... I would say something
to her; else I could not die.... Will you?--Go clear to the end of
the corridor; you can come back at once, at once.... Do not refuse
me this.... I am a wretch.... [_Exit_ ARKËL _and the_
PHYSICIAN.]--Mélisande, hast thou pity on me, as I have pity on
thee?... Mélisande?... Dost thou forgive me, Mélisande?...

MÉLISANDE.

Yes, yes, I do forgive thee.... What must I forgive?...

GOLAUD.

I have wrought thee so much ill, Mélisande.... I cannot tell thee the
ill I have wrought thee.... But I see it, I see it so clearly to-day
... since the first day.... And all I did not know till now leaps in
my eyes to-night.... And it is all my fault, all that has happened,
all that will happen.... If I could tell it, thou wouldst see as I
do!... I see all! I see all!... But I loved thee so!... I loved thee
so!... But now there is some one dying.... It is I who am dying....
And I would know.... I would ask thee.... Thou'lt bear me no
ill-will.... I would.... The truth must be told to a dying man.... He
must know the truth, or else he could not sleep.... Swearest thou to
tell me the truth?

MÉLISANDE

Yes.

GOLAUD.

Didst thou love Pélléas?

MÉLISANDE.

Why, yes; I loved him.--Where is he?

GOLAUD.

Thou dost not understand me?--Thou wilt not understand me?--It seems
to me ... it seems to me.... Well, then, here: I ask thee if thou
lovedst him with a forbidden love?... Wert thou ... were you guilty?
Say, say, yes, yes, yes!...

MÉLISANDE.

No, no; we were not guilty.--Why do you ask that?

GOLAUD.

Mélisande!... tell me the truth, for the love of God!

MÉLISANDE.

Why have I not told the truth?

GOLAUD.

Do not lie so any more, at the moment of death!

MÉLISANDE.

Who is dying?--Is it I?

GOLAUD.

Thou, thou! and I, I too, after thee!... And we must have the
truth.... We must have the truth at last, dost thou understand?...
Tell me all! Tell me all! I forgive thee all!...

MÉLISANDE.

Why am I going to die?--I did not know it....

GOLAUD.

Thou knowest it now!... It is time! It is time!... Quick! quick!...
The truth! the truth!...

MÉLISANDE.

The truth ... the truth....

GOLAUD.

Where art thou?--Mélisande!--Where art thou?--It is not natural!
Mélisande! Where art thou?--Where goest thou? [_Perceiving_ ARKËL
_and the_ PHYSICIAN _at the door of the room.]--_ Yes, yes; you may
come in.... I know nothing; it is useless.... It is too late; she is
already too far away from us.... I shall never know!... I shall die
here like a blind man!...

ARKËL.

What have you done? You will kill her....

GOLAUD.

I have already killed her....

ARKËL.

Mélisande....

MÉLISANDE.

Is it you, grandfather?

ARKËL.

Yes, my daughter.... What would you have me do?

MÉLISANDE.

Is it true that the winter is beginning?...

ARKËL.

Why dost thou ask?

MÉLISANDE.

Because it is cold, and there are no more leaves....

ARKËL.

Thou art cold?--Wilt thou have the windows closed?

MÉLISANDE.

No, no,... not till the sun be at the bottom of the sea.--It sinks
slowly; then it is the winter beginning?

ARKËL.

Yes.--Thou dost not like the winter?

MÉLISANDE.

Oh! no. I am afraid of the cold.--I am so afraid of the great cold....

ARKËL.

Dost thou feel better?

MÉLISANDE.

Yes, yes; I have no longer all those qualms....

ARKËL.

Wouldst thou see thy child?

MÉLISANDE.

What child?

ARKËL.

Thy child.--Thou art a mother.... Thou hast brought a little daughter
into the world....

MÉLISANDE.

Where is she?

ARKËL.

Here....

MÉLISANDE.

It is strange.... I cannot lift my arms to take her....

ARKËL.

Because you are still very weak.... I will hold her myself; look....

MÉLISANDE.

She does not laugh.... She is little.... She is going to weep too....
I pity her....

    [The room has been invaded, little by little, by the women
    servants of the castle, who range themselves in silence along
    the walls and wait]

GOLAUD (_rising abruptly_).

What is the matter?--What are all these women coming here for?...

THE PHYSICIAN.

It is the servants....

ARKËL.

Who was it called them?

THE PHYSICIAN.

It was not I....

GOLAUD.

Why do you come here?--No one has asked for you.... What come you here
to do?--But what is it, then?--Answer me!...
                                            [_The servants make no answer._

ARKËL.

Do not speak too loud.... She is going to sleep; she has closed her
eyes....

GOLAUD.

It is not...?

THE PHYSICIAN.

No, no; see, she breathes....

ARKËL.

Her eyes are full of tears.--It is her soul weeping now.... Why does
she stretch her arms out so?--What would she?

THE PHYSICIAN.

It is toward the child, without doubt.... It is the straggle of
motherhood against...

GOLAUD.

At this moment?--At this moment?--You must say. Say! Say!...

THE PHYSICIAN.

Perhaps.

GOLAUD.

At once?... Oh! oh! I must tell her....--Mélisande! Mélisande!...
Leave me alone! leave me alone with her!...

ARKËL.

No, no; do not come near.... Trouble her not.... Speak no more to
her.... You know not what the soul is....

GOLAUD.

It is not my fault!... It is not my fault!

ARKËL.

Hush!... Hush!... We must speak softly now.--She must not be
disturbed.... The human soul is very silent.... The human soul likes
to depart alone.... It suffers so timorously.... But the sadness,
Golaud ... the sadness of all we see!... Oh! oh! oh!... [_At this
moment, all the servants fall suddenly on their knees at the back of
the chamber._]

ARKËL (_turning_).

What is the matter?

THE PHYSICIAN (_approaching the bed and feeling the body_).

They are right....
                                                         [_A long silence._

ARKËL.

I saw nothing.--Are you sure?...

THE PHYSICIAN.

Yes, yes.

ARKËL.

I heard nothing.... So quick, so quick!... All at once!... She goes
without a word....

GOLAUD (_sobbing_).

Oh! oh! oh!

_ARKËL._

Do not stay here, Golaud.... She must have silence now.... Come,
come.... It is terrible, but it is not your fault.... 'T was a little
being, so quiet, so fearful, and so silent.... 'T was a poor little
mysterious being, like everybody.... She lies there as if she were the
big sister of her child.... Come, come.... My God! My God!... I shall
never understand it at all.... Let us not stay here.--Come; the child
most not stay here in this room.... She must live now in her place....
It is the poor little one's turn....
                                                 [_They go out in silence._


[CURTAIN.]
﻿Alladine and Palomides.

_To Camille Mauclair_.




Persons.


ABLAMORE.

ASTOLAINE, _daughter of Ablamore_.

ALLADINE.

PALOMIDES.

THE SISTERS OF PALOMIDES.

A PHYSICIAN.

[NOTE: The translation of Ablamore's song is taken from the version of
this play made by the editors of "Poet-lore." R.H.]




Alladine and Palomides.

       *       *       *       *       *




ACT FIRST.

_A-wild part of the gardens_. ABLAMORE _discovered leaning over_
ALLADINE, _who is asleep_.


ABLAMORE.

Methinks sleep reigns day and night beneath these trees. Each time
she comes here with me toward nightfall, she is hardly seated when she
falls asleep. Alas! I must be glad even of that.... During the day,
whene'er I speak to her and her look happens to encounter mine, it is
hard as a slave's to whom a thing impossible has just been bidden....
Yet that is not her customary look.... I have seen her many times
resting her beautiful eyes on children, on the forest, the sea, or her
surroundings. She smiles at me as one smiles on a foe; and I dare not
bend over her save at times when her eyes can no longer see me.... I
have a few moments every evening; and all the rest of the day I live
beside her with my eyes cast down.... It is sad to love too late....
Maids cannot understand that years do not separate hearts.... They
have called me "The wise King."... I was wise because till now nothing
had happened to me.... There are men who seem to turn events aside.
It was enough that I should be about for nothing to be able to have
birth.... I had suspected it of old.... In the time of my youth, I had
many friends whose presence seemed to attract every adventure; but
the days when I went forth with them, for the encounter of joys or
sorrows, they came back again with empty hands.... I think I palsied
fate; and I long took pride in this gift. One lived under cover in my
reign.... But now I have recognized that misfortune itself is better
worth than sleep, and that there must be a life more active and higher
than waiting.... They shall see that I too have strength to trouble,
when I will, the water that seems dead at the bottom of the great
caldrons of the future.... Alladine, Alladine!... Oh! she is lovely
so, her hair over the flowers and over her pet lamb, her lips apart
and fresher than the morn.... I will kiss her without her knowing,
holding back my poor white beard.... [_He kisses her._]--She
smiled.... Should I pity her? For the few years she gives me, she will
some day be queen; and I shall have done a little good before I go
away.... They will be astonished.... She herself does not know.... Ah!
here she wakes with a start.... Where are you coming from, Alladine?

ALLADINE.

I have had a bad dream....

ABLAMORE.

What is the matter? Why do you look yonder?

ALLADINE.

Some one went by upon the road.

ABLAMORE.

I heard nothing.

ALLADINE.

I tell you some one is coming.... There he is! [_She points out a
young knight coming forward through the trees and holding his horse by
the bridle._] Do not take me by the hand; I am not afraid.... He has
not seen us....

ABLAMORE.

Who dares come here?... If I did not know.... I believe it is
Palomides.... It is Astolaine's betrothed.... He has raised his
head.... Is it you, Palomides?

_Enter_ PALOMIDES.

PALOMIDES.

Yes, my father.... If I am suffered yet to call you by that name.... I
come hither before the day and the hour....

ABLAMORE.

You are a welcome guest, whatever hour it be.... But what has
happened? We did not expect you for two days yet.... Is Astolaine
here, too?...

PALOMIDES.

No; she will come to-morrow. We have journeyed day and night. She was
tired and begged me to come on before.... Are my sisters come?

ABLAMORE.

They have been here three days waiting for your wedding.--You look
very happy, Palomides....

PALOMIDES.

Who would not be happy, to have found what he sought? I was sad of
old. But now the days seem lighter and more sweet than harmless birds
in the hand.... And if old moments come again by chance, I draw near
Astolaine, and you would think I threw a window open on the dawn....
She has a soul that can be seen around her,--that takes you in its
arms like an ailing child and without saying anything to you consoles
you for everything.... I shall never understand it at all.--I do not
know how it can all be; but my knees bend in spite of me when I speak
of it....

ALLADINE.

I want to go in again.

ABLAMORE.

[_Seeing that_ ALLADINE _and_ PALOMIDES _look at each other
stealthily._] This is little Alladine who has come hither from
the heart of Arcady.... Take hands ... Does that astonish you,
Palomides?...

PALOMIDES.

My father....

[PALOMIDES' _horse starts aside, frightening_ ALLADINE'S _lamb._]

ABLAMORE.

Take care.... Your horse has frightened Alladine's lamb.... He will
run away....

ALLADINE.

No; he never runs away.... He has been startled, but he will not
run away.... It is a lamb my godmother gave me.... He is not like
others.... He stays beside me night and day.               [_Caressing it._

PALOMIDES (_also caressing it_).

He looks at me with the eyes of a child....

ALLADINE.

He understands everything that happens....

ABLAMORE.

It is time to go find your sisters, Palomides.... They will be
astonished to see you....

ALLADINE.

They have gone every day to the turning of the road.... I have gone
with them; but they did not hope yet....

ABLAMORE.

Come; Palomides is covered with dust, and he must be weary.... We have
too many things to say to each other to talk here.... We will say them
to-morrow.... They claim the morn is wiser than the evening.... I see
the palace gates are open and seem to wait for us....

ALLADINE.

I cannot help being uneasy when I go back into the palace.... It is so
big, and I am so little, and I get lost there still.... And then
all those windows on the sea.... You cannot count them.... And the
corridors that turn without reason, and others that never turn, but
lose themselves between the walls.... And the halls I dare not go
into....

PALOMIDES.

We will go in everywhere....

ALLADINE.

You would think I was not made to dwell there,--that it was not built
for me.... Once I lost my way there.... I pushed open thirty doors,
before I found the light of day again.... And I could not go out;
the last door opened on a pool.... And the vaults that are cold all
summer; and the galleries that bend back on themselves endlessly....
There are stairways that lead nowhere and terraces from which nothing
can be seen....

ABLAMORE.

You who were not wont to talk, how you talk to-night!...
                                                                 [_Exeunt._




ACT SECOND.




SCENE I.--ALLADINE _discovered, her forehead against one of the
windows that open on the park. Enter_ ABLAMORE.


ABLAMORE.

Alladine....

ALLADINE (_turning abruptly_).

What is it?

ABLAMORE.

Oh, how pale you are!... Are you ill?

ALLADINE.

No.

ABLAMORE.

What is it in the park?--Were you looking at the avenue of fountains
that unfolds before your windows?--They are wonderful and weariless.
They were raised there one by one, at the death of each of my
daughters.... At night I hear them singing in the garden.... They
bring to mind the lives they represent, and I can tell their voices
apart....

ALLADINE.

I know.

ABLAMORE.

You must pardon me; I sometimes repeat the same things and my memory
is less trust-worthy.... It is not age; I am not an old man yet, thank
God! but kings have a thousand cares. Palomides has been telling me
his adventures....

ALLADINE.

Ah!

ABLAMORE.

He has not done what he would; young people have no will any more.--He
astonishes me. I had chosen him among a thousand for my daughter. He
should have had a soul as deep as hers.--He has done nothing which may
not be excusable, but I had hoped more.... What do you say of him?

ALLADINE.

Who?

ABLAMORE.

Palomides?

ALLADINE.

I have only seen him one evening....

ABLAMORE.

He astonishes me.--Everything has succeeded with him till now. He
would undertake a thing and accomplish it without a word.--He would
get out of danger without an effort, while others could not open a
door without finding death behind it.--He was of those whom events
seem to await on their knees. But a little while ago something
snapped. You would say he has no longer the same star, and every
step he takes carries him further from himself.--I don't know what it
is.--He does not seem to be at all aware, but others can remark it....
Let us speak of something else: look! the night comes; I see it rise
along the walls. Would you like to go together to the wood of Astolat,
as we do other evenings?

ALLADINE.

I am not going out to-night.

ABLAMORE.

We will stay here, since you prefer it so. Yet the air is sweet and
the evening very fair. [ALLADINE _starts without his noticing it._] I
have had flowers set along the hedges, and I should like to show them
to you....

ALLADINE.

No, not to-night.... If you wish me to.... I like to go there with you
... the air is pure and the trees ... but not to-night.... [_Cowers,
weeping, against the old man's breast._] I do not feel quite well....

ABLAMORE.

What is the matter? You are going to fall.... I will call....

ALLADINE.

No, no.... It is nothing.... It is over....

ABLAMORE.

Sit down. Wait....

    [He runs to the folding-doors at the back and opens both.
    Palomides is seen, seated on a bench. He has not had time to
    turn away his eyes. Ablamore looks fixedly at him, without a
    word, then re-enters the room. Palomides rises and retreats
    in the corridor, stifling the sound of his footsteps. The pet
    lamb leaves the room, unperceived.]




SCENE II.--_A drawbridge over the moats of the palace_. PALOMIDES
_and_ ALLADINE, _with her pet lamb, appear at the two ends of the
bridge._ KING ABLAMORE _leans out from a window of the tower_.


PALOMIDES.

Were you going out, Alladine?--I was coming in. I am coming back from
the chase.--It rained.

ALLADINE.

I have never passed this bridge.

PALOMIDES.

It leads to the forest. It is seldom passed. People had rather go a
long way around. I think they are afraid because the moats are deeper
at this place than elsewhere, and the black water that comes down from
the mountains boils horribly between the walls before it goes hurling
itself into the sea. It roars there always; but the quays are so high
you hardly notice it. It is the most deserted wing of the palace. But
on this side the forest is more beautiful, more ancient, and greater
than any you have seen. It is full of unusual trees and flowers that
have sprung up of themselves,--Will you come?

ALLADINE.

I do not know.... I am afraid of the roaring water.

PALOMIDES.

Come, come; it roars without reason. Look at your lamb; he looks at me
as if he wished to come.... Come, come....

ALLADINE.

Don't call him.... He will get away.

PALOMIDES.

Come, come.

    [The lamb escapes from Alladine's hands, and comes leaping toward
    Palomides, but slips on the inclined plane of the drawbridge and
    goes rolling into the moat.]

ALLADINE.

What has he done?--Where is he?

PALOMIDES.

He slipped. He is straggling in the heart of the eddy. Do not look at
him; there is nothing to be done....

ALLADINE.

You are going to save him?

PALOMIDES.

Save him? But look! he is already in the tunnel. One moment more,
and he will be under the vaults; and God himself will never see him
more....

ALLADINE.

Go away! Go away!

PALOMIDES.

What is the matter?

ALLADINE.

Go away!--I do not want to see you any more!...

    [Ablamore enters precipitately, seizes Alladine, and draws her
    away brusquely without speaking.]




SCENE III.--_A room in the palace_. ABLAMORE _and_ ALLADINE
_discovered_.


ABLAMORE.

You see, Alladine, my hands do not tremble, my heart beats like a
sleeping child's, and my voice has not once been stirred with wrath.
I bear no ill-will to Palomides, although what he has done might seem
unpardonable. And as for thee, who could bear thee ill-will? You obey
laws you do not know, and you could not act otherwise, I will not
speak to you of what took place the other day along the palace moats,
nor of all the unforeseen death of the lamb might have revealed to me,
had I believed in omens for an instant. But last night I surprised
the kiss you gave each other under the windows of Astolaine. At that
moment I was with her in her room. She has a soul that fears so much
to trouble, with a tear or with a simple movement of her eyelids, the
happiness of those about her, that I shall never know if she, as I,
surprised that wretched kiss. But I know what she has the power to
suffer. I shall not ask you anything you cannot avow to me, but I
would know if you had any secret design in following Palomides under
the window where you must have seen us. Answer me without fear; you
know beforehand I will pardon everything.

ALLADINE.

I did not kiss him.

ABLAMORE.

What? You did not kiss Palomides, and Palomides did not kiss you?

ALLADINE.

No.

ABLAMORE.

Ah!... Listen: I came here to forgive you everything.... I thought
you had acted as we almost all act, without aught of our soul
intervening.... But now I will know all that passed.... You love
Palomides, and you have kissed him under my eyes....

ALLADINE.

No.

ABLAMORE.

Don't go away. I am only an old man. Do not flee....

ALLADINE.

I am not fleeing.

ABLAMORE.

Ah! ah! You do not flee, because you think my old hands harmless! They
have yet the strength to tear a secret out in spite of all [_He seizes
her arms_.] And they could wrestle with all those you prefer.... [_He
twists her arms behind her head_.] Ah! you will not speak!... There
will yet come a time when all your soul shall spirt out like a clear
spring, for woe....

ALLADINE.

No, no!

ABLAMORE.

Again,... we are not at the end, the journey is very long--and naked
truth is hid among the rocks.... Will she come forth?... I see her
gestures in your eyes already, and her cool breath will lave my visage
soon.... Ah!... Alladine! Alladine!...[_He releases her suddenly_.]
I heard your bones cry out like little children.... I have not hurt
you?... Do not stay thus, upon your knees before me,... It is I who
go down on my knees. [_He does as he says_] I am a wretch.... You must
have pity.... It is not for myself alone I pray.... I have only one
poor daughter.... All the rest are dead.... I had seven of them
about me.... They were fair and full of happiness; and I saw them no
more.... The only one left to me is going to die, too.... She did
not love life.... But one day she encountered something she no longer
looked for, and I saw she had lost the desire to die.... I do not ask
a thing impossible.... [ALLADINE _weeps and makes no answer_.]




SCENE IV.--_The apartment of_ ASTOLAINE. ASTOLAINE _and_ PALOMIDES
_discovered_.


PALOMIDES.

Astolaine, when I met you several months ago by chance, it seemed
to me that I had found at last what I had sought for during many
years.... Till you, I did not know all that the ever tenderer goodness
and complete simplicity of a high soul might be. I was so deeply
stirred by it that it seemed to me the first time I had met a human
being. You would have said that I had lived till then in a closed
chamber which you opened for me; and all at once I knew what must be
the soul of other men and what mine might become.... Since then,
I have known you further. I have seen you act, and others too have
taught me all that you have been.

There have been evenings when I quitted you without a word, and went
to weep for wonder in a corner of the palace, because you had simply
raised your eyes, made a little unconscious gesture, or smiled for no
apparent cause, yet at the moment when all the souls about you asked
it and would be satisfied. There is but you who know these moments,
because you are, it seems, the soul of all, and I do not believe those
who have not drawn near you can know what true life is. To-day I come
to say all this to you, because I feel that I shall never be he whom
I hoped once to become.... A chance has come--or haply I myself have
come; for you can never tell if you have made a movement of yourself,
or if it be chance that has met with you--a chance has come, which has
opened my eyes, just as we were about to make each other unhappy; and
I have recognized there must be something more incomprehensible than
the beauty of the most beautiful soul or the most beautiful face; and
mightier, too, since I must needs obey it.... I do not know if you
have understood me. If you understand, have pity on me.... I have said
to myself all that could be said.... I know what I shall lose, for I
know her soul is a child's soul, a poor strengthless child's, beside
yours, and yet I cannot resist it....

ASTOLAINE.

Do not weep.... I know too that one does not do what one would do ...
nor was I ignorant that you would come.... There must indeed be
laws mightier than those of our souls, of which we always speak....
[_Kissing him abruptly_].--But I love thee the more, my poor
Palomides.

PALOMIDES.

I love thee, too ... more than her I love.... Thou weepest, as I do?

ASTOLAINE.

They are little tears.... Do not be sad for them.... I weep so,
because I am woman, but they say our tears are not painful.... You see
I can dry them already.... I knew well what it was.... I waited for
the wakening.... It has come, and I can breathe with less disquietude,
being no longer happy.... There!... We must see clearly now for you
and her. For I believe my father already has suspicions.         [_Exeunt_.




ACT THIRD.


SCENE I.--_A room in the palace_. ABLAMORE _discovered_. ASTOLAINE
_stands on the step of a half-open door at the back of the hall_.

ASTOLAINE.

Father, I have come because a voice that I no longer can resist,
commands me to. I told you all that happened in my soul when I met
Palomides. He was not like other men.... To-day I come to ask your
help ... for I do not know what should be said to him.... I have
become aware I cannot love him.... He has remained the same, and
I alone have changed, or have not understood.... And since it is
impossible for me to love, as I have dreamed of love, him I had chosen
among all, it must be that my heart is shut to these things.... I know
it to-day.... I shall look no more toward love; and you will see me
living on about you without sadness and without unrest.... I feel that
I am going to be happy....

ABLAMORE.

Come hither, Astolaine. It is not so that you were wont to speak in
the old days to your father. You wait there, on the threshold of a
door hardly ajar, as if you were ready to flee; and with your hand
upon the key, as if you would close from me forever the secret of your
heart. You know quite well I have not understood what you have just
said, and that words have no sense when souls are not within reach
of each other. Draw nearer still, and speak no more to me, [ASTOLAINE
_approaches slowly_.] There is a moment when souls touch each
other, and know all without need that one should move the lips. Draw
nearer.... They do not reach each other yet, and their radiance is
so slight about us!... [ASTOLAINE _stops_.] Thou darest not?--Thou
knowest too how far one can go?--It is I who must.... [_He approaches
Astolaine with slow step, then stops and looks long at her_.] I see
thee, Astolaine....

ASTOLAINE.

Father!... [_She sobs as she kisses the old man_.]

ABLAMORE.

You see well it was useless....




SCENE II.--_A chamber in the palace_.


_Enter_ ALLADINE _and_ PALOMIDES.

PALOMIDES.

All will be ready to-morrow. We cannot wait longer. He prowls like
a madman through the corridors of the palace; I met him even now.
He looked at me without a word. I passed; and as I turned, I saw him
slyly laugh, shaking his keys. When he perceived that I was looking
at him, he smiled at me, making signs of friendship. He must have
some secret project, and we are in the hands of a master whose reason
begins to totter.... To-morrow we shall be far away.... Yonder there
are wonderful countries that resemble thine.... Astolaine has already
provided for our flight and for my sisters'....

ALLADINE.

What has she said?

PALOMIDES.

Nothing, nothing.... You will see everything about my father's
castle,--after days of sea and days of forests--you will see lakes and
mountains ... not like these, under a sky that looks like the vault of
a cave, with black trees that the storms destroy ... but a sky beneath
which there is nothing more to fear,--forests that are always awake,
flowers that do not close....

ALLADINE.

She wept?

PALOMIDES.

What are you asking?... There is something there of which we have no
right to speak, do you understand?... There is a life there that does
not belong to our poor life, and which love has no right to approach
except in silence.... We are here, like two beggars in rags, when I
think of it.... Go! go!... I could tell you things....

ALLADINE.

Palomides!... What is the matter?

PALOMIDES.

Go! go!... I have seen tears that came from further than the eyes....
There is something else.... It may be, nevertheless, that we are right
... but how I regret being right so, my God!... Go!... I will tell you
to-morrow ... to-morrow ... to-morrow....
                                                       [_Exeunt severally_.




SCENE III.--_A corridor before the apartment of_ ALLADINE. _Enter_
ASTOLAINE _and the_ SISTERS OF PALOMIDES.


ASTOLAINE.

The horses wait in the forest, but Palomides will not flee; and yet
your lives and his are in danger. I do not know my poor father any
longer. He has a fixed idea that troubles his reason. This is the
third day I have followed him step by step, hiding myself behind the
pillars and the walls, for he suffers no one to companion him. To-day,
as the other days, and from the first gleams of the morning he has
gone wandering through the corridors and halls of the palace, and
along the moats and ramparts, shaking the great golden keys he has
had made and singing at the top of his voice the strange song whose
refrain, _Go follow what your eyes have seen_, has perhaps pierced
even to the depths of your chambers. I have concealed from you till
now all that has come to pass, because such things must not be spoken
of without reason. He must have shut up Alladine in this apartment,
but no one knows what he has done with her. I have listened at the
doors every night and whenever he has been away a moment, but I have
never heard any noise in the room.... Do you hear anything?

ONE OF THE SISTERS OF PALOMIDES.

No; I hear only the murmur of the air passing through the little
chinks of the wood....

ANOTHER SISTER.

It seems to me, when I listen hard, that I hear the great pendulum of
the clock.

A THIRD SISTER.

But what is this little Alladine, then, and why does he bear such
ill-will to her?

ASTOLAINE.

It is a little Greek slave that came from the heart of Arcady....
He bears her no ill-will, but ... Do you hear?--It is my father....
[_Singing heard in the distance._] Hide yourselves behind the pillars
... He will have no one pass by this corridor.--[_They hide._]

_Enter_ ABLAMORE, _singing and shaking a bunch of great keys_.

ABLAMORE (_sings_).

  Misfortune had three golden keys.
  --He has no rescue for the Queen!--
  Misfortune had three golden keys.
  Go follow what your eyes have seen.

    [Sits dejected on a bench, beside the door of Alladine's
    apartment, hums a little while longer, and soon goes to sleep, his
    arms hanging down and his head fallen.]

ASTOLAINE.

Come, come! make no noise. He has fallen asleep on the bench.--Oh, my
poor old father! How white his hair has grown during these days! He
is so weak, he is so unhappy, that sleep itself no longer brings him
peace. It is three whole days now since I have dared to look upon his
face....

ONE OF THE SISTERS OF PALOMIDES.

He sleeps profoundly....

ASTOLAINE.

He sleeps profoundly, but you can see his soul has no rest.... The
sunlight here will vex his eyelids.... I am going to draw his cloak
over his face....

ANOTHER SISTER.

No, no; do not touch it.... He might wake with a start....

ASTOLAINE.

Some one is coming in the corridor. Come, come! put yourselves before
him.... Hide him.... A stranger must not see him in this state....

A SISTER OF PALOMIDES.

It is Palomides....

ASTOLAINE.

I am going to cover his poor eyes.... [_She covers_ ABLAMORE'S
_face_.]--I would not have Palomides see him thus.... He is too
miserable.

_Enter_ PALOMIDES.

PALOMIDES.

What is the matter?

ONE OF THE SISTERS.

He has fallen asleep on the bench.

PALOMIDES.

I have followed him without his seeing me.... He said nothing?...

ASTOLAINE.

No; but see all he has suffered....

PALOMIDES.

Has he the keys?

ANOTHER SISTER.

He holds them in his hand....

PALOMIDES.

I am going to take them.

ASTOLAINE.

What are you going to do? Oh, do not wake him!... For three nights now
he has wandered through the palace....

PALOMIDES.

I will open his hand a little without his noticing it.... We have no
right to wait any longer.... God knows what he has done.... He will
forgive us when he has his reason back.... Oh! oh! his hand has no
strength any more...

ASTOLAINE.

Take care! Take care!

PALOMIDES.

I have the keys.--Which is it? I am going to open the room.

ONE OF THE SISTERS.

Oh, I am afraid!... Do not open it at once.... Palomides!...

PALOMIDES.

Stay here.... I do not know what I shall find....

[_He goes to the door, opens it, and enters the apartment_.]

ASTOLAINE.

Is she there?

PALOMIDES (_in the apartment_).

I cannot see.... The shutters are closed....

ASTOLAINE.

Have a care, Palomides.... Wilt thou that I go first?... Thy voice is
trembling....

PALOMIDES (_in the apartment_).

No, no.... I see a ray of sunlight falling through the chinks of the
shutters.

ONE OF THE SISTERS.

Yes; it is broad day out of doors.

PALOMIDES.

[_Rushing headlong from the room_.] Come! Come!... I think she ...

ASTOLAINE.

Thou hast seen her?...

PALOMIDES.

She is stretched out on the bed!... She does not stir!... I do not
think she ... Come! Come!                     [_They all go into the room._

ASTOLAINE AND THE SISTERS OF PALOMIDES.

[_In the room_.] She is here.... No, no, she is not dead.... Alladine!
Alladine!... Oh! oh! The poor child!... Do not cry out so.... She has
fainted.... Her hair is tied across her mouth.... And her hands are
bound behind her back.... They are bound with the help of her hair....
Alladine! Alladine!... Fetch some water....

[ABLAMORE, _who has waked, appears on the step of the door_.]

ASTOLAINE.

There is my father!...

ABLAMORE (_going to_ PALOMIDES).

Was it you who opened the door of the room?

PALOMIDES.

Yes, it was I.... I did it--well, then?--well, then?... I could not
let her die under my eyes.... See what you have done. Alladine!...
Fear nothing.... She opens her eyes a little.... I will not ...

ABLAMORE.

Do not cry out.... Do not cry out so.... Come, we will open the
shutters.... You cannot see here. Alladine!... She is already sitting
up. Alladine, come too.... Do you see, my children, it is dark in
the room. It is as dark here as if we were a thousand feet under the
ground. But I open one of the shutters, and behold! All the light of
the sky and the sun!... It does not need much effort; the light
is full of good-will.... It suffices that one call it; it always
obeys.... Have you seen the river with its little islands between the
meadows in flower?... The sky is a crystal ring to-day.... Alladine!
Palomides, come see.... Draw both of you near Paradise.... You must
kiss each other in the new light.... I bear you no ill-will. You did
what was ordained; and so did I.... Lean out a moment from the open
window, and look once more at the sweet green things....
                       [_A silence. He closes the shutter without a word_.]




ACT FOURTH.

_Vast subterranean crypts_. ALLADINE _and_ PALOMIDES.


PALOMIDES.

They have bound my eyes with bands; they have tied my hands with
cords.

ALLADINE.

They have tied my hands with cords; they have bound my eyes with
bands.... I think my hands are bleeding....

PALOMIDES.

Wait. To-day I bless my strength.... I feel the knots beginning to
give way.... One struggle more, and let my fists burst! One struggle
more! I have my hands! [_Tearing away the bandage_.] And my eyes!...

ALLADINE.

You see now?

PALOMIDES.

Yes.

ALLADINE.

Where are we?

PALOMIDES.

Where are you?

ALLADINE.

Here; can you not see me?

PALOMIDES.

My eyes weep still where the band has left its trace.... We are not in
darkness.... Is it you I hear toward where I can just see?

ALLADINE.

I am here; come.

PALOMIDES.

You are at the edge of that which gives us light. Do not stir; I
cannot see all that there is about you. My eyes have not forgot the
bandage yet. They bound it tight enough to burst my eyelids.

ALLADINE.

Come; the knots stifle me. I can wait no longer....

PALOMIDES.

I hear only a voice coming out of the light....

ALLADINE.

Where are you?

PALOMIDES.

I have no idea myself. I walk still in darkness.... Speak again, that
I may find you. You seem to be on the edge of an unbounded light....

ALLADINE.

Come! come! I have borne without a word, but I can bear no more....

PALOMIDES (_groping forward_).

You are there? I thought you so far away!... My tears deceived me.
I am here, and I see you. Oh, your hands are wounded! They have bled
upon your gown, and the knots have entered into the flesh. I have no
longer any weapons. They have taken away my poniard. I will tear them
off. Wait! wait! I have the knots.

ALLADINE.

Take off the bandage first that makes me blind....

PALOMIDES.

I cannot.... I do not see.... It seems to be surrounded by a net of
golden threads....

ALLADINE.

My hands, then, my hands!

PALOMIDES.

They have taken silken cords.... Wait, the knots come undone. The cord
has thirty turns.... There, there!--Oh, your hands are all blood!...
You would say they were dead....

ALLADINE.

No, no!... They are alive! they are alive! See!...

    [With her hands hardly yet unbound, she clasps Palomides about the
    neck and kisses him passionately.]

PALOMIDES.

Alladine!

ALLADINE.

Palomides!

PALOMIDES.

Alladine, Alladine!...

ALLADINE.

I am happy!... I have waited a long while!...

PALOMIDES.

I was afraid to come....

ALLADINE.

I am happy ... and I would that I could see thee....

PALOMIDES.

They have tied down the bandage like a casque....--Do not turn round;
I have found the golden threads....

ALLADINE.

Yes, yes, I will turn round....
                                     [_She turns about, to kiss him again._

PALOMIDES.

Have a care. Do not stir. I am afraid of wounding thee....

ALLADINE.

Tear it away! Fear nothing. I can bear no more!...

PALOMIDES.

I would see thee too....

ALLADINE.

Tear it away! Tear it away! I am no longer within reach of woe!...
Tear it away!... Thou dost not know that one could wish to die....
Where are we?

PALOMIDES.

Thou'lt see, thou'lt see.... It is innumerable crypts ... great blue
halls, gleaming pillars, and deep vaults....

ALLADINE.

Why dost thou answer when I question thee?

PALOMIDES.

What matter where we be, if we be but together?...

ALLADINE.

Thou lovest me less already?

PALOMIDES.

Why, what ails thee?

ALLADINE.

I know well where I am when I am on thy heart.... Oh, tear the bandage
off!... I would not enter blind into thy soul.... What doest thou,
Palomides? Thou dost not laugh when I laugh. Thou dost not weep when
I weep. Thou dost not clap thy hands when I clap mine; and thou
tremblest not when I speak trembling to the bottom of my soul....
The band! The band!... I will see!... There, there, above my hair!...
[_She tears away the bandage_.] Oh!...

PALOMIDES.

Seest thou?

ALLADINE.

Yes.... I see thee only....

PALOMIDES.

What is it, Alladine? Thou kissest me as if thou wert already sad....

ALLADINE.

Where are we?

PALOMIDES.

Why dost thou ask so sadly?

ALLADINE.

No, I am not sad; but my eyes will hardly open....

PALOMIDES.

One would say your joy had fallen on my lips like a child at the
threshold of the house.... Do not turn away.... I fear lest you should
flee, and I fear lest I dream....

ALLADINE.

Where are we?

PALOMIDES.

We are in crypts that I have never seen.... Doth it not seem to thee
the light increases? When I unclosed my eyes, I could distinguish
nothing; now little by little it is all revealed. I have been often
told of wondrous caverns whereon the halls of Ablamore were built. It
must be these. No one descends here ever; and the king only has the
keys. I knew the sea flooded the lowest vaults; and it is probably the
reflex of the sea which thus illumines us.... They thought to bury us
in night. They came down here with torches and flambeaus and saw the
darkness only, while the light came out to meet us, seeing we had
none.... It brightens without ceasing.... I am sure the dawn pierces
the ocean and sends down to us through all its greening waves the
purest of its child-soul....

ALLADINE.

How long have we been here?

PALOMIDES.

I have no idea.... I made no effort till I heard thee speak....

ALLADINE.

I do not know how this took place. I was asleep in the room where thou
didst find me; and when I waked, my eyes were bound across, and both
my hands were pinioned in my girdle....

PALOMIDES.

I too was sleeping. I heard nothing, and I had a band across my eyes
ere I could open them. I struggled in the darkness; but they were
stronger than I.... I must have passed under deep vaults, for I felt
the cold fall on my shoulders; and I went down so far I could not
count the steps.... Did no one speak to thee?

ALLADINE.

No; no one spoke. I heard some one weeping as he walked; and then I
fainted....

PALOMIDES (_kissing her_).

Alladine!

ALLADINE.

How gravely thou dost kiss me!...

PALOMIDES.

Close not thine eyes when I do kiss thee so.... I would see the kisses
trembling in thy heart, and all the dew that rises in thy soul.... We
shall not find such kisses any more....

ALLADINE.

Always, always!

PALOMIDES.

No, no; there is no kissing twice upon the heart of death.... How fair
thou art so!... It is the first time I have seen thee near.... It is
strange, we think that we have seen each other because we have gone by
two steps apart; but everything changes the moment the lips touch....
There, thou must be let to have thy will.... I stretch my arms wide
to admire thee, as if thou wert no longer mine; and then I draw them
nearer till I touch thy kisses and perceive only eternal bliss....
There needed us this supernatural light!... [_He kisses her again_.]
Ah! What hast thou done? Take care! we are upon a crest of rock that
overhangs the water that gives us light. Do not step back. It was
time.... Do not turn too abruptly. I was dazzled....

ALLADINE.

[_Turning and looking at the blue water that illuminates them_.]
Oh!...

PALOMIDES.

It is as if the sky had flowed hither....

ALLADINE.

It is full of moveless flowers....

PALOMIDES.

It is full of moveless flowers and strange.... Hast thou seen the
largest there that blooms beneath the others? It seems to live a
cadenced life.... And the water ... Is it water?... It seems more
beautiful, more pure, more blue than all the water in the world....

ALLADINE.

I dare not look upon it longer....

PALOMIDES.

See how about us all is luminous.... The light dares hesitate no
longer, and we kiss each other in the vestibules of heaven.... Seest
thou the precious stones that gem the vaults, drunken with life, that
seem to smile on us; and the thousands and thousands of glowing blue
roses that climb along the pillars?...

ALLADINE.

Oh!... I heard!...

PALOMIDES.

What?

ALLADINE.

Some one striking the rocks....

PALOMIDES.

No, no; it is the golden gates of a new Paradise, that open in our
souls and sing upon their hinges!...

ALLADINE.

Listen.... again, again!...

PALOMIDES (_with voice suddenly changed_).

Yes; it is there.... It is at the bottom of the bluest vaults....

ALLADINE.

They are coming to....

PALOMIDES.

I hear the sound of iron on the rock.... They have walled up the door
or cannot open it.... It is the picks grating against the stone....
His soul has told him we were happy....

    [A silence; then a stone is detached at the very end of the vault,
    and a ray of daylight breaks into the cavern.]

ALLADINE.

Oh!...

PALOMIDES.

It is another light....

    [Motionless and anxious, they watch other stones detach themselves
    slowly in an insufferable light, and fall one by one; while the
    light, entering in more and more resistless floods, reveals to
    them little by little the gloom of the cavern they had thought
    marvellous. The miraculous lake becomes wan and sinister; the
    precious stones about them are extinguished, and the glowing roses
    appear as the stains and rotten rubbish that they are. At last,
    the whole side of rock falls abruptly into the crypt. The sunlight
    enters, dazzling. Calls and songs are heard without. Alladine and
    Palomides recoil.]

PALOMIDES.

Where are we?

ALLADINE (_embracing him_).

I love thee still, Palomides....

PALOMIDES.

I love thee too, my Alladine....

ALLADINE.

They come....

PALOMIDES.

[_Looking behind him as they still recoil_.] Have a care....

ALLADINE.

No, no; have no more care....

PALOMIDES (_looking at her_).

Alladine?

ALLADINE.

Yes ...

    [They still recoil before the invasion of light or peril, until
    they lose their footing; and they fall and disappear behind the
    rock that overhangs the underground and now gloomy water.--A
    silence. Astolaine and the sisters of Palomides enter the crypt.]

ASTOLAINE.

Where are they?

ONE OF THE SISTERS OF PALOMIDES.

Palomides!...

ASTOLAINE.

Alladine! Alladine!...

ANOTHER SISTER.

Palomides!... It is we!...

THIRD SISTER.

Fear nothing; we are alone!...

ASTOLAINE.

Come! come! we have come to rescue you!...

FOURTH SISTER.

Ablamore has fled....

FIFTH SISTER.

He is no longer in the palace....

SIXTH SISTER.

They do not answer....

ASTOLAINE.

I heard the water stirred!... This way, this way!

[_They run to the rock that overlooks the underground_.]

ONE OF THE SISTERS.

They are there!...

ANOTHER SISTER.

Yes, yes; at the very bottom of the black water.... They embrace.

THIRD SISTER.

They are dead.

FOURTH SISTER.

No, no; they are alive! they are alive!... See....

THE OTHER SISTERS.

Help! help!... Call!...

ASTOLAINE.

They make no effort to save themselves!...




ACT FIFTH.

    [A corridor, so long that its furthest arches seem to lose
    themselves in a kind of indoor horizon. The sisters of Palomides
    wait before one of the innumerable closed doors that open into
    this corridor. They seem to be guarding it. A little further down,
    on the opposite side, Astolaine and the Physician converse before
    another door, also closed.]


ASTOLAINE.

[_To the Physician._] Nothing has ever happened until now in this
palace, where all things have seemed to be asleep since my sisters
died; and my poor old father, pursued by a strange restlessness, has
fretted without reason at this calm, which seems, for all that,
the least dangerous form of happiness. Some time ago,--his reason
beginning to totter even then,--he went up to the top of a high tower;
and as he stretched his arms out timidly toward the forests and toward
the sea, he said to me--smiling a little fearfully at his words, as if
to disarm my incredulous smile--that he called about us events which
had long been hidden beneath the horizon. They have come, alas! sooner
and more in number than he expected, and a few days have sufficed for
them to reign in his stead. He has been their first victim. He fled
to the meadows, singing, all in tears, the evening when he had little
Alladine and luckless Palomides taken down into the crypts. He has
not since been seen. I have had search made everywhere throughout the
country and even on the sea. He has not been found. At least, I had
hoped to save those he made suffer unwittingly, for he has always been
the tenderest of men and the best of fathers; but there, too, I think
I came too late. I do not know what happened. They have not spoken
yet. They doubtless must have thought, hearing the sound of the iron
and seeing all at once the light again, that my father had regretted
the kind of surcease he had granted them, and that some one came to
bring them death. Or else they slipped as they drew back, upon
the rock that overhangs the lake; and so must have fallen through
heedlessness. But the water is not deep in that spot, and we succeeded
in saving them without difficulty. To-day it is you alone who can do
the rest.
                             [THE SISTERS OF PALOMIDES _have drawn nearer._


THE PHYSICIAN.

They are both ailing with the same disease, and it is a disease I do
not know.--But I have little hope left. They were seized perhaps
with the cold of the underground waters; or else those waters may be
poisonous. The decomposed body of Alladine's lamb was found there.--I
will come back to-night.--Meanwhile they must have silence.... The
level of life is very low in their hearts.... Do not go into their
rooms and do not speak to them, for the least word, in the state they
are in, might cause their death.... They must succeed in forgetting
one another.                                                       [_Exit._

ONE OF THE SISTERS OF PALOMIDES.

I see that he will die.

ASTOLAINE.

No, no.... Do not weep;... one does not die so, at his age....

ANOTHER SISTER.

But why is your father angry without reason at my poor brother?

THIRD SISTER.

I think your father loved Alladine.

ASTOLAINE.

Do not speak so of it.... He thought I suffered. He thought to have
done good, and he did evil unwittingly.... That often happens to
us.... It is my fault, perhaps.... I recall it to-day.... One night I
was asleep. I was weeping in a dream.... We have little courage when
we dream. I waked.... He was beside my bed, looking at me.... Perhaps
he was deceived....

FOURTH SISTER (_running_).

Alladine has stirred a little in her room....

ASTOLAINE.

Go to the door ... listen.... Perhaps it was the nurse rising....

FIFTH SISTER (_listening at the door_).

No, no; I hear the nurse walking.... There is another noise.

SIXTH SISTER (_also running_).

I think Palomides has moved too; I hear the murmur of a voice
seeking....

THE VOICE OF ALLADINE.

[_Very feebly, within the room._] Palomides!...

ONE OF THE SISTERS.

She is calling him!...

ASTOLAINE.

Let us be careful!... Go, go in front of the door, that Palomides may
not hear....

THE VOICE OF ALLADINE.

Palomides!

ASTOLAINE.

My God! My God! Silence that voice!... Palomides will die of it if he
hear it!...

THE VOICE OF PALOMIDES.

[_Very feebly, within the other room_.] Alladine!...

ONE OF THE SISTERS.

He answers!...

ASTOLAINE.

Three among you remain here,... and we will go to the other door. Come,
come quickly. We will surround them. We will try to defend them....
Lie back against the doors.... Perhaps they will hear no longer....

ONE OF THE SISTERS.

I shall go into Alladine's room....

SECOND SISTER.

Yes, yes; prevent her from crying out again.

THIRD SISTER.

She is already cause of all this evil....

ASTOLAINE.

Do not go in, or I go in to Palomides.... She also had a right to
life; and she has done nought but to live.... But that we cannot
stifle in their passage their deadly words!... We are without help, my
poor sisters, my poor sisters, and hands cannot stop souls!...

THE VOICE OF ALLADINE.

Palomides, is it thou?

THE VOICE OF PALOMIDES.

Where art thou, Alladine?

THE VOICE OF ALLADINE.

Is it thou whom I hear far from me making moan?

THE VOICE OF PALOMIDES.

Is it thou whom I hear calling, and see thee not?

THE VOICE OF ALLADINE.

One would believe thy voice had lost the last of hope....

THE VOICE OF PALOMIDES.

One would believe that thine had crossed the winds of death....

THE VOICE OF ALLADINE.

It goes hard with thy voice to pierce into my room....

THE VOICE OF PALOMIDES.

And I no longer hear thy voice as of old time.

THE VOICE OF ALLADINE.

I have been woe for thee!...

THE VOICE OF PALOMIDES.

They have divided us, but I do love thee ever....

THE VOICE OF ALLADINE.

I have been woe for thee.... Art then still suffering?

THE VOICE OF PALOMIDES.

No; I no longer suffer, but I =fain= would see thee....

THE VOICE OF ALLADINE.

We shall not see each other more; the doors are shut....

THE VOICE OF PALOMIDES.

Thy voice would make one say thou lovedst me no more....

THE VOICE OF ALLADINE.

Yes, yes; I love thee still, but it is mournful now....

THE VOICE OF PALOMIDES.

Whither is thy face turned? I hardly understand thee....

THE VOICE OF ALLADINE.

We seem to be an hundred leagues from one another....

THE VOICE OF PALOMIDES.

I try to rise in vain; my spirit is too heavy....

THE VOICE OF ALLADINE.

I too would come,--I too--but still my head falls back....

THE VOICE OF PALOMIDES.

Thou seemest almost to speak in tears despite thyself....

THE VOICE OF ALLADINE.

No; I wept long ago; it is no longer tears....

THE VOICE OF PALOMIDES.

There's something in thy thoughts thou dost not tell me of....

THE VOICE OF ALLADINE.

They were not precious stones....

THE VOICE OF PALOMIDES.

And the flowers were not real....

ONE OF THE SISTERS OF PALOMIDES.

They rave....

ASTOLAINE.

No, no; they know what they are saying....

THE VOICE OF ALLADINE.

It was the light that had no pity on us....

THE VOICE OF PALOMIDES.

Where goest thou, Alladine? Thou'rt being borne away....

THE VOICE OF ALLADINE.

I have no more regret to lose the light o' the sun....

THE VOICE OF PALOMIDES.

Yes, yes; we shall behold the sweet green things again!...

THE VOICE OF ALLADINE.

I have lost desire to live....

[_A silence; then more and more faintly:_]

THE VOICE OF PALOMIDES.

Alladine!...

THE VOICE OF ALLADINE.

Palomides!...

THE VOICE OF PALOMIDES.

Alla ... dine!...

    [A silence.--Astolaine and the sisters of Palomides listen, in
    anguish. Then the nurse opens, from the inside, the door of
    Palomides' room, appears on the sill, makes a sign, and all enter
    the room. The door doses behind them. A new silence. A little
    afterwards, the door of Alladine's room opens in its turn; the
    other nurse comes out in like manner, looks about in the corridor,
    and, seeing no one, re-enters the room, leaving the door wide
    open.]


[CURTAIN.]




Home.

_To Mademoiselle Sara de Swart._




Persons.

IN THE GARDEN.

THE OLD MAN.
THE STRANGER.
MARTHA     } _granddaughters of the old man._
AND MARY,  }
A PEASANT.
THE CROWD.

IN THE HOUSE

THE FATHER,       }
THE MOTHER,       } _Silent characters._
THE TWO DAUGHTERS,}
THE CHILD,        }




Home.

       *       *       *       *       *

    [An old garden, planted with willows. At the back, a house in
    which three windows on the ground-floor are lighted. A family,
    sitting up under the lamp, is seen rather distinctly. The
    father is seated by the fireside. The mother, one elbow on the
    table, is staring into space. Two young girls, clad in white,
    embroider, dream, and smile in the quiet of the room. A
    child lies asleep with his head under the mother's left arm.
    Whenever one of them rises, walks, or makes a gesture, his
    movements seem to be grave, slow, rare, and, as it were,
    spiritualized by the distance, the light, and the vague veil
    of the windows. The old man and the stranger enter the garden
    cautiously.]


THE OLD MAN.

We are in the part of the garden behind the house. They never come
here. The doors are on the other side.--They are closed, and the
shutters are up. But there are no shutters on this side, and I saw
a light.... Yes; they are sitting up still under the lamp. It is
fortunate they have not heard us; the mother or the young girls would
have come out, perhaps, and then what should we have done?...

THE STRANGER.

What are we going to do?

THE OLD MAN.

I should like to see, first, if they are all in the room. Yes, I see
the father sitting in the chimney-corner. He waits, with his hands on
his knees;... the mother is resting her elbow on the table.

THE STRANGER.

She is looking at us....

THE OLD MAN.

No; she doesn't know where she is looking: her eyes do not wink. She
cannot see us; we are in the shade of great trees. But do not go any
nearer.... The two sisters of the dead girl are in the room too. They
are embroidering slowly; and the little child is asleep. It is nine
by the clock in the corner.... They suspect nothing, and they do not
speak.

THE STRANGER.

If one could draw the father's attention, and make him some sign? He
has turned his head this way. Would you like me to knock at one of the
windows? One of them ought to be told before the others....

THE OLD MAN.

I don't know which one to choose.... We must take great
precautions.... The father is old and ailing.... So is the mother; and
the sisters are too young.... And they all loved her with such love as
will never be again.... I never saw a happier household.... No, no, do
not go near the window; that would be worse than anything else....
It is better to announce it as simply as possible,--as if it were an
ordinary event,--and not to look too sad; for otherwise their grief
will wish to be greater than yours and will know of nothing more that
it can do.... Let us go on the other side of the garden. We will knock
at the door and go in as if nothing had happened. I will go in first:
they will not be surprised to see me; I come sometimes in the evening,
to bring them flowers or fruit, and pass a few hours with them.

THE STRANGER.

Why must I go with you? Go alone; I will wait till I am called....
They have never seen me.... I am only a passer-by; I am a stranger....

THE OLD MAN.

It is better not to be alone. A sorrow that one does not bring alone
is not so unmixed nor so heavy.... I was thinking of that as we were
coming here.... If I go in alone, I shall have to be speaking from the
first minute; in a few words they will know everything, and I shall
have nothing more to say; and I am afraid of the silence following the
last words that announce a woe.... It is then the heart is rent.... If
we go in together, I shall tell them, for example, after going a long
way about, "She was found so.... She was floating in the river, and
her hands were clasped."...

THE STRANGER.

Her hands were not clasped; her arms were hanging down along her body.

THE OLD MAN.

You see, one speaks in spite of oneself.... And the sorrow is lost in
the details;... but otherwise, if I go in alone, at the first words,
knowing them as I do, it would be dreadful, and God knows what might
happen.... But if we speak in turn, they will listen to us and not
think to look the ill news in the face.... Do not forget the mother
will be there, and that her life hangs by a thread.... It is good that
the first wave break on some unnecessary words.... There should be a
little talking around the unhappy, and they should have people about
them.... The most indifferent bear unwittingly a part of the grief....
So, without noise or effort, it divides, like air or light....

THE STRANGER.

Your clothes are wet through; they are dripping on the flagstones.

THE OLD MAN.

It is only the bottom of my cloak that dipped in the water.--You seem
to be cold. Your chest is covered with earth.... I did not notice it
on the road on account of the darkness....

THE STRANGER.

I went into the water up to my waist.

THE OLD MAN.

Was it long after you found her when I came?

THE STRANGER.

A few minutes, barely. I was going toward the village; it was already
late, and the bank was getting dark. I was walking with my eyes
fixed on the river because it was lighter than the road, when I saw
something strange a step or two from a clump of reeds.... I drew near
and made out her hair, which had risen almost in a circle above her
head, and whirled round, so, in the current.

[_In the room, the two young girls turn their heads toward the
window._]

THE OLD MAN.

Did you see the two sisters' hair quiver on their shoulders?

THE STRANGER.

They turned their heads this way.... They simply turned their heads.
Perhaps I spoke too loud. [_The two young girls resume their former
position._] But they are already looking no longer.... I went into the
water up to my waist and I was able to take her by the hand and
pull her without effort to the shore.... She was as beautiful as her
sisters are.

THE OLD MAN.

She was perhaps more beautiful.... I do not know why I have lost all
courage....

THE STRANGER.

What courage are you talking of? We have done all man could do.... She
was dead more than an hour ago....

THE OLD MAN.

She was alive this morning!... I met her coming out of church.... She
told me she was going away; she was going to see her grandmother on
the other side of the river where you found her.... She did not know
when I should see her again.... She must have been on the point of
asking me something; then she dared not and left me abruptly. But I
think of it now.... And I saw nothing!... She smiled as they smile who
choose to be silent, or who are afraid they will not be understood....
She seemed hardly to hope.... Her eyes were not clear and hardly
looked at me....

THE STRANGER.

Some peasants told me they had seen her wandering on the river-bank
until nightfall.... They thought she was looking for flowers.... It
may be that her death....

THE OLD MAN.

We cannot tell.... What is there we can tell?... She was perhaps of
those who do not wish to speak, and every one of us bears in himself
more than one reason for no longer living.... We cannot see in the
soul as we see in that room. They are all like that.... They only say
trite things; and no one suspects aught.... You live for months by
some one who is no longer of this world and whose soul can bend no
longer; you answer without thinking; and you see what happens.... They
look like motionless dolls, and, oh, the events that take place in
their souls!... They do not know themselves what they are.... She
would have lived as the rest live.... She would have said up to her
death: "Monsieur, Madame, we shall have rain this morning," or else,
"We are going to breakfast; we shall be thirteen at table," or else:
"The fruits are not yet ripe." They speak with a smile of the flowers
that have fallen, and weep in the dark.... An angel even would not see
what should be seen; and man only understands when it is too late....
Yesterday evening she was there, under the lamp like her sisters,
and you would not see them as they should be seen, if this had not
occurred.... I seem to see her now for the first time.... Something
must be added to common life before we can understand it.... They are
beside you day and night, and you perceive them only at the moment
when they depart forever.... And yet the strange little soul she must
have had; the poor, naïve, exhaustless little soul she had, my son,
if she said what she must have said, if she did what she mast have
done!...

THE STRANGER.

Just now they are smiling in silence in the room....

THE OLD MAN.

They are at peace.... They did not expect her to-night....

THE STRANGER.

They smile without stirring;... and see, the father is putting his
finger on his lips....

THE OLD MAN.

He is calling attention to the child asleep on its mother's heart....

THE STRANGER.

She dares not raise her eyes lest she disturb its sleep....

THE OLD MAN.

They are no longer working.... A great silence reigns....

THE STRANGER.

They have let fell the skein of white silk....

THE OLD MAN.

They are watching the child....

THE STRANGER.

They do not know that others are watching them....

THE OLD MAN.

We are watched too....

THE STRANGER.

They have lifted their eyes....

THE OLD MAN.

And yet they can see nothing....

THE STRANGER.

They seem happy; and yet nobody knows what may be--....

THE OLD MAN.

They think themselves in safety.... They have shut the doors; and
the windows have iron bars.... They have mended the walls of the old
house; they have put bolts upon the oaken doors.... They have foreseen
all that could be foreseen....

THE STRANGER.

We must end by telling them.... Some one might come and let them know
abruptly.... There was a crowd of peasants in the meadow where the
dead girl was found.... If one of them knocked at the door...

THE OLD MAN.

Martha and Mary are beside the poor dead child. The peasants were to
make a litter of leaves; and I told the elder to come warn us in all
haste, the moment they began their march. Let us wait till she comes;
she will go in with me.... We should not have looked on them so.... I
thought it would be only to knock upon the door; to go in simply, find
a phrase or two, and tell.... But I have seen them live too long under
their lamp....

_Enter_ MARY.

MARY.

They are coming, grandfather.

THE OLD MAN.

Is It you?--Where are they?

MARY.

They are at the foot of the last hills.

THE OLD MAN.

They will come in silence?

MARY.

I told them to pray in a low voice. Martha is with them....

THE OLD MAN.

Are they many?

MARY.

The whole village is about the bearers. They had brought lights. I
told them to put them out....

THE OLD MAN.

Which way are they coming?

MARY.

They are coming by the footpaths. They are walking slowly....

THE OLD MAN.

It is time....

MARY.

You have told them, grandfather?

THE OLD MAN.

You see plainly we have told them nothing.... They are waiting still
under the lamp.... Look, my child, look! You will see something of
life....

MARY.

Oh, how at peace they seem!... You would say I saw them in a dream....

THE STRANGER.

Take care, I saw both sisters give a start....

THE OLD MAN.

They are getting up....

THE STRANGER.

I think they are coming to the windows....

    [At this moment, one of the two sisters of whom they speak draws
    near the first window, the other near the third, and, pressing
    their hands at the same time against the panes, look a long while
    into the darkness.]

THE OLD MAN.

No one comes to the window in the middle....

MARY.

They are looking.... They are listening....

THE OLD MAN.

The elder smiles at what she does not see.

THE STRANGER.

And the other has eyes full of fearfulness....

THE OLD MAN.

Take care; we do not know how far the soul extends about men....

[_A long silence_, MARY _cowers against the old man's breast and
kisses him._]

MARY.

Grandfather!...

THE OLD MAN.

Do not weep, my child.... We shall have our turn....
                                                              [_A silence._

THE STRANGER.

They are looking a long while....

THE OLD MAN.

They might look a hundred thousand years and not perceive anything,
the poor little sisters.... The night is too dark.... They are looking
this way; and it is from that way the misfortune is coming....

THE STRANGER.

It is fortunate they look this way.... I do not know what that is
coming toward us, over by the meadows.

MARY.

I think it is the crowd.... They are so far away you can hardly make
them out....

THE STRANGER.

They follow the undulations of the path.... Now they appear again on a
hillside in the moonlight....

MARY.

Oh, how many they seem!... They had already run up from the suburbs of
the city when I came.... They are going a long way around....

THE OLD MAN.

They will come in spite of all; I see them too.... They are on the
march across the meadow lands.... They seem so small you hardly make
them out among the grasses.... They look like children playing in
the moonlight; and if the girls should see them, they would not
understand.... In vain they turn their backs; those yonder draw near
with every step they take, and the sorrow has been growing these two
hours already. They cannot hinder it from growing; and they that bear
it there no longer can arrest it.... It is their master too, and they
must serve it.... It has its end and follows its own road.... It
is unwearying and has but one idea.... Needs must they lend their
strength. They are sad, but they come.... They have pity, but they
must go forward....

MARY.

The elder smiles no longer, grandfather....

THE STRANGER.

They leave the windows....

MARY.

They kiss their mother....

THE STRANGER.

The elder has caressed the curls of the child without waking him....

MARY.

Oh! the father wants to be kissed too....

THE STRANGER.

And now silence....

MARY.

They come back beside the mother....

THE STRANGER.

And the father follows the great pendulum of the clock with his
eyes....

MARY.

You would say they were praying without knowing what they did....

THE STRANGER.

You would say that they were listening to their souls....
                                                              [_A silence._

MARY.

Grandfather, don't tell them to-night!...

THE OLD MAN.

You see, you too lose courage.... I knew well that we must not look. I
am nearly eighty-three years old, and this is the first time the sight
of life has struck me. I do not know why everything they do seems so
strange and grave to me.... They wait for night quite simply, under
their lamp, as we might have been waiting under ours; and yet I seem
to see them from the height of another world, because I know a little
truth which they do not know yet.... Is it that, my children? Tell me,
then, why you are pale, too? Is there something else, perhaps,
that cannot be told and causes us to weep? I did not know there was
anything so sad in life, nor that it frightened those who looked upon
it.... And nothing can have occurred that I should be afraid to see
them so at peace.... They have too much confidence in this world....
There they are, separated from the enemy by a poor window.... They
think nothing will happen because they have shut the door, and do not
know that something is always happening in our souls, and that the
world does not end at the doors of our houses.... They are so sure of
their little life and do not suspect how many others know more of
it than they; and that I, poor old man,--I hold here, two steps from
their door, all their little happiness, like a sick bird, in my old
hands I do not dare to open....

MARY.

Have pity, grandfather....

THE OLD MAN.

We have pity on them, my child, but no one has pity on us....

MARY.

Tell them to-morrow, grandfather; tell them when it is light.... They
will not be so sorrowful....

THE OLD MAN.

Perhaps you are right, my child.... It would be better to leave all
this in the night. And the light is sweet to sorrow.... But what would
they say to us to-morrow? Misfortune renders jealous; they whom it
strikes, wish to be told before strangers; they do not like to have it
left in the hands of those they do not know.... We should look as if
we had stolen something....

THE STRANGER.

There is no more time, besides; I hear the murmur of prayers
already....

MARY.

There they are.... They are passing behind the hedges....

_Enter_ MARTHA.

MARTHA.

Here I am. I have brought them this far. I have told them to wait on
the road. [_Cries of children heard._] Ah! the children are crying
again.... I forbade their coming.... But they wanted to see too, and
the mothers would not obey.... I will go tell them.... No; they are
silent.--Is everything ready?--I have brought the little ring that was
found on her.... I have some fruit, too, for the child.... I laid her
out myself on the litter. She looks as if she were asleep.... I had
a good deal of trouble; her hair would not obey.... I had some
marguerites plucked.... It is sad, there were no other flowers....
What are you doing here? Why are you not by them?... [_She looks at
the windows._] They do not weep?... They ... you have not told them?

THE OLD MAN.

Martha, Martha, there is too much life in your soul; you cannot
understand....

MARTHA.

Why should I not understand?... [_After a silence and in a tone of
very grave reproach._] You cannot have done that, grandfather....

THE OLD MAN.

Martha, you do not know....

MARTHA.

_I_ will tell them.

THE OLD MAN.

Stay here, my child, and look at them a moment.

MARTHA.

Oh, how unhappy they are!... They can wait no longer.

THE OLD MAN.

Why?

MARTHA.

I do not know;... it is no longer possible!...

THE OLD MAN.

Come here, my child....

MARTHA.

How patient they are!

THE OLD MAN.

Come here, my child....

MARTHA.

[_Turning._] Where are you, grandfather? I am so unhappy I cannot see
you any more.... I do not know what to do myself any more....

THE OLD MAN.

Do not look at them any more; till they know all....

MARTHA.

I will go in with you....

THE OLD MAN.

No, Martha, stay here.... Sit beside your sister, on this old stone
bench, against the wall of the house, and do not look.... You are too
young; you never could forget.... You cannot know what a face is like
at the moment when death passes before its eyes.... There will
be cries, perhaps.... Do not turn round.... Perhaps there will be
nothing.... Above all, do not turn if you hear nothing.... One does
not know the course of grief beforehand.... A few little deep-rooted
sobs, and that is all, usually.... I do not know myself what I may
do when I shall hear them.... That belongs no longer to this life....
Kiss me, my child, before I go away....

    [The murmur of prayers has gradually drawn nearer. Part of the
    crowd invades the garden. Dull steps heard, running, and low
    voices speaking.]

THE STRANGER (_to the crowd_).

Stay here;... do not go near the windows.... Where is she?...

A PEASANT.

Who?

THE STRANGER.

The rest ... the bearers?...

THE PEASANT.

They are coming by the walk that leads to the door.

    [The old man goes away. Martha and Mary are seated on the bench,
    with their backs turned to the windows. Murmurs in the crowd.]

THE STRANGER.

S--t!... Do not speak.

[_The elder of the two sisters rises and goes to bolt the door...._]

MARTHA.

She opens it?

THE STRANGER.

On the contrary, she is shutting it.
                                                              [_A silence._

MARTHA.

Grandfather has not entered?

THE STRANGER.

No.... She returns and sits down by her mother.... The others do not
stir, and the child sleeps all the time....
                                                              [_A silence._

MARTHA.

Sister, give me your hands....

MARY.

Martha!...
                                [_They embrace and give each other a kiss._

THE STRANGER.

He must have knocked.... They have all raised their heads at the same
time;... they look at each other....

MARTHA.

Oh! oh! my poor little sister!... I shall cry too!...
                          [_She stifles her sobs on her sister's shoulder._

THE STRANGER.

He must be knocking again.... The father looks at the clock. He rises.

MARTHA.

Sister, sister, I want to go in too.... They cannot be alone any
longer....

MARY.

Martha! Martha!...
                                                     [_She holds her back._

THE STRANGER.

The father is at the door.... He draws the bolts.... He opens the door
prudently....

MARTHA.

Oh!... you do not see the...

THE STRANGER.

What?

MARTHA.

Those who bear....

THE STRANGER.

He hardly opens it.... I can only see a corner of the lawn; and the
fountain.... He does not let go the door;... he steps back.... He
looks as if he were saying: "Ah, it's you!"... He raises his arms....
He shuts the door again carefully.... Your grandfather has come into
the room....

    [The crowd has drawn nearer the windows. Martha and Mary half rise
    at first, then draw near also, clasping each other tightly. The
    old man is seen advancing into the room. The two sisters of the
    dead girl rise; the mother rises as well, after laying the child
    carefully in the armchair she has just abandoned; in such a way
    that from without the little one may be seen asleep, with his head
    hanging a little to one side, in the centre of the room. The
    mother advances to meet the old man and extends her hand to him,
    but draws it back before he has had time to take it. One of the
    young girls offers to take off the visitor's cloak and the other
    brings forward a chair for him; but the old man makes a slight
    gesture of refusal. The father smiles with a surprised look. The
    old man looks toward the windows.]

THE STRANGER.

He dares not tell them.... He has looked at us....
                                                    [_Rumors in the crowd._

THE STRANGER.

S ... t!...

    [The old man, seeing their faces at the windows, has quickly
    turned his eyes away. As one of the young girls continues to offer
    him the same armchair, he ends by sitting down and passes his
    right hand across his forehead several times.]

THE STRANGER.

He sits down....

    [The other people in the room sit down also, while the father
    talks volubly. At last the old man opens his mouth, and the tone
    of his voice seems to attract attention. But the father interrupts
    him. The old man begins to speak again, and little by little the
    others become motionless. All at once, the mother starts and
    rises.]

MARTHA.

Oh! the mother is going to understand!...

    [She turns away and hides her face in her hands. New murmurs in
    the crowd. They elbow each other. Children cry to be lifted up, so
    that they may see too. Most of the mothers obey.]

THE STRANGER.

S ... t!... He has not told them yet....

    [The mother is seen to question the old man in anguish. He says a
    few words more; then abruptly all the rest rise too and seem to
    question him. He makes a slow sign of affirmation with his head.]

THE STRANGER.

He has told them.... He has told them all at once!...

VOICES IN THE CROWD.

He has told them!... He has told them!...

THE STRANGER.

You hear nothing....

    [The old man rises too, and, without turning, points with his
    finger to the door behind him. The mother, the father, and the two
    young girls throw themselves on this door, which the father cannot
    at once succeed in opening. The old man tries to prevent the
    mother from going out.]

VOICES IN THE CROWD.

They are going out! They are going out!...

    [Jostling in the garden. All rush to the other side of the house
    and disappear, with the exception of the stranger, who remains at
    the windows. In the room, both sides of the folding-door at last
    open; all go out at the same time. Beyond can be seen a starry
    sky, the lawn and the fountain in the moonlight, while in the
    middle of the abandoned room the child continues to sleep
    peacefully in the armchair.--Silence.]

THE STRANGER.

The child has not waked!...
                                                       [_He goes out also._]


[CURTAIN.]
