THE BANKRUPT

A PLAY IN FOUR ACTS


DRAMATIS PERSONAE

     HENNING TJAELDE, merchant and brewer.
     MRS. TJAELDE, his wife.
     VALBORG and SIGNE, their daughters.
     LIEUTENANT HAMAR, engaged to Signe.
     SANNAES, Tjaelde's confidential clerk.
     JAKOSSEN, manager of Tjaelde's brewery.
     BERENT, a lawyer.
     PRAM, a custom-house official.
     An Agent.
     The VICAR.
     LIND, a guest.
     FINNE, a guest.
     RING, a guest.
     HOLM, a guest.
     KNUTZON, a guest.
     KNUDSEN, a guest.
     FALBE, a guest.




ACT I

(SCENE.--A sitting-room in the TJAELDES' house, opening on a verandah
that is decorated with flowers. It is a hot summer's day. There is a
view of the sea beyond the verandah, and boats are visible among the
islands that fringe the coast. A good-sized yacht, with sails spread, is
lying close up under the verandah on the right. The room is luxuriously
furnished and full of flowers. There are two French windows in the
left-hand wall; two doors in the right-hand. A table in the middle of
the room; arm-chairs and rocking-chairs scattered about. A sofa in the
foreground on the right. LIEUTENANT HAMAR is lying on the sofa, and
SIGNE sitting in a rocking-chair.)

Hamar. What shall we do with ourselves to-day?

Signe (rocking herself). Hm! (A pause.)

Hamar. That was a delicious sail we had last night. (Yawns.) But I am
sleepy to-day. Shall we go for a ride?

Signe. Hm! (A pause.)

Hamar. I am too hot on this sofa. I think I will move. (Gets up. SIGNE
begins to hum an air as she rocks herself.) Play me something, Signe!

Signe (singing her words to the air she has been humming). The piano is
out of tune.

Hamar. Read to me, then!

Signe (as before, looking out of the window). They are swimming the
horses. They are swimming the horses. They are swimming the horses.

Hamar. I think I will go and have a swim too. Or perhaps I will wait
till nearer lunch-time.

Signe (as before). So as to have a better appetite--appetite--appetite.

(MRS. TJAELDE comes in from the right, walking slowly.)

Hamar. You look very thoughtful!

Mrs. Tjaelde. Yes, I don't know what to order.

Signe (as before). For dinner, I suppose you mean?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Yes.

Hamar. Do you expect any one?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Yes, your father writes to me that Mr. Finne is coming.

Signe (speaking). The most tiresome person possible, of course.

Mrs. Tjaelde. How would boiled salmon and roast chicken do?

Signe. We had that the other day.

Mrs. Tjaelde. (With a sigh). There is nothing that we didn't. There is
so little choice in the market just now.

Signe. Then we ought to send to town.

Mrs. Tjaelde. Oh, these meals, these meals!

Hamar (yawning). They are the best thing in life, anyway.

Signe. To eat, yes--but not to cook; I never will cook a dinner.

Mrs. Tjaelde (sitting down at the table). One could put up with the
cooking. It's the having always to think of something fresh!

Hamar. Why don't you get a chef from one of the hotels, as I have so
often advised you?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Oh, we have tried that, but he was more trouble than it
was worth.

Hamar. Yes, because he had no invention. Get a French chef!

Mrs. Tjaelde. Yes, and have to be always beside him to interpret!--But I
am no nearer this dinner. And lately I have been finding such difficulty
in getting about.

Hamar. I have never in my life heard so much talk about meals as I have
in this house.

Mrs. Tjaelde. You see, you have never been in a prosperous
business-man's house before. Our friends are mostly business-men, of
course--and most of them have no greater pleasures than those of the
table.

Signe. That's true.

Mrs. Tjaelde. Are you wearing _that_ dress to-day?

Signe. Yes.

Mrs. Tjaelde. You have worn a different one every day.

Signe. Well, if Hamar is tired of both the blue one and the grey one,
what can I do?

Hamar. And I don't like this one any better than the others.

Signe. Indeed!--Then I really think you had better order me one
yourself.

Hamar. Come to town with me, and I will!

Signe. Yes, mother--Hamar and I have made up our minds that we must go
back to town. [Note: There would be nothing contrary to Norwegian ideas
of propriety in Signe's proposal. In Norway an engaged couple could
travel alone; and the fiancée would go to stay in the house of her
future husband's relations.]

Mrs. Tjaelde. But you were there only a fortnight ago!

Hamar. And it is exactly a fortnight too long since we were there!

Mrs. Tjaelde. (thoughtfully). Now, what _can_ I order for dinner?

(VALBORG comes into sight on the verandah.)

Signe (turning round and seeing VALBORG). Enter Her Highness!

Hamar (turning round). Carrying a bouquet! Oho! I have seen it before!

Signe. Have you? Did _you_ give it her?

Hamar. No; I was coming through the garden--and saw it on the table in
Valborg's summerhouse. Is it your birthday, Valborg?

Valborg. No.

Hamar. I thought not. Perhaps there is some other festivity to-day?

Valborg. No. (SIGNE suddenly bursts out laughing.)

Hamar. Why do you laugh?

Signe. Because I understand! Ha, ha, ha, ha!

Hamar. What do you understand?

Signe. Whose hands it is that have decked the altar! Ha, ha, ha!

Hamar. I suppose you think they were mine?

Signe. No, they were redder hands than yours! Ha, ha, ha, ha! (VALBORG
throws the bouquet down.) Oh, dear me, it doesn't do to laugh so much in
this heat. But it is delightful! To think he should have hit upon that
idea! Ha, ha, ha!

Hamar (laughing). Do you mean--?

Signe (laughing). Yes! You must know that Valborg--

Valborg. Signe!

Signe.--who has sent so many distinguished suitors about their business,
cannot escape from the attentions of a certain red pair of hands--ha,
ha, ha, ha!

Hamar. Do you mean Sannaes?

Signe. Yes! (Points out of the window.) There is the culprit! He is
waiting, Valborg, for you to come, in maiden meditation, with the
bouquet in your hands--as you came just now--

Mrs. Tjaelde. (getting up). No, it is your father he is waiting for. Ah,
he sees him now. (Goes out by the verandah.)

Signe. Yes, it really is father--riding a bay horse!

Hamar (getting up). On a bay horse! Let us go and say "how do you do" to
the bay horse!

Signe. N--o, no!

Hamar. You won't come and say "how do you do" to the bay horse? A
cavalry officer's wife must love horses next best to her husband.

Signe. And he his wife next best to his horses.

Hamar. What? Are you jealous of a horse?

Signe. Oh, I know very well you have never been so fond of me as you are
of horses.

Hamar. Come along! (Pulls her up out of her chair.)

Signe. But I don't feel the least interested in the bay horse.

Hamar. Very well, then, I will go alone!

Signe. No, I will come.

Hamar (to VALBORG). Won't you come and welcome the bay horse too?

Valborg. No, but I will go and welcome my father!

Signe (looking back, as she goes). Yes, of course--father as well. (She
and HAMAR go out.)

(VALBORG goes to the farthest window and stands looking out of it. Her
dress is the same colour as the long curtain, and a piece of statuary
and some flowers conceal her from any one entering the room. SANNAES
comes in, carrying a small saddle-bag and a cloak, which he puts down
on a chair behind the door. As he turns round he sees the bouquet on the
door.)

Sannaes. There it is! Has she dropped it by accident, or did she throw
it down? Never mind--she has had it in her hands. (Picks it up, kisses
it, and is going to take it away.)

Valborg (coming forward). Leave it alone!

Sannaes (dropping the bouquet). You here, Miss Valborg--? I didn't see
you--

Valborg. But I can see what you are after. How dare you presume to think
of persecuting me with your flowers and your--your red hands? (He puts
his hands behind his back.) How dare you make me a laughing-stock to
every one in the house, and I suppose to every one in the town?

Sannaes. I--I--I--

Valborg. And what about me? Don't you think I deserve a little
consideration? You will be turned out of the house before long, if you
do not take care--! Now be quick and get away before the others come in.
(SANNAES turns away, holding his hands in front of him, and goes out by
the verandah to the right. At the same moment TJAELDE is seen coming at
the other end of the verandah, followed by HAMAR and SIGNE.)

Tjaelde. Yes, it is a fine horse.

Hamar. Fine? I don't believe there is its equal in the country.

Tjaelde. I dare say. Did you notice that he hadn't turned a hair?

Hamar. What glorious lungs! And such a beauty, too--his head, his legs,
his neck--! I never saw such a beauty!

Tjaelde. Yes, he is a handsome beast. (Looks out of the verandah at the
yacht.) Have you been out for a sail?

Hamar. I was sailing among the islands last night, and came back this
morning with the fishing-boats--a delightful sail!

Tjaelde. I wish I had time to do that.

Hamar. But surely it is only imagination on your part, to think that you
never have time?

Tjaelde. Oh, well, perhaps I have time but not inclination.

Signe. And how do things stand where you have been?

Tjaelde. Badly.

Valborg (coming forward). Welcome home, father!

Tjaelde. Thank you, dear!

Hamar. Is it not possible to save anything?

Tjaelde. Not at present; that is why I took the horse.

Hamar. Then the bay horse is the only thing you get out of the smash?

Tjaelde. Do you know that I might say that horse has cost me three or
four thousand pounds?

Hamar. Well, that is its only defect, anyway! Still, if the worst comes
to the worst, and you can afford it--the horse is priceless! (TJAELDE
turns away, puts down his hat and coat and takes off his gloves.)

Signe. It is beautiful to see your enthusiasm when you talk about
horses. I rather think it is the only enthusiasm you have.

Hamar. Yes, if I were not a cavalry officer I should like to be a horse!

Signe. Thank you! And what should I be?

Valborg. "Oh, were I but the saddle on thy back! Oh, were I but the whip
about thy loins!"

Hamar. "Oh, were I but the flowers in thy--." No, "hand" doesn't rhyme!

Tjaelde. (coming forward, meets MRS. TJAELDE, who has come in from the
right.) Well, my dear, how are you?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Oh, I find it more and more difficult to get about.

Tjaelde. There is always something the matter with you, my dear! Can I
have something to eat?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Yes, it has been standing waiting for you. Here it comes.
(A maid brings in a tray which she lays on the table.)

Tjaelde. Good!

Mrs. Tjaelde. Will you have a cup of tea?

Tjaelde. No, thank you.

Mrs. Tjaelde. (sitting down beside him and pouring him out a glass of
wine). And how have things gone with the Möllers?

Tjaelde. Badly. I told you so already.

Mrs. Tjaelde. I didn't hear you.

Valborg. I had a letter to-day from Nanna Möller. She tells me all about
it--how none of the family knew anything about it till the officers of
the courts came.

Tjaelde. Yes, there must have been a dreadful scene.

Mrs. Tjaelde. Did he tell you anything about it?

Tjaelde (as he eats). I didn't speak to him.

Mrs. Tjaelde. My dear! Why, you are old friends!

Tjaelde. Bah! Old friends! He sat looking as if he had taken leave of
his senses. Besides, I have had enough of that family. I didn't go there
to hear them talk about their troubles.

Signe. I suppose it was all very sad?

Tjaelde (still eating). Shocking!

Mrs. Tjaelde. What will they have to live on?

Tjaelde. What is allowed them by their creditors, of course.

Signe. But all the things they had?

Tjaelde. Sold.

Signe. All those pretty things--their furniture, their carriages,
their--?

Tjaelde. All sold.

Hamar. And his watch? It is the most beautiful watch I have ever
seen--next to yours.

Tjaelde. It had to go, of course, being jewellery. Give me some wine; I
am hot and thirsty.

Signe. Poor things!

Mrs. Tjaelde. Where are they going to live now?

Tjaelde. In the house of one of the skippers of what was their fleet.
Two small rooms and a kitchen.

Signe. Two small rooms and a kitchen! (A pause.)

Mrs. Tjaelde. What do they intend to do?

Tjaelde. There was a subscription started to enable Mrs. Möller to get
the job of catering for the Club.

Mrs. Tjaelde. Is the poor woman going to have more cooking to do!

Signe. Did they send no messages to us?

Tjaelde. Of course they did; but I didn't pay any attention to them.

Hamar (who has been standing on the verandah). But Möller--what did he
say? What did he do?

Tjaelde. I don't know, I tell you.

Valborg (who has been walking up and down the room during the preceding
conversation). He has said and done quite enough already.

Tjaelde (who has at last finished eating and drinking, is struck by her
words). What do you mean by that, Valborg?

Valborg. That if I were his daughter I would never forgive him.

Mrs. Tjaelde. My dear Valborg, don't say such things!

Valborg. I mean it! A man who would bring such shame and misery upon his
family does not deserve any mercy from them.

Mrs. Tjaelde. We are all in need of mercy.

Valborg. In one sense, yes. But what I mean is that I could never give
him my respect or my affection again. He would have wronged me too
cruelly.

Tjaelde (getting up). Wronged you?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Have you finished already, dear?

Tjaelde. Yes.

Mrs. Tjaelde. No more wine?

Tjaelde. I said I had finished. Wronged you? How?

Valborg. Well, I cannot imagine how one could be more cruelly wronged
than to be allowed to assume a position that was nothing but a lie,
to live up to means that had no real existence but were merely a
sham--one's clothes a lie, one's very existence a lie! Suppose I were
the sort of girl that found a certain delight in making use of her
position as a rich man's daughter--in using it to the fullest possible
extent; well, when I discovered that all that my father had given me was
stolen-that all he had made me believe in was a lie--I am sure that then
my anger and my shame would be beyond all bounds!

Mrs. Tjaelde. My child, you have never been tried. You don't know how
such things may happen. You don't really know what you are saying!

Hamar. Well it might do Möller good if he heard what she says!

Valborg. He has heard it. His daughter said that to him.

Mrs. Tjaelde. His own daughter! Child, child, is that what you write to
each other about? God forgive you both!

Valborg. Oh, He will forgive us, because we speak the truth.

Mrs. Tialde. Child, child!

Tjaelde. You evidently don't understand what business is--success one
day and failure the next.

Valborg. No one will ever persuade me that business is a lottery.

Tjaelde. No, a sound business is not.

Valborg. Exactly. It is the unsound sort that I condemn.

Tjaelde. Still, even the soundest have their anxious moments.

Valborg. If the anxious moments really foreshadow a crisis, no man of
honour would keep his family o: his creditors in ignorance of the fact.
My God, how Mr. Möller has deceived his!

Signe. Valborg is always talking about business!

Valborg. Yes, it has had an attraction for me ever since I was a child.
I am not ashamed of that.

Signe. You think you know all about it, anyway.

Valborg. Oh, no; but you can easily get to know a little about anything
you are fond of.

Hamar. And one would need no great knowledge of business to condemn the
way Möller went on. It was obvious to every one. And the way his family
went on, too! Who went the pace as much as the Möllers? Think of his
daughter's toilettes!

Valborg. His daughter is my best friend. I don't want to hear her
abused.

Hamar. Your Highness will admit that it is possible to be the daughter
of a _very_ rich man without being as proud and as vain as--as the lady
I am not allowed to mention!

Valborg. Nanna is neither proud nor vain. She is absolutely genuine.
She had the aptitude for being exactly what she thought she was--a rich
man's daughter.

Hamar. Has she the "aptitude" for being a bankrupt's daughter now?

Valborg. Certainly. She has sold all her trinkets, her dresses--every
single thing she had. What she wears, she has either paid for herself or
obtained by promising future payment.

Hamar. May I ask if she kept her stockings?

Valborg. She sent everything to a sale.

Hamar. If I had known that I would certainly have attended it!

Valborg. Yes, I daresay there was plenty to make fun of, and plenty of
idle loafers, too, who were not ashamed to do so.

Mrs. Tjaelde. Children, children!

Hamar. May I ask if Miss Nanna sent her own idleness to the sale with
her other effects?--because I have never known any one with a finer
supply of it!

Valborg. She never thought she would need to work.

Tjaelde (coming forward to VALBORG). To take up the thread of what we
were saying: you don't understand what a business-man's hope is from one
day to the other--always a renewed hope. That fact does not make him a
swindler. He may be unduly sanguine, perhaps--a poet, if you like, who
lives in a world of dreams--or he may be a real genius, who sees land
ahead when no one else suspects it.

Valborg. I don't think I misunderstand the real state of affairs. But
perhaps you do, father. Because is not what you call hope, poetry,
genius, merely speculating with what belongs to others, when a man knows
that he owes more than he has got?

Tjaelde. It may be very difficult to be certain even whether he does
that or not.

Valborg. Really? I should have thought his books would tell him--

Tjaelde. About his assets and his liabilities, certainly. But values are
fluctuating things; and he may always have in hand some venture which,
though it cannot be specified, may alter the whole situation.

Valborg. If he undeniably owes more than he possesses, any venture he
undertakes must be a speculation with other people's money.

Tjaelde. Well--perhaps that is so; but that does not mean that he steals
the money--he only uses it in trust for them.

Valborg. Entrusted to him on the false supposition that he is solvent.

Tjaelde. But possibly that money may save the whole situation.

Valborg. That does not alter the fact that he has got the use of it by a
lie.

Tjaelde. You use very harsh terms. (MRS. TJAELDE has once or twice been
making signs to VALBORG, which the latter sees but pays no attention
to.)

Valborg. In that case the lie consists in the concealment.

Tjaelde. But what do you want him to do? To lay all his cards on the
table, and so ruin both himself and the others?

Valborg. Yes, he ought to take every one concerned into his confidence.

Tjaelde. Bah! In that case we should see a thousand failures every year,
and fortunes lost one after the other everywhere! No, you have a level
head, Valborg, but your ideas are narrow. Look here, where are the
newspapers? (SIGNE, who has been talking confidentially to HAMAR on the
verandah, comes forward.)

Signe. I took them down to your office. I did not know you meant to stay
in here.

Tjaelde. Oh, bother the office! Please fetch them for me. (SIGNE goes
out, followed by Hamar.)

Mrs. Tjaelde (in an undertone to VALBORG). Why will you never listen to
your mother, Valborg? (VALBORG goes out to the verandah; leans on the
edge of it, with her head on her hands, and looks out.)

Tjaelde. I think I will change my coat. Oh no, I will wait till
dinner-time.

Mrs. Tjaelde. Dinner! And here I am still sitting here!

Tjaelde. Are we expecting any one?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Yes, have you forgotten?

Tjaelde. Of course, yes.

Mrs. Tjaelde (going out). What on earth am I to order?

(TJAELDE comes forward as soon as he is alone, sits down on a chair with
a weary, harassed expression, and buries his face in his hands with a
sigh. SIGNE and HAMAR come back, she carrying some newspapers. HAMAR is
going out to the verandah again, but SIGNE pulls him back.)

Signe. Here you are, father. Here are--

Tjaelde. What? Who?

Signe (astonished). The newspapers.

Tjaelde. Ah, yes. Give them to me.(Opens them hurriedly. They are mostly
foreign papers, in which he scans the money articles one after another.)

Signe (after a whispered conversation with HAMAR). Father!

Tjaelde (without looking up from the papers).Well? (To himself,
gloomily.) Down again, always down!

Signe. Hamar and I want so much to go into town again to Aunt Ulla's.

Tjaelde. But you know you were there only a fortnight ago. I received
your bills yesterday. Have you seen them?

Signe. No need for that, father, if _you_ have seen them! Why do you
sigh?

Tjaelde. Oh--because I see that stocks keep falling.

Signe. Pooh! Why should you bother about that? Now you are sighing
again. I am sure you know how horrid it is for those you love not to
have what they want. You won't be so unkind to us, father?

Tjaelde. No, my child, it can't be done.

Signe. Why?

Tjaelde. Because--because--well, because now that it is summer time so
many people will be coming here whom we shall have to entertain.

Signe. But entertaining people is the most tiresome thing I know, and
Hamar agrees with me.

Tjaelde. Don't you think I have to do tiresome things sometimes, my
girl?

Signe. Father dear, why are you talking so solemnly and ceremoniously?
It sounds quite funny from you!

Tjaelde. Seriously, my child, it is by no means an unimportant matter
for a big business house like ours, with such a wide-spread connection,
that people coming here from all quarters should find themselves
hospitably received. You might do that much for me.

Signe. Hamar and I will never have a moment alone at that rate.

Tjaelde. I think you mostly squabble when you are alone.

Signe. Squabble? That is a very ugly word, father.

Tjaelde. Besides, you would be no more alone if you were in town.

Signe. Oh, but it is quite different there!

Tjaelde. So I should think--from the way you throw your money about!

Signe (laughing). Throw our money about! What else have we to do? Isn't
that what we are for? Daddy, listen--dear old dad--

Tjaelde. No, dear--no.

Signe. You have never been so horrid to me before.

Hamar (who has been making signs to her to stop, whispers). Can't you be
quiet! Don't you see he is put out about something?

Signe (whispering). Well, you might have backed me up a little.

Hamar (as before). No, I am a bit wiser than you.

Signe (as before). You have been so odd lately. I am sure I don't know
what you want?

Hamar (as before). Oh, well, it doesn't matter now--because I am going
to town alone.

Signe (as before). What are you going to do?

Hamar (going). I am going to town alone. I am sick of this!

Signe (following him). Just you try! (Both go out by the verandah, to
the right. TJAELDE lets the newspapers fall out of his hands with a
heavy sigh.)

Valborg (looking in from the verandah). Father! (TJAELDE starts.) There
goes Mr. Berent, the lawyer from Christiania.

Tjaelde (getting up). Berent? Where? On the wharf?

Valborg. Yes. (Comes back into the room. TJAELDE looks out of the
window.) The reason I told you was because I saw him yesterday at the
timber-yard, and a little while before that, at the brewery and at the
works.

Tjaelde (to himself). What can that mean? (Aloud.) Oh, I know he is very
fond of making little trips to all sorts of places in the summer. This
year he has come here--and no doubt he likes to see the chief industries
of the place. There is not much else here to see! But are you sure it is
he? I think--

Valborg (looking out). Yes, it is he. Look now, you know his walk--

Tjaelde.--and his trick of crossing his feet--yes, it is he. It looks as
if he were coming here.

Valborg. No, he has turned away.

Tjaelde. All the better! (To himself, thoughtfully.) Could it possibly
mean--? (SANNAES comes in from the right.)

Sannaes. Am I disturbing you, sir?

Tjaelde. Is that you, Sannaes? (SANNAES, as he comes forward, sees
VALBORG standing by the farther window. He appears frightened and hides
his hands quickly behind his back.) What do you want? (VALBORG looks at
SANNAES, then goes on to the verandah and out to the right.) What is it,
man? What the deuce are you standing there for?

Sannaes (bringing his hands from behind his back as soon as VALBORG has
passed him, and looking after her.) I didn't like to ask you, before
Miss Valborg, whether you are coming down to your office to-day or not.

Tjaelde. Have you gone mad? Why on earth shouldn't you ask me that
before Miss Valborg?

Sannaes. I mean that--if not--I should like to speak to you here, if it
is convenient.

Tjaelde. Look here, Sannaes, you ought to try and get rid of your
shyness; it doesn't suit a business man. A business man should be smart
and active, and not let his wits go wool-gathering because he finds
himself in the same room with a woman. I have often noticed it in
you.--Now, what is it? Out with it!

Sannaes. You are not coming to the office this morning, sir?

Tjaelde. No, there is no post goes out before this evening.

Sannaes. No. But there are some bills of exchange--

Tjaelde. Bills? No.

Sannaes. Yes, sir--that fourth one of Möller's that was protested, and
the big English one.

Tjaelde (angrily). Have they not been met yet? What does this mean?

Sannaes. The manager of the bank wanted to see you first, sir!

Tjaelde. Have you gone crazy--? (Collects himself.) There must be some
misunderstanding, Sannaes.

Sannaes. That is what I thought; so I spoke about it to the chief clerk,
and to Mr. Holst as well.

Tjaelde. And Mr. Holst said--?

Sannaes. The same thing.

Tjaelde (walking up and down). I will go and see him--or rather, I
_won't_ go and see him; because this is evidently something that--. We
have some days' grace yet, haven't we?

Sannaes. Yes, sir.

Tjaelde. And still no telegram from Mr. Lind?

Sannaes. No, sir.

Tjaelde (to himself). I can't understand it. (Aloud.) We will negotiate
this matter direct with Christiania, Sannaes. That is what we will
do--and leave these little local banks alone in future. That will do,
Sannaes! (Makes a gesture of dismissal. Then says to himself:) That
damned Möller! It has made them all suspicious! (Turns round and sees
SANNAES still there.) What are you waiting for?

Sannaes. It is settling day--and I have no money in the safe.

Tjaelde. No money in the safe! A big business like this, and nothing in
the safe on settling day! What kind of management is that, I should like
to know? Must I teach you the A B C of business over and over again? One
can never take a half day off, or hand over the control! of the tiniest
part of the business--! I have no one, absolutely no one, that I can
rely on! How have you let things get into such a state?

Sannaes. Well, there was a third bill, which expired to-day--Holm and
Co., for £400. I had relied upon the bank, unfortunately--so there was
nothing for it but to empty the safe--here and at the brewery as well.

Tjaelde (walking about restlessly). Hm--hm--hm!--Now, who can have put
that into Holst's head?--Very well, that will do. (Dismisses SANNAES,
who goes out but comes back immediately.)

Sannaes (whispering). Here is Mr. Berent!

Tjaelde (surprised). Coming here?

Sannaes. He is just coming up the steps! (Goes out by the further door
on the right.)

Tjaelde. (calls after him in a whisper). Send up some wine and
cakes!--It is just as I suspected! (Catches sight of himself in a
mirror.) Good Lord, how bad I look! (Turns away painfully from the
mirror; looks in it again, forces a smile to his face, and so, smiling,
goes towards the verandah, where BERENT is seen coming in slowly from
the left.)

Tjaelde (greeting BERENT politely but with reserve). I feel honoured at
receiving a visit from so distinguished a man.

Berent. Mr. Tjaelde, I believe?

Tjaelde. At your service! My eldest daughter has just been telling me
that she had seen you walking about my property.

Berent. Yes; an extensive property--and an extensive business.

Tjaelde. Too extensive, Mr. Berent. Too many-sided. But one thing has
led to another. Pray sit down.

Berent. Thank you; it is very warm to-day. (A maid brings in cakes and
wine, and puts them on the table.)

Tjaelde. Let me give you a glass of wine?

Berent. No, thank you.

Tjaelde. Or something to eat?

Berent. Nothing, thank you.

Tjaelde (taking out his cigar-case). May I offer you a cigar? I can
answer for their quality.

Berent. I am very fond of a good cigar. But for the moment I will not
take anything, thank you! (A pause. TJAELDE takes a seat.)

Tjaelde (in a quiet, confidential voice). Have you been long here, Mr.
Berent?

Berent. Only a day or two. You have been away, have you not?

Tjaelde. Yes--that unhappy affair of Mr. Möller's. A meeting of
creditors after the sale.

Berent. Times are hard just now.

Tjaelde. Extraordinarily so!

Berent. Do you think that Möller's failure will bring down any more
firms with it-besides those we know of already, I mean?

Tjaelde. I don't think so. His--his misfortune was an exceptional case
in every respect.

Berent. It has made the banks a little nervous, I hear.

Tjaelde. I dare say.

Berent. Of course you know the state of affairs here better than any
one.

Tjaelde. (with a smile). I am very much indebted to you for your
flattering confidence in me.

Berent. I suppose all this might have a bad effect upon the export trade
of this part of the country?

Tjaelde. Yes--it is really hard to tell; but the important thing
certainly is to keep every one on their legs.

Berent. That is your opinion?

Tjaelde. Undoubtedly.

Berent. As a general rule a crisis of this sort shows up the unsound
elements in a commercial community.

Tjaelde (with a smile). And for that reason this crisis should be
allowed to take its natural course, you mean?

Berent. That is my meaning.

Tjaelde. Hm!--In some places it is possible that the dividing line
between the sound firms and the unsound may not be very distinct.

Berent. Can there really be any danger of such a thing here?

Tjaelde. Well--you are expecting too much of my knowledge of affairs;
but I should be inclined to think that there may. (A pause.)

Berent. I have been instructed by the banks to prepare an opinion upon
the situation--a fact which I have, so far, only confided to you.

Tjaelde. I am much obliged.

Berent. The smaller local banks here have combined, and are acting in
concert.

Tjaelde. Indeed? (A pause.) I suppose you have seen Mr. Holst, then?

Berent. Of course. (A pause.) If we are to assist the sound firms and
leave the others to their fate, the best way will certainly be for all
alike to disclose their actual position.

Tjaelde. Is that Mr. Holst's opinion too?

Berent. It is. (A pause.) I have advised him for the present--at all
events till we have all the balance-sheets--to say "no" to every request
for an advance, without exception.

Tjaelde. (with a look of relief). I understand!

Berent. Only a temporary measure, of course--

Tjaelde. Quite so!

Berent.--but one that must apply to every one impartially.

Tjaelde. Admirable!

Berent. Not to treat every one alike would be to run the danger of
throwing premature suspicion on individuals.

Tjaelde. I quite agree.

Berent. I am delighted to hear it. Then you will not misunderstand me
if I ask you also to prepare a balance-sheet which shall show the actual
position of your firm.

Tjaelde. With the greatest pleasure, if by doing so I can assist the
general welfare.

Berent. I assure you, you can. It is by such means that public
confidence is strengthened.

Tjaelde. When do you want the balance-sheet? Of course, it can only be a
summary one.

Berent. Naturally. I will give myself the pleasure of calling for it.

Tjaelde. By no means. I can let you have it at once, if you like. I am
in the habit of frequently drawing up summary balance-sheets of that
kind--as prices rise and fall, you know.

Berent. Indeed? (Smiles.) You know, of course, what they say of
swindlers--that they draw up three balance-sheets everyday, and all
different! But you are teaching me, apparently--

Tjaelde (laughing).--that others too, may have that bad habit!--though I
haven't actually got as far as three a day!

Berent. Of course I was only joking. (Gets up.)

Tjaelde (getting up). Of course. I will send it to the hotel in an
hour's time; for I suppose you are staying in our only so-called hotel!
Would you not care, for the rest of your stay, to move your things over
here and make yourself at home in a couple of empty spare rooms that I
have?

Bercnt. Thank you, but the length of my stay is so uncertain; and the
state of my health imposes habits upon me which are embarrassing to
every one, and to myself most of all, when I am among strangers.

Tjaelde. But at all events I hope you will dine with us to-day? I expect
one or two friends. And perhaps a short sail afterwards; it is very
pretty among the islands here.

Berent. Thank you, but my health won't allow me such dissipations.

Tjaelde. Ha, ha!--Well, if I can be of any further service to you--?

Berent. I should be glad to have a talk with you before I leave,
preferably as soon as possible.

Tjaelde (somewhat surprised). You mean, after you have received all the
balance-sheets?

Berent. I have already managed to get most of them quietly, through Mr.
Holst.

Tjaelde (more surprised). Oh--so you mean to-day--?

Berent. Would five o'clock suit you?

Tjaelde. I am quite at your disposal! I will give myself the pleasure of
calling upon you at five.

Berent. No, I will come here at five o'clock. (Bows, and turns to go.)

Tjaelde (following him). But you are the invalid--the older man--and a
distinguished man--

Berent. But you are at home here. Good-bye!

Tjaelde. Let me thank you for the honour you have done me by calling
upon me!

Berent. Please don't bother to see me out.

Tjaelde. Allow me to escort you?

Berent. I can find the way quite well, thank you.

Tjaelde. No doubt, no doubt-but I should feel it an honour!

Berent. As you please! (As they are about to go down the verandah steps
they are met by SIGNE and HAMAR, who are coming up arm in arm. Each
couple draws aside to make room for the other.)

Tjaelde. Let me introduce--no, I am sure Mr. Berent needs no
introduction. This is my youngest daughter--and her fiancé, Lieutenant
Hamar.

Berent. I thought your regiment was at the manoeuvres, Lieutenant?

Hamar. I have got furlough--

Berent. On account of urgent business, no doubt! Good day!

Tjaelde. Ha, ha, ha! (He and BERENT go down the steps.)

Hamar. Insolent fellow! But he is like that to every one.

Signe. Not to my father, as far as I could see.

Hamar. Your father is insolent too.

Signe. You shan't say such things of father!

Hamar. What else do you call it, to laugh at such impertinence as
Berent's.

Signe. I call it good spirits! (Sits down in a rocking-chair and begins
rocking herself.)

Hamar. Oh, then, so you--. You are not very agreeable to-day.

Signe (still rocking herself). No; do you know, sometimes I get so bored
with you.

Hamar. Yet you won't let me go away?

Signe. Because I should be still worse bored without you.

Hamar. Let me tell you this, I am not going to put up much longer with
the way I am treated here!

Signe. Very well. (Takes off her engagement ring and holds it between
her finger and her thumb, as she rocks herself and hums a tune.)

Hamar. Oh, I don't say anything about _you_; but look at Valborg! Look
at your father! He hasn't even as much as offered me a mount on his new
horse!

Signe. He has had something else to think about--possibly something even
more important than that. (Goes on humming.)

Hamar. Oh, do be nice, Signe! You must admit that my feelings are very
natural. Indeed, to speak quite candidly--because I know I can say
anything to you--it seems to me that, as I am to be his son-in-law and
am in a cavalry regiment, and as he has no sons of his own, I might
almost expect that--that he would make me a present of the horse.

Signe. Ha, ha, ha!

Hamar. Does it seem so unreasonable to you?

Signe. Ha, ha, ha!

Hamar. Why do you laugh at what I say, Signe? It seems to me that it
would reflect very well on your family if, when my friends admired my
horse, I could say: "My father-in-law made me a present of it." Because,
you know, there isn't a finer horse in the whole of Norway.

Signe. And that is the reason why you should have it? Ha, ha, ha!

Hamar. I won't stand it!

Signe. The peerless lieutenant on the peerless horse! Ha, ha, ha!

Hamar. Signe, be quiet!

Signe. You are so funny! (Begins to hum again.)

Hamar. Listen, Signe! No one has so much influence with your father as
you.--Oh, do listen! Can't you talk seriously for a moment?

Signe. I should like to! (Goes on humming.)

Hamar. My idea was that, if that horse were mine, I would stay here for
the summer and break it in thoroughly. (SIGNE stops rocking herself and
humming. HAMAR comes up to her chair and leans over her.) In that case
I would not go back till the autumn, and then you could come with the
horse and me into town. Wouldn't that be delightful?

Signe (after looking at him for a moment). Oh, yes, my dear, you always
have such delightful ideas!

Hamar. Don't I! But the whole thing depends, of course, on whether you
can get the horse from your father. Will you try, darling?

Signe. And then you would stay here all the summer?

Hamar. All the summer!

Signe. So as to break in the horse.

Hamar. Just to break in the horse!

Signe. And I would go with you into town in the autumn--that was what
you said, wasn't it?

Hamar. Yes; wouldn't it be jolly?

Signe. Shall you take the bay horse to stay with your Aunt Ulla too?

Hamar (laughing). What?

Signe. Well, you have spent your furlough here simply for the sake of
that horse--I know that well enough--and you propose to stay here, just
to break it in-and then you propose that the horse and I should go to
your aunt's--

Hamar. But, Signe, what do you--?

Signe (beginning to rock herself furiously). Ugh! Go away!

Hamar. Jealous of a horse! Ha, ha, ha!

Signe. Go away to the stables.

Hamar. Is that meant for a punishment? Because it would be more amusing
there than it is here.

Signe (throwing down her ring). There! Let your horse wear that!

Hamar. Every time you throw down that ring--

Signe. Oh, you have said that so often! I am tired of that too! (Turns
her chair round so as to turn her back on him.)

Hamar. You are such a spoilt child that it would be absurd to take
everything you say seriously--

Signe. I am sick of that too, I tell you--for the hundred and twentieth
time! Go away!

Hamar. But can't you see how ridiculous it is of you to be jealous of a
horse? Have you ever heard of anyone else behaving like that?

Signe (jumping up). Oh, you make me want to shout and scream! I feel so
ashamed of you! (Stamps her foot.) I despise you!

Hamar (laughing). And all on account of the horse?

Signe. No, on your own account--yours, yours! I feel so miserable
sometimes, I should like to throw myself down on the floor and cry--or
run away and never come back! Can't you let me alone! Can't you go away!

Hamar. Yes--and I have not picked up the ring this time, either!

Signe. Oh, do go!--go, go, go! (Bursts out crying and sits down.)

Hamar. All right!--I see the steamer in the distance; I shall go home at
once.

Signe. Oh, you know as well as I do that that steamer goes the other
way! Oh! (Cries. The masts and funnel of a steamer come into sight, and
a trail of smoke passes over the sky. TJAELDE'S voice is heard outside,
calling: "Hurry up! Take the lieutenant's boat; it is ready!" SIGNE
jumps up.)

Hamar. They are going to fetch some one from the steamer! (TJAELDE'S
voice is heard again: "You get the boat out! He is coming here!" HAMAR
runs to pick up the ring and comes back hurriedly to SIGNE.) Signe!

Signe. No, I won't!

Hamar. Signe, dear! What does this mean? What is it that I have done?

Signe. I don't know, but I am wretchedly unhappy! (Bursts into tears.)

Hamar. But you know that in the end I always do what you want? What more
can you wish than that?

Signe. I can't help it, I wish I were dead! It is always the same thing!
(In tears again.)

Hamar. But, Signe--you who have told me hundreds of times that you loved
me!

Signe. And so I do. But sometimes our engagement seems horrible!--No,
don't come near me!

Hamar. Signe! (TJAELDE'S voice is heard outside: "Of course, put your
best coat on!" He calls louder: "Sannaes!" An answering voice is heard
in the distance. TJAELDE continues: "Don't forget your gloves!") Dry
your eyes, Signe! Don't let him see you have been crying. (He tries to
give her the ring, but she turns away, wiping her eyes. TJAELDE comes up
the steps on to the verandah.)

Tjaelde. Oh, there you are! That's right. Mr. Lind is arriving by
this steamer--I had a telegram from him just now. (Calls out over the
verandah.) Come along with those flags! And get this boat out of the way
and unstep her mast! She is moored up tight! (HAMAR runs to help him.)
Yes, you cast her off! (HAMAR does so, and the boat is hauled away to
the right. TJAELDE comes forward into the room.) Signe! (Looks at her.)
What? Squabbling again?

Signe. Father!

Tjaelde. Well, this is no time for tomfoolery of that sort! You must all
do the honours of the house to-day. Tell Valborg--

Signe. Tell her yourself, please! You know Valborg only does just what
she likes.

Tjaelde. Don't talk such rubbish! This is an important moment--and you
will all do as _I_ say! Tell Valborg that she is to make herself look
nice and come to me here. And you do the same. (She goes.) Signe!

Signe (stopping). Yes?

Tjaelde. We must ask five or six more people to dinner. You must send
word to Mr. Finne that we shall dine punctually at three o'clock,
instead of four. Mr. Lind has to go away again by the next boat, at five
o'clock. Do you understand?

Signe. But has mother enough in the house for so many?

Tjaelde. It is not a mere question of there being enough--it must be a
very good dinner. I expect my larder to be kept thoroughly well stocked
all through the summer. How often am I to repeat that?

Signe (trying to repress her fears). But mother is feeling so ill
to-day--

Tjaelde. Oh! don't begin about that everlasting "feeling ill." There
is no time to-day to feel ill. Now, be quick! (SIGNE goes out by the
farther door. TJAELDE turns to HAMAR.) Get a pen and ink and some paper!
We must draw up a list of guests, at once!

Hamar (looking about). There is none here.

Tjaelde (impatiently). Fetch some, then! (HAMAR goes into the next room.
TJAELDE, after a long sigh of relief, reads a telegram he has in his
hand. His hand trembles as he reads it slowly, repeating some passages
twice.) "Letter received just as starting. Before taking charge of
affairs, must have interview. Coming to-day earliest boat, return five
o'clock. Have clear statement ready. Lind." I can hardly read it--but it
is true! Yes, if I can only work this properly all doors will be open to
me! (To HAMAR, who has come back.) Ah, there you are! It would take too
long to write invitations. We will just draw up a list of names and
one of my clerks shall run round to them all. Now then! (Dictates.) The
Vicar--Oh, by the way, what is the champagne like?

Hamar. Do you mean the new lot?

Tjaelde. Yes.

Hamar. The Vicar praised it highly.

Tjaelde. Good. Well, then--

Hamar (writing). The Vicar.

Tjzlde. Mr. Ring.

Hamar. Mr. Ring.

Tjaelde. And--and--

Hamar. Mr. Holst?

Tjaelde. No, not Holst. (HAMAR appears greatly astonished. TJAELDE says
to himself:) I can show him now that I have no need of him! (Suddenly,
to HAMAR.) Mr. Holm. (To himself.) Holst's enemy!

Hamar. Mr. Holm.

Tjaelde (to himself). Although Holm is a boor. Still, it will annoy
Holst. (Aloud.) The Chief Constable.

Hamar. The Chief--

Tjaelde. No, strike out the Chief Constable.

Hamar. Chief Constable struck out.

Tjaelde. Have we got the Vicar down?

Hamar. He is number one on the list.

Tjaelde. Of course, yes.

Hamar. What about the Magistrate?

Tjaelde. No, he lives too far off. Besides, unless he is the guest
of honour and can talk shop all the time--. No! But, let me see. Mr.
Knutzon--Knutzon with a "z."

Hamar. Knutzon with a "z."

Tjaelde. Oh!--and--Knudsen, too! Knudsen with an "s."

Hamar. Knudsen with an "s."

Tjaelde. How many have we got?

Hamar. The Vicar, Ring, Holm, the Chief--oh, no, the Chief Constable was
struck out; Knutzon with a "z," Knudsen with an "s "--that is one, two,
three, four, five, six.

Tjaelde. And Finne, you, and I make nine. We must have twelve.

Hamar. What about some ladies?

Tjaelde. No; ladies are out of place at a business dinner. They may do
the honours afterwards, when we have got to the cigarette stage. But
whom shall we--?

Hamar. That new lawyer fellow? He's a smart chap--I can't remember his
name?

Tjaelde. No, he always wants to be speechifying wherever he goes.--Ah,
Mr. Pram, the custom-house officer!

Hamar. That man? He always gets drunk!

Tjaelde. Yes, but he doesn't get noisy with it. He does no harm--quite
the contrary! Yes, put down Pram.

Hamar. Mr. Pram.

Tjaelde. It is a very difficult task, in such a small town, when you
want to get a good set of people together. Ah!--Falbe! I forgot him. He
is very neat, and no opinions.

Hamar. Neat in his dress, do you mean?

Tjaelde. Yes, in his dress too-but I meant it more generally. Now, for
the twelfth--Morten Schultz?

Hamar. Morten Schultz! (Gets up.) No, really, I must take the liberty of
protesting against him! Do you really know what he did the last time he
was here, when you had a lot of guests? In the middle of dinner he took
out his false teeth and began showing them to his neighbours. He wanted
to have them passed round the table! If that is your idea of a good set
of people--well!

Tjaelde. Yes, he is rather a rough diamond. But he is the richest man
about here.

Hamar (who has sat down again). Well in that case he really ought to
afford himself a new wig! It is far from pleasant to sit beside him, I
can assure you!

Tjaelde. Yes, I know he is a pig; but he is wide awake, and this would
flatter him! You see, my young friend, when a man is very rich you must
make certain allowances for him.

Hamar. I can't understand what _you_ can hope to get out of him.

Tjaelde. Hm, hm!--No, well, perhaps we had better leave him out?

Hamar. Certainly!

Tjaelde (to himself). Although Lind would understand the significance of
Morten Schultz's being here--

Hamar. And the things he says! Ladies have to leave the room!

Tjaelde. Yes, you are right. (Mutters to himself.) And, after all, I
don't need him any longer. (Aloud.) But what about our twelfth, then?
Let me see--.

Hamar. Christopher Hansen?

Tjaelde. Oh, Lord! no. We should have to talk politics. No, let
me see--. Yes, I think I might risk it! Hm, hm--yes, just the man!
Jakobsen, the brewery manager.

Hamar. Jakobsen?

Tjaelde. Hm, hm! Jakobsen will do very well. I know Jakobsen.

Hamar. Oh, he is a very good fellow--we all know that, but in polite
society--!

Tjaelde. Hm, hm, hm!--Put him down!

Hamar (writing). Jakobsen. There, then! (Gets up.)

Tjaelde. Now let Skogstad go with the list! Remember, three o'clock
punctually! And be quick! (Calls after HAMAR, who is going out.) And
come back when you have given him the list! There may be something more
to do! (HAMAR goes out by the nearer door. TJAELDE takes a letter out of
his pocket.) Ah, of course! Shall I send the balance-sheet to Berent?
I am independent of the banks now. Still, I am not out of the wood yet.
And, anyway, it is a very pretty balance-sheet! Holst would be sure to
see it, and that might be useful--and it might annoy him, too. Besides,
if I don't send it, they will think that my promising to send it had put
me into a hole, and that Lind had helped me out of it. I risk least by
sending it. (HAMAR comes back.) Look here, let him take this letter,
too. It is for Mr. Berent, at the Hotel Victoria.

Hamar. Is this an invitation? Because, if it is, we shall be thirteen at
table.

Tjaelde. It is not an invitation. Be quick, before he goes. (HAMAR goes
out again.) Oh, if only it succeeds! Lind is the sort of man one can
persuade--and I must, I must persuade him! (Looks at his watch.) I have
four whole hours to do it in. I have never felt so hopeful--not for a
long time. (Is lost in thought; then says quietly:) After all, sometimes
a crisis is a good thing--like a big wave that carries one on!--They
have all had their suspicions aroused now, and are all ready to get
into a panic. (Sighs.) If only I could get safely out of my difficulties
without any one's suspecting it!--Oh, this anxious fear, night and
day!--all this mystery, these shifts, these concealments, this farce
I have to keep up! I go about my business as if I were in a dream.
(Despairingly.) This shall be the last time--my last performance of this
sort! No more of it!--I only need a helping hand now, and I have got it!
But _have_ I got it? that is the question. Oh! if only, after this, I
could know what it was to have a good night's sleep and to wake in
the morning free from anxiety!--to join them at meals with an easy
conscience!--come home in the evening and feel that it was all done
with! If only I had something to take my stand upon that I could call my
own--really and truly my own! I hardly dare to believe that there is a
chance--I have so often been disappointed! (HAMAR comes back.)

Hamar. There--that's done!

Tjaelde. Good Lord, what about a salute from our cannon? We must give
him a salute!

Hamar. We have powder.

Tjaelde. Then send word up at once to Ole to see about it! (They hurry
out. The curtain falls.)




ACT II

SCENE I

(SCENE.--The same room. The table, which has been drawn to one side, is
covered with bottles of champagne aged dishes of fruit. MRS. TJAELDE and
SIGNE, with a man-servant and a maid, are busy preparing it. Through
the door on the right a lively conversation can be heard, and occasional
bursts of laughter.)

Mrs. Tjaelde (in a tired voice). Now I think it is all ready.

Signe. They are talking a long time over their dinner.

Mrs. Tjaelde (looking at her watch). Yes, they will only have half an
hour for their dessert, because Mr. Lind has to leave at five o'clock.

Signe. Ah, they have finished at last! Listen, they are getting up from
the table. (Amidst the loud noise of conversation the noise of chairs
being pushed back is audible.) Here they come!

Mrs. Tjaelde. Yes; let us retreat. (The maid goes out by the farther
door; SIGNE helps MRS. TJAELDE out after her. The man-servant begins
opening the champagne. The guests come in from the dining-room, headed
by LIND escorted by TJAELDE, whom he is assuring that the dinner was
excellent, to which TJAELDE replies that it is impossible to do much in
a small country town. Both look at their watches, and observe that there
is only half an hour left. TJAELDE vainly endeavours to persuade LIND
to stay longer. Close behind them come HOLM and RING, engaged in an
animated dispute about timber prices, the former maintaining that they
will fall still lower, the latter that they will rise speedily owing
to the fall in the prices of coal and iron, a point of view which the
former vigorously controverts. Immediately behind them comes the VICAR,
escorted by HAMAR, who is a little tipsy. The VICAR is assuring him that
he has no objection to parishioners repudiating the obligation to attend
the services of their own priest, so long as they are compelled to pay
him for those services whether they avail themselves of them or not;
because order, which is an essential characteristic of the Heavenly
Kingdom, must be maintained. HAMAR tries to get in a word or two about
the bay horse, but without success. At the same time KNUTZON and FALBE
are deep in a discussion about a dancer whom FALBE has seen at Hamburg.
He is maintaining that she can leap six feet into the air, which KNUTZON
ventures to doubt, but FALBE says there is no doubt about it, and he
knows because he has once sat at the same dinner-table with her. FINNE,
KNUDSEN, and JAKOBSEN follow them. JAKOBSEN is heard challenging any one
to contradict him, while the others eagerly protest that he has entirely
misunderstood their meaning. He affirms stoutly that he doesn't care a
damn what they meant, but that his employer is the greatest business
man and the finest fellow in the world, or at all events in Norway. PRAM
comes in by himself, wrapt in tipsy contemplation. They all talk at the
same time.)

Tjaelde (rapping on a glass). Gentlemen! (There is a sudden silence,
except for the sound of the voices of FALBE and JAKOBSEN, who are hushed
down by the others.) Gentlemen! I am sorry dinner has occupied such a
long time.

All (unanimously). No, no!

Tjaelde. Our distinguished guest has, unfortunately, to leave us in half
an hour, so I should like to take the opportunity of saying a few words.
Gentlemen, we have a prince among us to-day. I say a prince, because
if it is true that it is the financiers that rule the world--and it is
true, gentlemen--

Pram (who is standing well forward, supporting himself by the edge of
the table, says solemnly:) Yes.

Tjaelde.--then our friend here is a prince! There is not a single
important undertaking that he has not initiated, or at any rate backed
with his name.

Pram (lifting his glass). Mr. Lind, may I have the honour--?

Voices. Sh! Sh!

Tjaelde. Yes, gentlemen, his name backs every enterprise. It would be
impossible to carry one through that had not his backing.

Pram (solemnly). His backing.

Tjaelde. Am I not right, then, in describing him as a prince?

Falbe (in a feeble voice). Yes.

Tjaelde. Gentlemen, to-day his name is once more exercising its
powerful, I might say its creative, influence upon circumstances. I may
say that at this moment the country holds no truer benefactor than he.

Pram. Great man.

Tjaelde. Let us drink his health! May prosperity attend him and his, and
may his name be deathless in Norway! Mr. Lind!

All. Mr. Lind! Mr. Lind! (They all drink his health effusively.)

Tjaelde (to HAMAR, whom he pulls forward somewhat roughly, as the others
begin to help themselves to the dessert.) What has become of the salute?

Hamar (in consternation).Good Lord, yes! (Rushes to the window, but
comes back.) I have no handkerchief. I must have laid it down in the
dining-room.

Tjaelde. Here is mine!(Feels in his pocket for it.) One cannot rely
on you for the least thing. The salute will be too late now. It is
disgraceful! (HAMAR goes to the window and waves the handkerchief madly.
At last the report of a cannon is heard. The guests are standing in a
group, holding their dessert plates.)

Holm. A little bit late!

Knutzon. Rather behind the moment--

Ring. A very important moment, however!

Holm. A very unexpected one, anyway!

Knutzon (jestingly). Allow me, amidst the cannon's roar, to introduce to
you a man who has been led by the nose!

Ring. Oh, Tjaelde knows what he is about!

Tjaelde. Mr. Lind is kind enough to wish to propose a toast. (They all
compose themselves into respectful silence.)

Lind. Our worthy host has proposed my health in most flattering terms.
I would merely add this, that wealth is entrusted to those who have it
precisely in order that they may support industry, genius, and great
undertakings.

Pram (who has never changed his position). Nobly said.

Lind. I am only an administrator of a trust, and too often a weak and
short-sighted one.

Pram. Beautiful.

Lind. But I shall not be mistaken if I say that Mr. Tjaelde's many-sided
activities, which we must all admire, rest upon a sound foundation; and
of that fact no one, at the present moment, is better able to judge than
I. (The guests look at one another in surprise.) Therefore I have no
hesitation in saying that his activities are an honour to this town, to
this district, to our whole country, and that therefore his genius and
his energy deserve support. I propose the toast of "prosperity to the
firm of Tjaelde!"

All. Prosperity to the firm of Tjaelde!

(HAMAR signals again with the handkerchief, and a cannon shot is heard.)

Tjaelde. I thank you heartily, Mr. Lind! I am profoundly touched.

Lind. I said no more than I am convinced of, Mr. Tjaelde!!

Tjaelde. Thank you! (To HAMAR.) What do you mean by signalling for a
salute for the host? Blockhead!

Hamar. You said there was to be a salute when a toast was proposed,
didn't you?

Tjaelde. Oh, you are a--!

Hamar (to himself). Well, if ever again I--!

Holm. Then it is an accomplished fact, I suppose?

Knutzon. _Fait accompli_! That toast represents twenty thousand pounds,
at least.

Ring. Yes, Tjaelde knows what he is about! I have always said that!
(FALBE is seen drinking ceremoniously with LIND. JAKOBSEN comes forward,
talking to KNUDSEN.)

Jakobsen (in a low voice). There isn't a word of truth in what you say!

Knudsen. But, my dear Jakobsen, you misunderstand me!

Jakobsen (louder). Hang it, I know my people!

Knudsen. Don't talk so loud!

Jakobsen (still louder). What I say any one may hear!

Tjaelde. (at the same moment). The Vicar wishes to say a few words.

Knudsen (to JAKOBSEN). Hush! The Vicar wishes to say a few words.

Jakobsen. Have I got to hush because that damned--

Tjaelde (in a voice of authority). The Vicar wishes to speak.

Jakobsen. I beg your pardon!

The Vicar (in a feeble voice). As the spiritual adviser of this
household, I have the pleasing duty of invoking a blessing on the gifts
that have been so richly showered upon our host and his friends. May
they be to their souls' present good and eternal welfare!

Pram. Amen.

The Vicar. I am going to ask you to drink the health of our host's dear
children--those lovely girls whose welfare has been the object of my
prayers ever since they were confirmed--ever since that memorable day
when household and religious duties began to walk side by side.

Pram. Ah, yes!

The Vicar. May they always in the future, as they have in the past,
grow in the holy fear of God and in meekness and gratitude towards their
parents!

All. Miss Valborg, Miss Signe!

Hamar (in a panic). Am I to signal?

Tjaelde. Oh, go to--!

Hamar. Well, if ever again--!

Tjaelde. Thank you very much, Mr. Vicar. Like you, I hope that the
intimate relations between parent and child that exist here--

The Vicar. It has always been a pleasure to me to come into your most
hospitable house.

Tjaelde. May I have the honour of drinking a glass of wine with you?
(They drink to each other.)

The Vicar. Excellent champagne, my dear sir!

Lind (to HOLM). It pains me to hear what you say. Is it possible that
this town, which owes so much to Mr. Tjaelde, repays him with such
ingratitude?

Holm (in a low voice). One never can quite confidently rely on him.

Lind. Really? I have heard others sing his praises so loudly, you know.

Holm (as before). You misunderstand me. I mean his position--

Lind. His position? That must be merely envy! People are often so unjust
towards those whose enterprise has lifted them above the heads of the
crowd.

Holm. At any rate I assure you it was not from--

Lind (coldly). I don't doubt it. (Walks away from him.)

Jakobsen (with whom TJAELDE has just drunk). Gentlemen!

Knutzon (to HOLM, in passing). Is that boor really going to be allowed
to make a speech! (Going up to LIND.) May I have the honour of drinking
a glass of wine with you, Mr. Lind? (Several of the guests begin to
talk, ostentatiously indifferent to JAKOBSEN who is trying to begin his
speech.)

Jakobsen (in a formidable voice). Gentlemen! (Silence ensues, and he
continues in his usual voice.) Permit a common man to say a word, too,
on this festive occasion. I was a poor little boy when I entered Mr.
Tjaelde's employment; but he pulled me out of the gutter. (Laughter.) I
am-what I am, gentlemen! And therefore if any here is qualified to talk
about Mr. Tjaelde, it is I; because I know him. I know he is a fine
fellow.

Lind (to TJAELDE). Children and drunken men--

Tjaelde (laughing).--speak the truth!

Jakobsen. There are lots of people that will tell you one thing or
another about him--and, of course, he may have his failings like all of
us. But as I find myself in such fine company as this I am going to say
that--that--devil take me if Mr. Tjaelde isn't too good for the lot of
you! (Laughter.)

Tjaelde. That's enough, Jakobsen!

Jakobsen. No, it's not enough! Because there is one toast we have all
forgotten, although we have all had such a splendid dinner. (Laughter.
FALBE claps his hands and cries: "Bravo!") Yes, and it is nothing to
laugh at; because it is the toast of Mrs. Tjaelde's health that we have
not drunk!

Lind. Bravo!

Jakobsen. There's a wife and mother for you! I can tell you--and it's
true--she goes about the house attending to her duties and preparing for
our entertainment when all the time she is ill, and she takes the whole
thing on her shoulders and says nothing. God bless her, I say!--and that
is all I have to say.

Several of the Guests (raising their glasses). Mrs. Tjaelde! Mrs.
Tjaelde!

Pram (grasping JAKOBSEN by the hand). That was fine of you, Jakobsen!
(LIND joins them; PRAM steps aside respectfully.)

Lind. Will you drink a glass of wine with me, Jakobsen?

Jakobsen. Thank you, very much. I am only a common man--

Lind. But a good-hearted one! Your health! (They drink to each other. A
boat is seen putting in to shore below the verandah. Its crew of six men
stand up and toss their oars in naval fashion. SANNAES is standing at
the helm.)

Holm (in a whisper, to KNUTZON). Tjaelde knew what he was doing when he
invited Jakobsen!

Knutzon (whispering). Just look at the boat!

Ring. Tjaelde is a very clever fellow--a very clever fellow! (VALBORG,
SIGNE and MRS. TJAELDE are seen coming up the verandah steps.)

Tjaelde. Gentlemen, the moment of departure is at hand; I see the ladies
coming to take leave of our distinguished guest. Let us take this last
opportunity of gathering around him--round our prince--and thanking him
for coming! Let us cheer him with three times three! (Cheers.)

Lind. Thank you, gentlemen! There is so little time left that I must
confine myself to merely bidding you all good-bye. (To MRS. TJAELDE.)
Good-bye, my dear madam! You should have heard how your health was
proposed and drunk just now. My warmest thanks for your hospitality, and
forgive me for the trouble I have caused you. (To SIGNE.) Good-bye,
Miss Signe. I am sorry time has not permitted me to have the honour of
becoming better acquainted with you; you seem so full of spirit! But if,
as you said, you are soon coming to Christiania--

Signe. I shall then do myself the honour of calling upon your wife.

Lind. Thank you, thank you--you will be most welcome. (To VALBORG.) Are
you not feeling well, Miss Valborg?

Valborg. Yes.

Lind. You look so serious. (As VALBORG does not reply, he continues
somewhat coldly:) Good-bye, Miss Valborg. (To HAMAR.) Good-bye,
Mr.--Mr.--

Tjaelde. Mr. Hamar.

Lind. Ah, the young man that talked to me about a horse--your future
son-in-law! Pray forgive me for not--

Hamar. Don't mention it!

Lind. Good-bye!

Hamar. A pleasant journey, sir!

Lind (coldly, to HOLM). Good-bye, Mr. Holm.

Holm (imperturbably polite). I wish you a very pleasant journey, Mr.
Lind.

Lind (to PRAM). Good-bye, Mr. Pram.

Pram (holds his hand, and seems as if he wanted to say something but
could not. At last he finds his voice). I want to thank you for--for--I
want to thank you for--for--

Lind. You are an excellent fellow!

Pram (in a relieved voice). I am so glad to hear it! Thank you.

Lind (to KNUTZON). Good-bye, Mr.--

Knutzon (hastily). Knutzon.

Pram. With a "z."

Lind (to KNUDSEN). Good-bye, Mr.--

Knudsen. Knudsen, again.

Pram. With an "s."

Lind (to FALBE). Mr--?

Falbe. Falbe.

Lind. Good-bye, Mr. Falbe! (To RING.) I am delighted to see you looking
so well, Mr. Ring.

Ring (with a low bow). The same to you, sir!

Lind. Good-bye, Mr. Vicar!

The Vicar (holding his hand, impressively). Let me wish you good luck
and happiness, Mr. Lind--

Lind. Thank you. (Tries to get away.)

The Vicar.--in your journey over the perilous seas to foreign lands!

Lind. Thank you. (Tries to get away.)

The Vicar. Let me wish you a safe return, Mr. Lind--

Lind. Thank you very much. (Tries to get away.)

The Vicar.--to our dear fatherland; a land, Mr. Lind, which possesses in
you--

Lind. You must excuse me, Mr. Vicar, but time presses.

The Vicar. Let me thank you for the pleasure of our meeting to-day, Mr.
Lind, for--

Lind. Indeed, there is no occasion! Good-bye! (To JAKOBSEN.) Good-bye,
Jakobsen, good-bye!

Jakobsen. Good-bye, Mr. Lind! I am only a common man, I know; but that
is no reason why I shouldn't wish you a pleasant journey too, is it?

Lind. Certainly not, Jakobsen.--Good-bye, Mr. Finne! By the way--just a
word! (In an undertone.) You said that Mr. Berent--. (Takes him aside.)

Tjaelde (to HAMAR). Now, remember the salute this time!--No, no, no!
Don't be in such a hurry! Wait till the boat puts off! You want to make
a mess of it again!

Hamar. Well, if ever again I--!

Tjaelde (to LIND, who holds out his hand to him). Goodbye, Mr. Lind! (In
a low voice.) No one has so much reason to thank you for your visit as
I. You are the only one that can understand--.

Lind (a shade coldly). Don't mention it, Mr. Tjaelde! Good luck to your
business! (In warmer tones.) Good-bye everybody--and thank you all for
your kindness! (The footman, who has for some time been holding out his
hat to him, gives it him, and his coat to SANNAES. LIND steps on board
the boat.)

All. Good-bye, Mr. Lind, good-bye!

Tjaelde. One cheer more! (Cheers and a cannon salute are heard together.
The boat glides away. They all wave their handkerchiefs. TJAELDE hurries
into the room.) I have no handkerchief; that blockhead has--. (Looks at
VALBORG.) Why are you not waving?

Valborg. Because I don't wish to. (TJAELDE looks at her, but says
nothing. He goes into the other room and comes back with a table-napkin
in each hand, and hurries on to the verandah.)

Tjaelde (waving and shouting). Good-bye! Good-bye!

Signe. Let us go out to the point and see the last of them!

All. Yes, yes! (All but TJAELDE and VALBORG hurry off to the right.)

Tjaelde (coming into the room). I saw Berent coming! (VALBORG goes out
by the door on the right. TJAELDE comes forward, throws the napkins on
to a table and himself into a chair.) Oh--oh! But this must be the last
time.--I shan't need this sort of thing any more! Never again! (Gets up
wearily.) Ah, I had forgotten. Berent!

[The Curtain falls.]

[The interval between this scene and the next should be as short as
possible.]


SCENE II

(SCENE.-TJAELDE'S private office. On the left, a desk strewn with
ledgers and papers. On the right, a stove. An easy chair by the stove.
A table in the foreground to the right; on it an inkstand and pens. Two
armchairs; one at the table facing the audience, the other at the side
of the table. Windows on either side of the desk; a door beyond the
stove. A door in the background, leading to other offices. A bell-pull
hangs down the wall. A chair on either side of the door. Quite at the
back, on the left, a staircase leading direct to TJAELDE'S bedroom.
BERENT and TJAELDE come in from the back.)

Tjaelde. You must excuse my receiving you here. But the other rooms are
all upside down; we have had some people to dinner.

Berent. I heard you had guests.

Tjaelde. Yes, Mr. Lind from Christiana.

Berent. Quite so.

Tjaelde. Won't you sit down? (BERENT lays down his hat and coat on a
chair by the door. He comes slowly forward, sits down at the side of the
table, and takes some papers from his breast-pocket. TJAELDE sits down
at the other chair by the table and watches him indifferently.)

Berent. What we now want is some fixed standard by which to make our
valuations, especially of real estate. Have you any objection to our
making your business a basis for arriving at that?

Tjaelde. None at all.

Berent. Then may I make my comments on your own figures, and ask you a
few questions about them?

Tjaelde. By all means.

Berent. Well, to begin with, let us take your properties immediately
round here; they will give us the best idea of local values. For
instance, take the Mjölstad forest; you have put that down, I see, at
£16,500.

Tjaelde (indifferently). Have I?

Berent. You bought it for £10,000.

Tjaelde. Yes, four years ago. Timber prices ruled low then.

Berent. And since then you have cut down more than £20,000 worth of
timber there.

Tjaelde. Who told you so?

Berent. Mr. Holst.

Tjaelde. Holst knows nothing about it.

Berent. We must try to be very accurate, you know.

Tjaelde. Well, of course, the whole valuation is not my concern; but
those whom it does concern will protest.

Berent (taking no notice of his objection). So I think we will reduce
the £16,500 to £10,000.

Tjaelde. To £10,000! (Laughs.) As you please.

Berent. Calculating by the same standard, we can scarcely put down the
Stav forest at more than £4000.

Tjaelde. Allow me to say that, if that is the way you are going to make
your valuation, everybody in the place will have to go bankrupt!

Berent (with a smile). We will risk that. You have put down your wharf
and its contents at £12,000.

Tjaelde. Including two ships in course of construction--

Berent.--for which it would be difficult to find a purchaser, as they
are so far from completion.

Tjaelde. Indeed?

Berent. So I think we cannot put down the wharf and its contents at a
higher figure than £8,000--and I believe even that will turn out to be
too high.

Tjaelde. If you can find me another wharf as well stocked, and with the
advantages that this one has, I will buy it whenever you like for £8000;
I am certain I should be more than £4000 to the good over the bargain.

Berent. May I go on?

Tjaelde. If you like! I even feel a certain curiosity to view my
possessions under such an entirely new light.

Berent. As a matter of fact the items that are too highly valued are
just those that comprise this property that you live on--its land, its
gardens, its dwelling houses, warehouses, and quays-not to mention the
brewery and the factory, which I shall come to later. Even regarded as
business premises they seem to me to be over-valued.

Tjaelde. Well?

Berent, Moreover, the luxurious appointments of this house of yours,
which would very probably be superfluous for any one else, cannot
possibly be counted upon to realise their full value in a sale.
Suppose--as is indeed most likely--that it were a countryman that bought
the place?

Tjaelde. You are reckoning me as turned out of it already, then!

Berent. I am obliged to base all my calculations on what the property
would fetch if sold now.

Tjaelde (getting up). What may you happen to value it at then?

Berent. At less than half your valuation; that is to say at--

Tjaelde. You must really forgive me if I use an expression which has
been on the tip of my tongue for some time: this is scandalous! You
force yourself into a man's house, and then, under pretext of asking for
his opinion, you practically--on paper--rob him of his possessions!

Berent. I don't understand you. I am trying to arrive at a basis for
values hereabouts; and you said yourself, did you not, that it is a
matter that does not concern you alone?

Tjaelde. Certainly; but even in jest--if I may be allowed the
expression--one does not take the statement that an honourable man has
voluntarily offered and treat it as a mendacious document.

Berent. There are many different points of view from which valuations
can be made, obviously. I see nothing more in it than that.

Tjaelde. But don't you understand that this is like cutting into my
living flesh? Bit by bit, my property has been brought together or
created by my own work, and preserved by the most strenuous exertions on
my part under terribly trying conditions--it is bound up with my family,
with all that is dear to me--it has become a part of my very life!

Berent (with a bow). I understand that perfectly. You have put down the
Brewery at--

Tjaelde. No; I refuse to allow you to go on in this way. You must find
some one else's property as a basis for your calculations--you must
consult some one else, whose idea of business corresponds somewhat
closer to your own ridiculous one.

Berent (leaning back in his chair). That is a pity. The banks were
anxious to be acquainted with your answers to my observations.

Tjaelde. Have you sent my statement to the banks?

Berent. With my remarks and comments on it, and Mr. Holst's.

Tjaelde. This has been a trap, then? I believed I had to deal with a
gentleman!

Berent. The banks or I, what is the difference? It comes to the same
thing, as I represent them unreservedly.

Tjaelde. Such impudent audacity is unpardonable!

Berent. I would suggest that we avoid hard words--at all events, for
the moment--and rather consider the effect that will be produced by the
balance-sheet sent in.

Tjaelde. That some of us will see!

Berent. The banking house of Lind & Co., for instance?

Tjaelde. Do you mean to say that my balance-sheet, ornamented with
marginal notes by you and Holst, is to be submitted to Mr. Lind's firm
too?

Berent. When the cannon-salutes and noise of your festivities
enlightened me as to the situation, I took the liberty of making some
inquiries of the banks.

Tjaelde. So you have been spying here, too? You have been trying to
undermine my business connections?

Berent. Is your position such, then, that you are afraid?

Tjaelde. The question is not my position, but your behaviour!

Berent. I think we had better keep to the point. You have put down the
Brewery at--

Tjaelde. No; your conduct is so absolutely underhanded that, as an
honest man, I must refuse all further dealing with you. I am, as I said
before, accustomed to have to deal with gentlemen.

Berent. I think you misunderstand the situation. Your indebtedness to
the banks is so considerable that a settlement of it may reasonably be
required of you. But to effect that you must work with us in the matter.

Tjaelde (after a moment's thought). Very well! But, no more details--let
me know your conclusions, briefly.

Berent. My conclusions, briefly, are that you have estimated your assets
at £90,800. I estimate them at £40,600.

Tjaelde (quietly). That is to say, you make me out to have a deficit of
about £30,000?

Berent. As to that, I must point out that your estimate of your
liabilities does not agree with mine, either.

Tjaelde (quietly). Oh, of course not!

Berent. For instance, the dividend that Möller's estate is to yield to
you.

Tjaelde. No more details! What do you put my total liabilities at?

Berent. Let me see. Your total liabilities amount, according to your
calculations, to £70,000. I estimate them at £80,000--to be precise, at
£79,372.

Tjaelde. That puts my deficit at about--

Berent. At about £39,400--or, in round figures, £40,000.

Tjaelde. Oh, by all means let us stick to round figures!

Berent. So that the difference between your views of your balance-sheet
and mine is that, whereas you give yourself a surplus of about £20,000,
I give you a deficit of about £40,000.

Tjaelde. Thank you very much.--Do you know my opinion of the whole
matter? (BERENT looks up at him.) That I am in this room with a madman.

Berent. I have had the same opinion for some time.--The stock of timber
you hold in France I have not been able to deal with; you have forgotten
to include it in your account. Perhaps it may make a little difference.

Tjaelde. It is of no consequence! I have often enough heard people speak
of your callousness and your heartlessness; but their account of you has
come nowhere near the truth. I don't know why I have not turned you out
of my house long before this; but you will have the goodness to leave it
now!

Berent. We shall both leave presently. But before we do, we must discuss
the question of handing over the house to the Receiver in Bankruptcy.

Tjaelde. Ha, ha, ha! Allow me to inform you that at this very moment
a sum is being telegraphed to me which will be sufficient not only to
cover my present liabilities, but to set me straight in every direction!

Berent. The telegraph is a useful invention which is open to every one.

Tjaelde (after a moment's thought). What do you mean by that?

Berent. One effect of the noise of your festivities was that I used the
telegraph also. Mr. Lind will receive, on board the boat, a telegram
from his firm--and I doubt if the money you speak of will be
forthcoming.

Tjaelde. It is not true! You have not dared to do that!

Berent. The facts are exactly as I state.

Tjaelde. Give me my balance-sheet; let me look at it again. (Stretches
out his hand to take it.)

Berent (taking it up). Excuse me!

Tjaelde. Do you presume to keep back my own balance-sheet in my own
writing?

Berent. Yes, and even to put it in my pocket. (Does so.) A fraudulent
balance-sheet, dated and signed, is a document of some importance.

Tjaelde. You are determined to ruin my private and public reputation?

Berent. You have been working for that yourself for a long time. I know
your position. For a month past I have been in correspondence with all
the quarters in which you have business connections, both here any I
abroad.

Tjaelde. What underhanded deceitfulness an honest man is exposed to!
Here have I been surrounded by spies for the last month! A plot between
my business acquaintances and the banks! A snake creeping into my house
and crawling over my accounts! But I will break up the conspiracy! And
you will find out what it mean, to try and ruin a reputable firm by
underhand devices!

Berent. This is no time for fine phrases. Do you propose to surrender
your property at once?

Tjaelde. Ha, ha! I am to surrender it because you have made me out a
bankrupt on your bit of paper!

Berent. You might conceal the facts for a month, I know. But for your
own sake, and especially for the sake of others, I would urgently advise
you to end the matter at once. That was the reason of my journey here.

Tjaelde. Ah, now the truth is out! And you came here pretending a
friendly concern that the tangle should be straightened out! We were to
distinguish between the sound and unsound firms, and you requested me,
most politely, to give you my assistance in the matter!

Berent. Exactly. But there is no question of anything unsound here
except your own business and what is bound up with it.

Tjaelde (when he has controlled himself). So you came into my house with
the hidden design of ruining me?

Berent. I must repeat that it is not I that am responsible for your
bankruptcy; it is yourself.

Tjaelde. And I must repeat that my bankruptcy only exists in your
imagination! Much may happen in a month; and I have shown that I can
find a way out of difficulties before now!

Berent. That is to say, by involving yourself deeper and deeper in
falsehood.

Tjaelde. Only a man of business can understand such things. But, if you
really understand them, I would say to you: "Give me £20,000 and I will
save the situation entirely." That would be doing something worthy of
your great powers; that would give you a reputation for penetration
in discerning the real state of affairs; because by so doing you would
safeguard the welfare of more than a thousand people, and ensure a
prosperous future for the whole district!

Berent. I don't rise to that bait.

Tjaelde (after a moment's reflection). Do you want me to explain to you
how £20,000 would be sufficient to set the whole complicated situation
straight? Within three months remittances would be coming in. I can make
it its clear as daylight to you--

Berent.--that you would be falling from one disillusionment to another!
That is what you have been doing for the last three years, from month to
month.

Tjaelde. Because the last three years have been bad years--horrible
years! But we have reached the crisis; things must begin to improve now!

Berent. That is what every defaulter thinks.

Tjaelde. Do not drive me to despair! Have you any idea what I have gone
through in these three years? Have you any idea what I am capable of?

Berent. Of still further falsehood.

Tjaelde. Take care!--It is quite true that I am standing on the edge of
a precipice. It is true that for three years I have done everything
in mortal power to save the situation! I maintain that there has been
something heroic in the fight I have made. And that deserves some
reward. You have unrestricted powers; every one trusts you. Realise
for yourself what your mission is; do not let it be necessary for me to
teach it you! Let me tell you this, emphatically: it will be a dreadful
thing for _you_ if hundreds of people are to be ruined unnecessarily
now!

Berent. Let us make an end of this.

Tjaelde. No, devil take me if I give up a fight like this with a
senseless surrender!

Berent. How do you propose to end it, then?

Tjaelde. There is no issue to it that I have not turned over in my
thoughts--thousands of times. _I_ know what I shall do! I won't be a
mark for the jeers of this wretched little town, nor triumphed over by
those who have envied me all round the countryside!

Berent. What will you do, then?

Tjaelde. You shall see! (Speaking more and more excitedly.) You won't
help me under any conditions?

Berent. No.

Tjaelde. You insist that I shall surrender my estate, here and now?

Berent. Yes.

Tjaelde. Hell and damnation! You dare do that?

Berent. Yes.

Tjaelde (his agitation robbing him of his voice, which all at once sinks
to a hoarse whisper). You have never known what despair is!--You don't
know what an existence I have endured!-But if the decisive moment has
come, and I have a man here in my office who _ought_ to save me but will
not, then that man shall share what is in store for me.

Berent (leaning back in his chair). This is beginning to be impressive.

Tjaelde. No more jesting; you might regret it! (Goes to all the doors
and locks them with a key which he takes out of his pocket; then unlocks
his desk, and takes a revolver out of it.) How long do you suppose I
have had this in here?

Berent. Since you bought it, I suppose.

Tjaelde. And why do you suppose I bought it?--Do you suppose that after
I have been master of this town and the biggest man in the district, I
would endure the disgrace of bankruptcy?

Berent. You have been enduring it for a long time.

Tjaelde. It is in your power now either to ruin me or to wave me. You
have behaved in such a way that you deserve no mercy--and you shall have
none! Report to the banks that they may give me the use of £14,000 for
a year--I need no more than that--and I will save the situation for good
and all. Think seriously, now! Remember my family, remember how long my
firm has been established, remember the numbers that would be ruined if
I were! And do not forget to think of your own family! Because, if you
_don't_ agree to what I ask, neither of us shall leave this room alive!

Berent (pointing to the revolver). Is it loaded?

Tjaelde (putting his finger on the trigger). You will find that out in
good time. You must answer me now!

Berent. I have a suggestion to make. Shoot yourself first and me
afterwards.

Tjaelde (going up to him and holding the revolver to his head). I will
soon quiet your pretty wit.

Berent (getting up, and taking out of his pocket a paper which he
unfolds). This is a formal surrender of your estate to the Receiver
in Bankruptcy. If you sign it, you will be doing your duty to your
creditors, to your family, and to yourself. Shooting yourself and me
would only be adding an acted lie to all your others. Put away your
revolver and take up your pen!

Tjaelde. Never! I had resolved on this long ago. But you shall keep me
company, now!

Berent. Do what you please. But you cannot threaten me into a falsehood.

Tjaelde (who has lowered the revolver, takes a step back, raises the
revolver and aims at BERENT). Very well!

Berent (walking up to TJAELDE and looking him straight in the eyes,
while the latter reluctantly lowers the revolver). Do you suppose I
don't know that a man who has for so long shivered with falsehood and
terror in his inmost heart has lots of schemes but no courage? You
_dare_ not do it!

Tjaelde (furiously). I will show you! (Steps back and raises the
revolver again.)

Berent (following him). Shoot, and you will hear a report--that is what
you are longing for, I suppose! Or, give up your plan of shooting, think
of what you have done, confess, and afterwards hold your tongue!

Tjaelde. No; may the devil take both you and me--

Berent. And the horse?

Tjaelde. The horse?

Berent. I mean the magnificent charger on which you came galloping home
from the sale of Möller's estate. You had better let some one shoot
you on horseback--on what was your last and greatest piece of business
duplicity! (Goes nearer to him and speaks more quietly.) Or--strip
yourself of the tissue of lies which enfolds you, and your bankruptcy
will bring you more blessing than your riches have ever done. (TJAELDE
lets the revolver drop out of his hand, and sinks into a chair in an
outburst of tears. There is silence for a moment.) You have made an
amazing fight of it for these last three years. I do not believe I know
any one who could have done what you have done. But you have lost the
fight this time. Do not shrink now from a final settlement and the pain
that it must cost you. Nothing else will cleanse your soul for you.

Tjaelde (weeping unrestrainedly, with his face buried in his hands). Oh,
oh!

Berent. You have blamed me for my method of proceeding in the matter.
My answer to that is that I forgive you for yours. (A pause.) Try now to
look the situation in the face, and take it like a man.

Tjaelde (as before). Oh!

Berent. At the bottom of your heart you must be weary of it all; make an
end of it all now!

Tjaelde (as before). Oh!

Berent (sitting down beside him, after a moment's pause). Wouldn't you
like to feel your conscience clear again--to be able really to live with
your wife and children? Because I am sure you have not done that for
many a day.

Tjaelde (as before). Oh!

Berent. I have known many speculators in my time and have received
many confessions. So I know what you have been robbed of for three
years--never a good night's rest, never a meal eaten with a light heart.
You have scarcely been conscious of what your children were doing or
saying, except when accident brought you together. And your wife--

Tjaelde. My wife!

Berent. Yes, she has slaved hard enough to prepare these banquets that
were to conceal the nakedness of the land. Indeed, she has been the
hardest worked servant in your house.

Tjaelde. My patient, good wife!

Berent. I feel certain you would rather be the humblest labourer earning
your daily bread than live through such suffering again.

Tjaelde. A thousand times rather!

Berent. Then can you hesitate to do what will give every man his due,
and bring you back to truthfulness again? Take the paper and sign it!

Tjaelde (falling on his knees). Mercy, mercy! You do not know what you
are asking me. My own children will curse me. I have just heard of a
child doing that to her father! And my business friends, who will be
ruined with me--numbers of them--think of their families! Oh! What is to
become of my work-people? Do you know there are more than four
hundred of them? Think of them and their families, robbed of their
livelihood!--Be merciful! I cannot, I dare not, do it! Save me, help me!
It was horrible of me to try and threaten you; but now I implore you,
for the sake of all those that deserve more than I, but to whom I shall
devote the rest of my life in loyal work!

Berent. I cannot save you, least of all with money that belongs to
others. What you ask me to do would be disloyalty to them.

Tjaelde. No, no! Publish my accounts openly--put me under trustees, if
you like; but let me go on with the scheme that I believe will succeed!
Every clear-headed man will see that it must succeed!

Berent. Come and sit down. Let us discuss it. (TJAELDE sits down.) Isn't
what you are now proposing exactly what you have been trying to do for
the last three years? You _have_ been able to borrow the means; but what
good has it done?

Tjaelde. Times have been so bad!

Berent (shaking his head). You have mixed up falsehood and truth for so
long that you have forgotten the simplest laws of commerce. To speculate
during bad times, on the chance of their becoming better, is all very
well for those who can afford it. Others must leave such things alone.

Tjaelde. But it is to the advantage of my creditors themselves, and of
the banks too, that my estate should hold together!

Berent. It is of no advantage to sound firms to prop up unsound ones.

Tjaelde. But, surely, to avoid losing their capital--?

Berent, Oh, perhaps in the Receiver's hands the estate may--

Tjaelde (hopefully, half rising from his chair). Yes? Well?

Berent. But not till you have been removed from the control of it.

Tjaelde (sinking down again). Not till I have been removed from the
control of it!

Berent. On _its own_ resources I dare say the estate can hold out until
better times come, but not on borrowed money.

Tjaelde. Not on borrowed money--

Berent. You understand the difference, of course?

Tjaelde. Oh, yes.

Berent. Good. Then you must understand that there is nothing left for
you to do but to sign this.

Tjaelde. Nothing left but to sign--

Berent. Here is the paper. Come, now!

Tjaelde (rousing himself). Oh, I cannot, I cannot!

Berent. Very well. But in that case the crash will come of itself in a
short time, and everything will be worse than it is now.

Tjaelde (falling on his knees).Mercy, mercy! I cannot let go of all
hope! Think, after a fight like mine!

Berent. Tell the truth and say: "I haven't the courage to face the
consequences."

Tjaelde. Yes, that is the truth.

Berent. "I haven't the courage to begin an honest life."

Tjaelde. Yes.

Berent. You don't know what you are saying, man!

Tjaelde. No, I don't. But spare me!

Berent (getting up). This is nothing but despair! I am sorry for you.

Tjaelde (getting up). Yes, surely you must be? Try me! Ask me to do
anything you like! Tell me what you--

Berent. No, no! Before anything else, you must sign this.

Tjaelde (sinking back into his chair). Oh!--How shall I ever dare to
look any one in the face again?--I, who, have defied everything and
deceived every one!

Berent. The man who has enjoyed the respect which he did not deserve
must some day undergo the humiliation which he has deserved. That is a
law; and I cannot save you from that.

Tjaelde. But they will be crueller to me than to any one else! I deserve
it, I know; but I shall not be able to endure it!

Berent. Hm! You are remarkably tough; your fight, these last three
years, proves that.

Tjaelde. Be merciful! Surely your ingenuity--your influence--_must_ be
able to find some way out for me?

Berent. Yes. The way out is for you to sign this.

Tjaelde. Won't you even take it over from me by private contract? If you
did that, everything would come right.

Berent. Sign! Here is the paper! Every hour is precious.

Tjaelde. Oh! (Takes up a pen; but turns to BERENT with a gesture of
supplication.) Daren't you test me, after what I have just gone through?

Berent. Yes, when you have signed. (TJAELDE signs the paper, and sinks
back in his chair with an expression of the keenest anguish. BERENT
takes the paper, folds it, and puts it in his pocket-book.) Now I will
go to the Bankruptcy Court with this, and afterwards to the telegraph
office. Probably the officials of the court will come this evening to
make their inventory. So you ought to warn your family.

Tjaelde. How shall I be able to do that? Give me a little time! Be
merciful!

Berent. The sooner the better for you--not to speak of the interests of
all concerned. Well, I have finished for the present.

Tjaelde. Don't desert me like this! Don't desert me!

Berent. You would like your wife to come to you, wouldn't you?

Tjaelde (resignedly). Yes.

Berent (taking up the revolver). And this--I will not take it with me.
There is no danger from it now. But I will put it in the desk, for the
sake of the others. Now, if you or yours should need me, send word to
me.

Tjaelde. Thank you.

Berent. I shall not leave the town until the worst is over.--Remember,
night or day, if you need me, send word to me.

Tjaelde. Thank you.

Berent. And now will you unlock the door for me?

Tjaelde (getting up). Ah, of course. Excuse me!

Berent (taking his hat and coat). Won't you call your wife now?

Tjaelde. No. I must have a little time first. I have the worst part of
it before me now.

Berent. I believe you have, and that is just why--. (Takes hold of the
bell-pull and rings the bell.)

Tjaelde. What are you doing?

Berent. I want, before I go, to be sure of your wife's coming to you.

Tjaelde. You should not have done that! (An office-boy comes in. BERENT
looks at TJAELDE.) Ask your mistress--ask my wife to come to me.

Berent. At once, please. (The boy goes out.) Good-bye! (Goes out.
TJAELDE sinks down on to a chair by the door.)

[The Curtain falls.]




ACT III

(SCENE.-The same as in the preceding act. TJAELDE is sitting alone, on
the chair by the door, in the position he was in when the curtain fell
on the last act. After sitting motionless for a considerable time, he
suddenly gets up.)

Tjaelde. How am I to begin? After her, there are the children; after
them, all my work-people--and then all the others! If only I could get
away! But the Receiver's men will be here.--I must have some air! (Goes
to the nearest window.) What a beautiful day!--but not for me. (Opens
the window and looks out.) My horse! No, I daren't look at it. Why is it
saddled? Oh, of course I meant, after my talk with Berent, to--. But
now everything is different! (Walks up and down once or twice, thinking;
then says suddenly:) Yes, on that horse I might reach the outer harbour
before the foreign boat sails! (Looks at his watch.) I can do it! And I
shall be able to put behind me all--. (Stops, with a start, as he hears
footsteps on the stair.) Who is there? What is it? (MRS. TJAELDE comes
down the stair into the room.)

Mrs. Tjaelde. You sent for me?

Tjaelde. Yes. (Watching her.) Were you upstairs?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Yes, I was resting.

Tjaelde (sympathetically). Ah, you were sleeping, and I woke you up!

Mrs. Tjaelde. No, I was not asleep. (She has come slowly forward.)

Tjaelde. You weren't asleep? (Apprehensively, to her.) I suppose you
didn't--? (To himself.) No, I daren't ask her.

Mrs. Tjaelde. What did you want?

Tjaelde. I wanted--. (Sees her eyes fixed on the revolver.) You are
surprised at my having that out? I got it out because I am going on a
journey.

Mrs. Tjaelde (supporting herself on the desk). Going on a journey?

Tjaelde. Yes. Mr. Berent has been here, as I dare say you know. (She
does not answer.) Business, you know. I have to go abroad.

Mrs. Tjaelde (faintly). Abroad?

Tjaelde. Only for a few days. So I will only take my usual bag with a
change of clothes and one or two shirts; but I must have it at once.

Mrs. Tjaelde. I don't think your bag has been unpacked since you brought
it home to-day.

Tjaelde. So much the better. Will you get it for me?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Are you going away now--at once?

Tjaelde. Yes, by the foreign boat--from the outer harbour.

Mrs. Tjaelde. You have no time to lose, then.

Tjaelde. Are you not well?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Not very.

Tiwlde. One of your attacks?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Yes!--but I must fetch your bag. (TJAELDE helps her over
to the staircase.)

Tjaelde. You are not well, my dear--but you will be better some day.

Mrs. Tjaelde. I only wish _you_ looked better.

Tjaelde. We all have our burdens to bear.

Mrs. Tjaelde. If only we could bear more together!

Tjaelde. But you don't understand my affairs--and I have never had time
to talk about yours.

Mrs. Tjaelde. No--that's it. (Begins to go upstairs slowly.)

Tjaelde. Shall I help you?

Mrs. Tjaelde. No, thank you, dear.

Tjaelde (coming forward). Does she suspect? She is always like that--she
takes all my courage away from me. But there is no other way! Now--about
money? I surely have some gold here somewhere. (Goes to his desk, takes
some gold out of a drawer and counts it; then lifts his head and sees
MRS. TJAELDE who has sat down on the stair half-way up.) My dear, are
you sitting down?

Mrs. Tjaelde. I felt faint for a moment. I will go up now. (Gets up and
climbs the stair slowly.)

Tjaelde. Poor thing, she is worn out. (Pulls himself together.)
No--five, six, eight, ten--that is not enough. I must have some more.
(Searches in the desk.) And when I run short I have my watch and chain.
Twenty, twenty-four--that is all I can find. Ah, my papers! I must on
no account forget them. The ground is falling away under me! Isn't she
coming back? The bag was packed, surely?--Ah, how all this will make her
suffer! But it will not be so bad for her if I am away. People will be
more merciful, both to her and the children. Oh, my children! (Collects
himself.) Only let me get away, away! Thoughts will follow me there, all
the same!--Ah, here she is! (MRS. TJAELDE is seen coming down slowly,
with a bag which is evidently, heavy.) Shall I help you, dear?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Thanks, will you take hold of the bag?

Tjaelde (takes it; she comes slowly down). It is heavier than it was
this morning.

Mrs. Tjaelde. Is it?

Tjaelde. I have some papers to put in it. (Opens the bag.) But, my dear,
there is money in this bag.

Mrs. Tjaelde. Yes--some gold that you have given me at odd times. I
thought it might be useful to you now.

Tjaelde. There is a large sum.

Mrs. Tjaelde. I don't believe you even know how much you have given me.

Tjaelde. She knows everything!--My dear! (Opens his arms.)

Mrs. Tjaelde. Henning! (They both burst into tears and fall into each
other's arms. MRS. TJAELDE whispers to him:) Shall I call the children?

Tjaelde (in a whisper). No, say nothing--till later! (They embrace
again. He takes up the bag.) Go to the window, so that I can see you
when I mount. (Shuts the bag and hurries to the door, but stops.) My
dear!

Mrs. Tjaelde. Yes?

Tjaelde. Forgive me!

Mrs. Tjaelde. Everything! (TJAELDE, as he is hurrying out, meets in the
doorway an office-boy who is bringing him a letter. TJAELDE takes it,
and the boy goes out.)

Tjaelde. From Berent! (Opens the letter, stands in the doorway and reads
it; then comes back into the room, with his bag in his hand, and reads
it again.) "When I left your house, I saw a horse standing saddled at
your door. To prevent misunderstanding, let me inform you that your
house is watched by the police."

Mrs. Tjaelde (supporting herself on the desk). You can't go?

Tjaelde. No. (A pause. He puts down the bag and wipes his forehead.)

Mrs. Tjaelde. Henning, shall we pray together?

Tjaelde. What do you mean?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Pray--pray to God to help us? (Bursts into tears. TJAELDE
is silent. She falls on her knees.) Come, Henning! You see that all
human ingenuity is of no avail!

Tjaelde. I know that, only too well.

Mrs. Tjaelde. Well, try once, in this hour of our greatest need!
(TJAELDE appears to be struggling with his emotion.) You never would!
You have never confided in us, or in your God!--never opened your heart
to any one!

Tjaelde. Be quiet!

Mrs. Tjaelde. But what you concealed by day, you used to talk of in
the night. We mortals must talk, you know! But I have lain awake and
listened to your distress. Now you know why I am no longer good for
anything. No sleep at night, and none of your confidence in the daytime.
I have suffered even more than you. (TJAELDE throws himself into a
chair. She goes to him.) You wanted to run away. When we are afraid of
our fellow-men, we have only Him to turn to. Do you think I should be
alive now, if it were not for Him?

Tjaelde. I have thrown myself imploringly at His feet, but always in
vain!

Mrs. Tjaelde. Henning, Henning!

Tjaelde. Why did He not bless my work and the fight I was making? It is
all one now.

Mrs. Tjaelde. Ah, there is more to come.

Tjaelde (getting up). Yes, the worst is before us now--

Mrs. Tjaelde.--because it is in our own hearts! (A pause. VALBORG
appears coming down the stair, but stops at the sight of the others.)
What do you want, dear?

Valborg (with suppressed emotion). From my room I can see the police
watching the house. Are the Receiver's men coming now?

Mrs. Tjaelde (sitting down). Yes, my child. After a terrible
struggle--how terrible, his God and I alone know--your father has just
sent in his declaration of bankruptcy. (VALBORG takes a step or two
forward, then stands still. A pause.)

Tjaelde (unable to control himself). Now I suppose you will say to me
just what Möller's daughter said to him!

Mrs. Tjaelde (getting up). You won't do that, Valborg!--God alone can
judge him.

Tjaelde. Tell me how cruelly I have wronged you! Tell me that you will
never be able to forgive me--(breaking down)--that I have lost your
respect and your love for ever!

Mrs. Tjaelde. Oh, my child!

Tjaelde. That your anger and your shame know no bounds!

Valborg. Oh, father, father! (Goes out by the door at the back. TJAELDE
tries to cross the room, as if to follow her, but can only stagger as
far as the staircase, to which he clings for support. MRS. TJAELDE sinks
back into her chair. There is a long pause. Suddenly JAKOBSEN cones in
from the outer once, dressed as before except that he has changed his
coat. TJAELDE is not aware of his entrance until JAKOBSEN is close
to him; then he stretches out his hands to him as if in entreaty, but
JAKOBSEN goes right up to him and speaks in a voice choked with rage.)

Jakobsen. You scoundrel! (TJAELDE recoils.)

Mrs. Tjaelde. Jakobsen! Jakobsen!

Jakobsen (without heeding her). The Receiver's men are here. The books
and papers at the Brewery have been seized. Work is at a standstill--and
the same thing at the factory.

Mrs. Tjaelde. My God!

Jakobsen. And I had made myself responsible for twice as much as
I possessed! (He speaks low, but his voice vibrates with anger and
emotion.)

Mrs. Tjaelde. Dear Jakobsen!

Jakobsen (turning to her). Didn't I say to him, every time he told me
to sign, "But I don't possess as much as that! It's not right!"--But he
used to answer, "It is only a matter of form, Jakobsen." "Yes, but
not an honourable form," I used to say. "It is a matter of form in
business," he would say; "all business folk do it." And all I knew of
business, I had learnt from him; so I trusted him. (With emotion.) And
he made me do it time after time. And now I owe more than I shall ever
be able to pay, all my life. I shall live and die a dishonoured man.
What have you to say to that, Mrs. Tjaelde? (She does not answer him. He
turns angrily upon TJAELDE.) Do you hear? Even _she_ can find nothing to
say!--Scoundrel!

Mrs. Tjaelde. Jakobsen!

Jakobsen (in a voice broken with emotion). I have nothing but the
deepest respect for you, Mrs. Tjaelde. But, you see, he has made me
swindle other people! In his name I shall have ruined numbers of them.
They trusted me, you see; just as I trusted him. I used to tell them
that he was a benefactor to the whole countryside, and that therefore
they ought to help him in these hard times. And now there will be many
an honest family robbed of house and home by our treachery. And that is
what he has brought me to! What heartless cruelty! (To TJAELDE.) I can
tell I feel inclined to--. (Takes a threatening step towards him.)

Mrs. Tjaelde (getting up). For my sake, Jakobsen!

Jakobsen (restraining himself). Yes, for your sake, ma'am; because I
have the deepest respect for you. But how am I to face all those poor
creatures that I have ruined? It will do them no good to explain to them
how it has happened; that won't help them to get their daily bread! How
shall I face my own wife! (With emotion.) She has had such faith in
me, and in those I trusted. And my children, too? It is very hard on
children, because they hear so much talk in the street. It won't be long
before they hear what sort of a father they have got; and they will hear
it from the children of the men I have ruined.

Mrs. Tjaelde. As you feel how hard it is yourself, that should make you
willing to spare others. Be merciful!

Jakobsen. I have the deepest respect for you; but it is hard that in my
home we should never again be able to eat a crust that we can properly
call our own--for I owe more than I can ever live to repay! That is
hard, Mrs. Tjaelde! What will become of my evenings with my children
now?--of our Sundays together? No, I mean that he shall hear the truth
from me. (Turns upon TJAELDE.) You scoundrel! You shan't escape me!
(TJAELDE shrinks back in terror and tries to reach the office door, but
at that moment the RECEIVER comes in, followed by two of his clerks and
SANNAES. TJAELDE crosses the room, staggers to his desk, and leans upon
it with his back turned to the newcomers.)

The Receiver (coming up behind Tjaelde). Excuse me! May I have your
books and papers? (TJAELDE gives a start, moves away to the stove, and
supports himself on it.)

Jakobsen (in a whisper, standing over him). Scoundrel! (TJAELDE moves
away from him and sits down on a chair by the door, hiding his face in
his hands.)

Mrs. Tjaelde (getting up and whispering to JAKOBSEN), Jakobsen!
Jakobsen! (He comes towards her.) He has never deliberately cheated
any one! He has never been what you say, and never will be! (Sits down
again.)

Jakobsen. I have the deepest respect for _you_, Mrs. Tjaelde. But if
_he_ is not a liar and swindler, there is no truth in anything! (Bursts
into tears. MRS. TJAELDE hides her face in her hands as she leans back
in her chair. A short silence. Then a confused noise of voices is
heard without. The RECEIVER and his men stop their work of sorting and
inventorying papers, and all look up.)

Mrs. Tjaelde (apprehensively). What is that? (SANNAES and the RECEIVER
go to one window, and JAKOBSEN to another.)

Jakobsen. It's the hands from the quay and the brewery and the factory
and the warehouse. All work is stopped until further orders; but this is
pay-day--and there is no pay for them! (The others resume their work.)

Tjaelde (coming forward despairingly). I had forgotten that!

Jakobsen (going up to him). Well, go out and face them, and they will
let you know what you are!

Tjaelde (in a low voice, as he takes up his saddle-bag). Here is money,
but it is all in gold. Go into the town and get it changed, and pay
them!

Mrs. Tjaelde. Yes, do, Jakobsen!

Jakobsen (in lower tones). If _you_ ask me to, ma'am, I--So there is
money in this bag? (Opens it.) And all done up in rolls. He meant to
bolt, then!--and with the money his people had lent him. And yet you
say he is not a scoundrel! (TJAELDE gives a groan. The noise of voices
without grows louder.)

Mrs. Tjaelde (in a low voice). Be quick, or we shall have them in here.

Jakobsen. I will go.

The Receiver (interposing). Excuse me, but nothing must be taken away
from here until it has been examined and inventoried.

Jakobsen. It is pay-day, and this is the money for the wages.

Mrs. Tjaelde. Jakobsen is responsible for it, and will account for it.

The Receiver. Oh, that alters the case. Mr. Jakobsen is a man of
integrity. (Goes back to his work.)

Jakobsen (to MRS. TJAELDE, in a low voice full of emotion). Did you hear
that, Mrs. Tjaelde? He called me a man of integrity--and very soon not
a single soul will call me that! (Goes out past TJAELDE to whom he
whispers as he passes:) Scoundrel! I shall come back again!

The Receiver (going up to TJAELDE). Excuse me, but I must ask you for
the keys of your private rooms and cupboards.

Mrs. Tjaelde (answering for her husband). My housekeeper shall go with
you. Sannaes, here is the key of the cupboard. (SANNAES takes it from
her.)

The Receiver (looking at TJAELDE'S massive watch-chain). Whatever
article of dress can be called a necessary, we have nothing to do with;
but if it happens that it comrises jewellery of any great value--.
(TJAELDE begins to take off the watch-chain.) No, no; keep it on. But it
will have to be included in the inventory.

Tjaelde. I don't wish to keep it.

The Receiver. As you please. (Signs to one of his clerks to take it.)
Good-day! (Meanwhile SIGNE and HAMAR have appeared at the door of the
outer office, and have seen what passed. The RECEIVER, SANNAES, and the
clerks try to open the door on the right, but find it locked.) This door
is locked.

Tjaelde (as if waking from a dream). Ah, of course! (Goes to the door
and unlocks it.)

Signe (rushing to MRS. TJAELDE and falling on her knees beside her).
Mother!

Mrs. Tjaelde. Yes, dear, the day of our trial has come! And I am
afraid--afraid that it may find us all too weak.

Signe. Mother, what is to become of us?

Mrs. Tjaelde. We are in God's hands.

Signe. I will go with Hamar to his aunt's. We will go at once.

Mrs. Tjaelde. It is possible that his aunt may not be willing to have
you now.

Signe. Aunt Ulla! What do you mean?

Mrs. Tjaelde. I mean that you have been the rich man's daughter; and you
do not know what the world is.

Signe. Hamar, do you think Aunt Ulla would refuse to have me?

Hamar (after a moment's thought). I don't know.

Mrs. Tjaelde. You hear that, my child. In the next few hours you will
learn more than you have learnt in all your life.

Signe (in a horrified whisper). Do you mean that even--?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Hush! (SIGNE hides her face in her mother's lap. A loud
burst of laughter is heard outside.)

Hamar (going to the nearest window). What is that? (SANNAES comes in
through the right-hand door and goes to the other window. TJAELDE, SIGNE
and MRS. TJAELDE get up.) The bay horse! They have got hold of it.

Sannaes. They have led it up the steps, and are pretending to sell it by
auction.

Hamar. They are ill-treating it! (SANNAES runs out. HAMAR snatches up
the revolver from the desk and looks to see if it is loaded.) I will--!

Signe. What are you going to do? (As he starts to go out, she clings to
him and prevents him.)

Hamar. Let me go!

Signe. Tell me first what you are going to do! Do you mean to go out
among all those men--alone?

Hamar. Yes.

Signe (throwing her arms round him). You shan't go!

Hamar. Take care, this is loaded!

Signe. What are you going to do with it?

Hamar (in a determined voice, as he shakes himself free of her). Put a
bullet into the poor beast! It is too good for that crew. It shan't be
put up for auction, either in joke or in earnest! (Goes to the farther
window.) I shall get a better aim from here.

Signe (following him, with a cry). You will hit some one!

Hamar. No, I can aim too well for that. (Takes aim.)

Signe. Father! If they hear a shot from here now--

Tjaelde (starting up). The house belongs to my creditors now--and the
revolver too!

Hamar. No, I am past taking orders from you now! (TJAELDE snatches at
the revolver, which goes off. SIGNE screams and rushes to her mother.
Outside, but this time immediately below the window, two cries are
heard: "They are shooting at us! They are shooting at us!" Then the
noise of breaking glass is heard, and stones fly in through the windows,
followed by shouts and ribald laughter. VALBORG, who has rushed in from
the outer office, stands in front of her father to protect him, her face
turned to the window. A voice is heard: "Follow me, my lads!")

Hamar (pointing the revolver at the window). Yes, just you try it!

Mrs. Tjaelde and Signe. They are coming in here!

Valborg. You shan't shoot! (Stands between him and the window.)

Tjaelde. It is Sannaes with the police! (Cries of "Get back, there!" are
heard; then a renewed uproar and a loud voice gradually dominating it;
until at last the noise gradually lessens and ceases.)

Mrs. Tjaelde. Thank God! We were in great danger. (Sinks into a chair.
A pause.) Henning, where are you? (TJAELDE comes up behind her, and
strokes her head with his hand, but turns away immediately to hide his
deep emotion. A pause.)

Signe (on her knees by her mother's side). But won't they come back?
Hadn't we better go away from here?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Where to?

Signe (despairingly). What is to become of us?

Mrs. Tjaelde. What God wills. (A pause. Meanwhile HAMAR, unobserved,
has laid down the revolver on a chair and slipped out of the room by the
door at the back.)

Valborg (softly). Signe, look! (SIGNE gets up, looks round the room, and
gives a little cry.)

Mrs. Tjaelde. What is it?

Signe. I knew he would!

Mrs. Tjaelde (apprehensively). What is it?

Valborg. Every rich family has its tame lieutenant--and ours has just
left us. That's all.

Mrs. Tjaelde (getting up). Signe, my child!

Signe (throwing herself into her arms). Mother!

Mrs. Tjaelde. There will be no more pretence now. Do not let us regret
it!

Signe (in tears). Mother, mother!

Mrs. Tjaelde. Things are better as they are. Do you hear, dear? Don't
cry!

Signe. I am not crying! but I feel so ashamed--oh, so ashamed!

Mrs. Tjaelde. It is I that ought to feel ashamed for never having had
the courage to put a stop to what I saw was folly.

Signe (as before). Mother!

Mrs. Tjaelde. Soon there will be no one else left to desert us; and we
shall have nothing left that any one can rob us of, either.

Valborg (comes forward evidently labouring under great emotion). Yes,
there is, mother; _I_ mean to desert you.

Signe. You, Valborg? Desert us? You?

Valborg. Our home is going to be broken up, anyway. Each of us ought to
shift for herself.

Signe. But what am I to do? I don't know how to do anything.

Mrs. Tjaelde (who has sunk back into her chair). What a bad mother I
must have been, not to be able to keep my children together now!

Valborg (impetuously). You know we cannot stay together now! You know we
cannot put up with living on the charity of our creditors; we have done
that too long!

Mrs. Tjaelde. Hush, remember your father is in the room. (A pause.) What
do you want to do, Valborg?

Valborg (after she has regained her self-control, quietly). I want to go
into Mr. Holst's office, and learn commercial work--and keep myself.

Mrs. Tjaelde. You don't know what you are undertaking.

Valborg. But I know what I am leaving.

Signe. And I shall only be a burden to you, mother, because I can't do
anything--

Valborg. You _can_! Go out and earn a living; even if it is only as a
servant, what does that matter? Don't live on our creditors--not for a
day, not for an hour!

Signe. And what is to become of mother, then?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Your mother will stay with your father.

Signe. But all alone? You, who are so ill?

Mrs. Tjaelde. No, not alone! Your father and I will be together.
(TJAELDE comes forward, kisses the hand she has stretched out to him,
and falls on his knees by her chair, burying his face in her lap. She
strokes his hair gently.) Forgive your father, children. That is the
finest thing you can do. (TJAELDE gets up again and goes back to the
other end of the room. A messenger comes in with a letter.)

Signe (turning round anxiously). It is a letter from him! I can't stand
any more! I won't have it! (The messenger hands the letter to TJAELDE.)

Tjaelde. I accept no more letters.

Valborg (looking at the letter). It is from Sannaes?

Tjaelde. He, too!

Mrs. Tjaelde. Take it and read it, Valborg. Let us get it all over at
once. (VALBORG takes the letter from the messenger, who goes out. She
opens the letter, looks at it, and then reads it with emotion.) "Sir,--I
have owed you everything since I entered your employment as a boy.
Therefore do not take what I am going to say amiss. You know that about
eight years ago I came into a little legacy. I have used the money to
some advantage, having especially looked out for such investments as
would not be affected by the uncertainties of high finance. The total
sum, which now amounts to about £1400, I beg to offer to you as a token
of respectful gratitude; because, in the end, I owe it to you that I
have been able to make it that sum. Besides, you will be able to make
many times better use of it than I could. If you need me, my dearest
wish is to remain with you in the future. Forgive me for having seized
just this moment for doing this; I could not do otherwise.--Your
obedient servant, J. SANNAES." (While VALBORG has been reading, TJAELDE
has come gradually forward, and is now standing beside his wife.)

Mrs. Tjaelde. Though out of all those you have helped, Henning, only one
comes to your aid at a time like this, you must feel that you have your
reward. (TJAELDE nods, and goes to the back of the room again.) And you,
children--do you see how loyally this man, a stranger, is standing by
your father? (A pause. SIGNE stands by the desk, crying. TJAELDE walks
up and down uneasily at the back of the room once or twice, then goes up
the staircase.)

Valborg. I should like to speak to Sannaes.

Mrs. Tjaelde. Yes, do, dear! I couldn't, just now; and I am sure your
father couldn't either. You speak to him! (Gets up.) Come, Signe, you
and I must have a talk; you must open your heart to me now.--Ah, when
have we ever had a real talk together? (SIGNE goes to her.) Where is
your father?

Valborg. He went upstairs.

Mrs. Tjaelde (leaning on SIGNE's arm). So he did. I am sure he must be
longing to rest--although he won't find it easy to do that. It has been
a terrible day; but surely God will turn it to our good! (Goes out
with SIGNE. VALBORG goes to the back of the room and rings the bell. A
messenger comes.)

Valborg. If Mr. Sannaes is out there, please ask him to be so good as
to come in here for a moment. (The messenger goes out.) Perhaps he won't
come, when he hears it is I. (Listens.) Yes, he is coming!

(SANNAES comes in, but stops short when he sees VALBORG, and hurriedly
puts his hands behind his back.)

Sannaes. Is it you, Miss Valborg, that want me?

Valborg. Please come in. (SANNAES takes a few timid steps forward.
VALBORG speaks in a more friendly tone.) Come in, then! (SANNAES comes
further into the room.)

Valborg. You have written a letter to my father.

Sannaes (after a moment's pause). Yes.

Valborg. And made him a most generous offer.

Sannaes (as before). Oh, well--it was only natural that I should.

Valborg. Do you think so? It doesn't seem so to me. It is an offer that
honours the man that made it. (A pause.)

Sannaes. I hope he means to accept it?

Valborg. I don't know.

Sannaes (sadly, after a moment's pause). Then he doesn't mean to? No--I
suppose not.

Valborg. I honestly don't know. It depends on whether he dare.

Sannaes. Whether he dare?

Valborg. Yes. (A pause.)

Sannaes (evidently very shy of VALBORG). Have you any more orders for
me, Miss Valborg?

Valborg (with a smile). Orders? I am not giving you orders.--You have
offered also to stay with my father for the future.

Sannaes. Yes--that is to say, if he wishes me to.

Valborg. I don't know. In that case there would be only he and my mother
and you; no one else.

Sannaes. Indeed? What about the others, then?

Valborg. I don't know for certain what my sister means to do--but I am
leaving home to-day.

Sannaes. Then you are going to--

Valborg.--to try and get a clerkship somewhere. So that it will be a bit
lonely for you to be in my father's employment now. (A pause.) I expect
you had not thought of it in that light?

Sannaes. No--yes--that is to say, your father will have all the more
need of me then.

Valborg. Indeed he will. But what sort of a prospect is it for you
to bind up your fortunes with my father's? The future is so very
problematical, you know.

Sannaes. What sort of a prospect--?

Valborg. Yes, a young man should have some sort of a prospect before
him.

Sannaes. Yes--of course; that is to say, I only thought that at first it
would be so difficult for him.

Valborg. But I am thinking of you. Surely you have some plans for the
future?

Sannaes (embarrassed). Really I would rather not talk about myself.

Valborg. But I want to.--You have something else in reserve, then?

Sannaes. Well--if I must tell you--I have some well-to-do relations in
America who have for a long time wanted me to go over there. I should
soon be able to get, a good situation there.

Valborg. Indeed?--But why haven't you accepted such a good offer long
before this? (SANNAES does not answer.) You must have been sacrificing
your best interests by staying so long with us? (SANNAES is still
silent.) Any! it will be making a still greater sacrifice to stay with
us now--

Sannaes (struggling with his embarrassment). I have never thought of it
as being that.

Valborg. But my father can scarcely accept so much from you.

Sannaes (in alarm). Why not?

Valborg. Because it really would be too much.--And, in any case, I shall
try to prevent him.

Sannaes (almost imploringly). You, Miss Valborg?

Valborg. Yes. You must not be misemployed any longer.

Sannaes. Misemployed? In what I _myself_ desire so much?

Valborg. When I have talked it over with my father, I think he will see
my point.

Sannaes (anxiously). What do you mean?

Valborg (after a moment's reflection).--I mean, the reason of your
having made such great sacrifices for us--and of your being willing to
make still greater now. (A pause. SANNAES hangs his head, and is raising
his hands to hide his face, when suddenly he puts them behind his back
again. VALBORG continues, in gentle but firm tones:) I have taught
myself, all my life, to look behind deeds and words for their motives.

Sannaes (quietly, without raising his head). You have taught yourself to
be cruelly bitter, hard and unjust.

Valborg (starts, but collects herself, and says gently:) Don't say that,
Mr. Sannaes! It is not hard-heartedness or bitterness that makes me
think of your future now--and makes me wish to spare you disappointment.

Sannaes (with a cry of pain). Miss Valborg!

Valborg. Be honest with yourself, and you will be able to take a fairer
view of what I have just said.

Sannaes. Have you any more orders, Miss Valborg?

Valborg. I give you no orders, as I have told you already. I am only
bidding you good-bye; and I do it with grateful thanks to you for all
your goodness to me--and to us all. Good-bye and good luck, Mr. Sannaes.
(SANNAES bows.)Won't you shake hands? Ah, I forgot--I offended you.
I beg your pardon for that. (SANNAES bows and turns to go.) Come, Mr.
Sannaes--let us at least part as good friends! You are going to America,
and I am going among strangers. Let us go away wishing one another well.

Sannaes (moved). Good-bye, Miss Valborg. (Turns to go.)

Valborg. Mr. Sannaes--shake hands!

Sannaes (stopping). No, Miss Valborg.

Valborg. Don't treat me uncivilly; I have not deserved that. (SANNAES
again turns to go.) Mr. Sannaes!

Sannaes (stopping). You might soil your fingers, Miss Valborg! (Walks
proudly away.)

Valborg (controlling herself with an effort). Well, we have offended
each other now. But why should we not forgive each other as well?

Sannaes. Because you have just offended me for the second time
to-day--and more deeply than the first time.

Valborg. Oh, this is too much! I spoke as I did, because I owed it to
myself not to be put in a false position, and owed it to you to spare
you future disappointment. And you call that insulting you! Which of us
has insulted the other, I should like to know?

Sannaes. You have, by thinking such things of me. Do you realise how
cruelly you have spoilt the happiest action of my life?

Valborg. I have done so quite unintentionally, then. I am only glad that
I was mistaken.

Sannes (bitterly). You are glad! So it really makes you glad to know
that I am not a scoundrel!

Valborg (quietly). Who said anything of the kind?

Sannaes. You! You know the weak spot in my armour; but that you should
on that account believe that I could lay a trap for you and try to trade
on your father's misfortune, Miss Valborg--! No, I cannot shake hands
with any one who has thought so badly of me as that! And, since you have
so persistently insulted me that I have lost all the timidity I used
to feel in your presence, let me tell you this openly; these hands
(stretching out his hands to her) have grown red and ugly in loyal work
for your father, and his daughter should have been above mocking at me
for them! (Turns to go, but stops.) And, one word more. Ask your father
for _his_ hand now, and hold fast to it, instead of deserting him on the
very day that misfortune has overtaken him. That would be more to the
point than worrying about _my_ future. I can look after that for myself.
(Turns again to go, but comes back.) And when, in his service--which
will be no easy service now--your hands bear the same honourable marks
of work as mine do, and are as red as mine, then you will perhaps
understand how you have hurt me! At present you cannot. (He goes quickly
towards the door of the outer office.)

Valborg (with a wry smile). What a temper! (More seriously.) And
yet, after all--. (Looks after him. Just as SANNAES gets to the door
TJAELDE'S voice is heard calling him from the top of the staircase.
SANNAES answers him.)

Tjaelde (coming down the stairs). Sannaes! Sannaes! I can see Jakobsen
coming. (Hurries across the room as if pursued by fear. SANNAES follows
him.) Of course he will be coming back to look for me again! It is
cowardly of me to feel that I cannot stand it; but I cannot--not to-day,
not now! I cannot stand any more! Stop him! Don't let him come in! I
shall have to drink my cup of misery to the dregs; but (almost in a
whisper) not all at one draught! (Hides his face in his hands.)

Sannaes. He shan't come; don't be afraid! (Goes quickly out, with an air
of determination.)

Tjaelde. It is hard--oh, it is hard!

Valborg (coming to his side). Father! (He looks at her, anxiously.) You
may safely accept the money Sannaes offers you.

Tjaelde (in surprise). What do you mean by that?

Valborg. I mean--that, if you do, I will not forsake you either, but
stay here with you too.

Tjaelde (incredulously). You, Valborg?

Valborg. Yes, you know I want to learn office work, and business; and I
would rather learn in your office.

Tjaelde (shyly). I don't understand what you--?

Valborg. Don't you understand, dear? I believe I could become of some
use in the office. And in that way, you know, we might begin afresh--and
try, with God's help, to pay your creditors.

Tjaelde (happily, but shyly). My child! Who put such a happy idea into
your head?

Valborg (putting an arm round his neck). Father, forgive me for all that
I have neglected to do! You shall see how I will try and make up for it!
How hard I shall work!

Tjaelde (still half incredulous). My child! My child!

Valborg. I feel--I cannot tell you how deeply--a craving for love and
for work! (Throws both her arms round his neck.) Oh, father, how I love
you!--and how I shall work for you!

Tjaelde. Ah, that is the Valborg I have waited for, ever since you were
a little child! But we had drifted away from one another, somehow.

Valborg. No more about the past! Look forward, father, look forward!
Concerns "that would not be affected by the uncertainties of high
finance,"--weren't those his words?

Tjaelde. So you were struck by that expression, too?

Valborg. That may mean a future for us now! We will have a home all to
ourselves--a little house down on the shore--and I shall help you, and
Signe will help mother--we shall know what it is to live, for the first
time!

Tjaelde. What happiness it will be!

Valborg. Only look forward, father! Look forward! A united family is
invincible!

Tjaelde. And to think that such help should come to me now!

Valborg. Yes, now we are all going to our posts--and all together, where
formerly you stood alone! You will have good fairies round you; wherever
you look, you will see happy faces and busy fingers all day long; and we
shall all enjoy our meals and our evenings together, just as we did when
we were children!

Tjaelde. That, above everything!

Valborg. Ha, ha!--it is after the rain that the birds sing blithest, you
know! And this time our happiness can never miscarry, because we shall
have something worth living for!

Tjaelde. Let us go to your mother! This will cheer her heart!

Valborg. Ah, how I have learnt to love her! What has happened to-day has
taught me.

Tjaelde. It is for her that we shall all work now.

Valborg. Yes--for her, for her. She shall rest now. Let us go to her!

Tjaelde. Kiss me first, my dear. (His voice trembles.) It is so long
since you did!

Valborg (kissing him). Father!

Tjaelde. Now let us go to your mother. (The curtain falls as they go out
together.)




ACT IV

(SCENE.--In the garden of TJAELDE'S new home, on the shore of the fjord,
three years later. A view of tranquil sunlit sea, dotted with boats, in
the background. On the left a portion of the house is seen, with an open
window within which VALBORG is seen writing at a desk. The garden is
shaded with birch trees; flower-beds run round the house, and the whole
atmosphere one of modest comfort. Two small garden tables and several
chairs are in the foreground on the right. A chair standing by itself,
further back, has evidently had a recent occupant. When the curtain
rises the stage is empty, but VALBORG is visible at the open window.
Soon afterwards TJAELDE comes in, wheeling MRS. TJAELDE in an invalid
chair.)

Mrs. Tjaelde. Another lovely day!

Tjaelde. Tjaelde. Lovely! There was not a ripple on the sea last night.
I saw a couple of steamers far out, and a sailing ship that had hove to,
and the fisher-boats drifting silently in.

Mrs. Tjaelde. And think of the storm that was raging two days ago!

Tjaelde. And think of the storm that broke over our lives barely three
years ago! I was thinking of that in the night.

Mrs. Tjaelde. Sit down here with me.

Tjaelde. Shall we not continue our stroll?

Mrs. Tjaelde. The sun is too hot.

Tjaelde. Not for me.

Mrs. Tjaelde. You big strong man! It is too hot for me.

Tjaelde (taking a chair). There you are, then.

Mrs. Tjaelde (taking off his hat and wiping his forehead). You are very
hot, dear. You have never looked so handsome as you do now!

Tjaelde. That's just as well, as you have so much time to admire me now!

Mrs. Tjaelde. Now that I find getting about so difficult, you mean? Ah,
that is only my pretence, so as to get you to wheel me about!

Tjaelde (with a sigh). Ah, my dear, it is good of you to take it so
cheerfully. But that you should be the only one of us to bear such hard
traces of our misfortune--

Mrs. Tjaelde (interrupting him). Do you forget your own whitened hair?
That is a sign of it, too, but a beautiful one! And, as for my being an
invalid, I thank God every day for it! In the first place I have almost
no pain, and then it gives me the opportunity to feel how good you are
to me in every way.

Tjaelde. You enjoy your life, then?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Yes, indeed I do--and just as I should wish to.

Tjaelde. Just to be spoiled, and yourself to spoil us?

Valborg (from the window). I have finished the accounts, father.

Tjaelde. Doesn't it come out at about what I said?

Valborg. Almost exactly. Shall I enter it in the ledger at once?

Tjaelde. Oho! You are glad then, as you seem in such it hurry?

Valborg. Certainly! Such a good stroke of business!

Tjaelde. And both you and Sannaes tried your best to dissuade me from
it!

Valborg. Such a pair of wiseacres!

Mrs. Tjaelde. Ah, your father is your master, my dear!

Tjaelde. Tjaelde. Oh, it is easy enough to captain a small army that
marches on, instead of a big one that is in retreat. (VALBORG goes on
with her work.)

Mrs. Tjaelde. And yet it seemed hard enough for us to give it up.

Tjaelde. Yes, yes--oh, yes. I can tell you, I was thinking of that last
night. If God had given me what I begged for then, what state should we
have been in now? I was thinking of that, too.

Mrs. Tjaelde. It is the fact of the estate being at last wound up that
has brought all these thoughts into your mind, dear?

Tjaelde. Yes.

Mrs. Tjaelde. Then I must confess that I, too, have scarcely been able
to think of anything else since yesterday, when Sannaes went into town
to settle it up. This a red-letter day! Signe is wrestling with a little
banquet for us; we shall see what an artist she has become! Here she is!

Tjaelde. I think I will just go and look over Valborg's accounts. (Goes
to the window. SIGNE comes out of the house, wearing a cook's apron and
carrying a basin.)

Signe. Mother, you must taste my soup! (Offers her a spoonful.)

Mrs. Tjaelde. Clever girl! (Tastes the soup.) Perhaps it would stand a
little--. No, it is very good as it is. You are clever!

Signe. Am I not! Will Sannaes be back soon?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Your father says we may expect him any moment.

Tjaelde (at the window, to VALBORG). No, wait a moment. I will come in.
(Goes into the house, and is seen within the window beside VALBORG.)

Mrs. Tjaelde. My little Signe, I want to ask you something?

Signe. Do you?

Mrs. Tjaelde. What was in the letter you had yesterday evening?

Signe. Aha, I might have guessed that was it! Nothing, mother.

Mrs. Tjaelde. Nothing that pained you, then?

Signe. I slept like a top all night--so you can judge for yourself.

Mrs. Tjaelde. I am so glad. But, you know, there seems to me something a
little forced in the gay way you say that?

Signe. Does there? Well, it was something that I shall always be ashamed
of; that is all.

Mrs. Tjaelde. I am thankful to hear it, for--

Signe (interrupting her). That must be Sannaes. I hear wheels. Yes, here
he is! He has come too soon; dinner won't be ready for half an hour yet.

Mrs. Tjaelde. That doesn't matter.

Signe. Father, here is Sannaes!

Tjaelde (from within). Good! I will come out! (SIGNE goes into the house
as TJAELDE comes out. SANNAES comes in a moment later.)

Tjaelde and Mrs. Tjaelde. Welcome!

Sannaes. Thank you! (Lays down his dust-coat and driving gloves on a
chair, and comes forward.)

Tjaelde. Well?

Sannaes. Yes--your bankruptcy is discharged!

Mrs. Tjaelde. And the result was--?

Sannaes. Just about what we expected.

Tjaelde. And, I suppose, just about what Mr. Berent wrote?

Sannaes. Just about, except for one or two inconsiderable trifles. You
can see for yourself. (Gives him a bundle of papers.) The high prices
that have ruled of late, and good management, have altered the whole
situation.

Tjaelde (who has opened the papers and glanced at the totals). A deficit
of £12,000.

Sannaes. I made a declaration on your behalf, that you intended to
try and repay that sum, but that you should be at liberty to do it in
whatever way you found best. And so--

Tjaelde. And so--?

Sannaes.--I proferred on the spot rather more than half the amount you
still owed Jakobsen.

Mrs. Tjaelde. Not really? (TJAELDE takes out a pencil and begins making
calculations on the margins of the papers.)

Sannaes. There was general satisfaction--and they all sent you their
cordial congratulations.

Mrs. Tjaelde. So that, if all goes well--

Tjaelde. Yes, if things go as well with the business as they promise
to, Sannaes, in twelve or fourteen years I shall have paid every one in
full.

Mrs. Tjaelde. We haven't much longer than that left to live, dear!

Tjaelde. Then we shall die poor. And I shall not complain!

Mrs. Tjaelde. No, indeed! The honourable name you will leave to your
children will be well worth it.

Tjaelde. And they will inherit a sound business, which they can go on
with if they choose.

Mrs. Tjaelde. Did you hear that, Valborg?

Valborg (from the window). Every word! (SANNAES bows to her.) I must go
in and tell Signe! (Moves away from the window.)

Mrs. Tjaelde. What did Jakobsen say?--honest old Jakobsen?

Sannaes. He was very much affected, as you would expect. He will
certainly be coming out here to-day.

Tjaelde (looking up from the papers). And Mr. Berent?

Sannaes. He is coming hard on my heels. I was to give you his kind
regards and tell you so.

Tjaelde. Splendid! We owe him so much.

Mrs. Tjaelde. Yes, he has been a true friend to us. But, talking of true
friends, I have something particular to ask _you_, Sannaes.

Sannaes. Me, Mrs. Tjaelde?

Mrs. Tjaelde. The maid told me that yesterday, when you went into town,
you took the greater part of your belongings with you. Is that so?

Sannaes. Yes, Mrs. Tjaelde.

Tjaelde. What does that mean? (To his wife.) You said nothing about it
to me, my dear.

Mrs. Tjaelde. Because I thought it might be a misunderstanding. But now
I must ask what was the meaning of it. Are you going away?

Sannaes (fingering a chair, in evident confusion). Yes, Mrs. Tjaelde.

Tjaelde. Where to? You never said anything about it.

Sannaes. No; but I have always considered that I should have finished my
task here as soon as the estate was finally wound up.

Tjaelde and Mrs. Tjaelde. You mean to leave us?

Sannaes. Yes.

Tjaelde. But why?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Where do you mean to go?

Sannaes. To my relations in America. I can now, without doing you any
harm, withdraw my capital from the business by degrees and transfer it
abroad.

Tjaelde. And dissolve our partnership?

Sannaes. You know that at any rate you had decided now to resume the old
style of the firm's name.

Tjaelde. That is true; but, Sannaes, what does it all mean? What is your
reason?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Are you not happy here, where we are all so attached to
you?

Tjaelde. You have quite as good a prospect for the future here as in
America.

Mrs. Tjaelde. We held together in evil days; are we not to hold together
now that good days have come?

Sannaes. I owe you both so much.

Mrs. Tjaelde. Good heavens, it is we that owe you--

Tjaelde.--more than we can ever repay. (Reproachfully.) Sannaes!

(SIGNE comes in, having taken off her cooking apron.)

Signe. Congratulations! Congratulations! Father mother! (Kisses them
both.) Welcome, Sannaes!--But aren't you pleased?--now? (A pause.
VALBORG comes in.)

Valborg. What has happened?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Sannaes wants to leave us, my children (A pause.)

Signe. But, Sannaes--!

Tjaelde. Even if you want to go away, why have you never said a single
word to us about it before? (To the others.) Or has he spoken to any of
you? (MRS. TJAELDE shakes her head.)

Signe. No.

Sannaes. It was because--because--I wanted to be able to go as soon as I
had told you. Otherwise it would be too hard to go.

Tjaelde. You must have very serious grounds for it, then! Has anything
happened to you to--to make it necessary? (SANNAES does not answer.)

Mrs. Tjaelde. And to make it impossible for you to trust any of us?

Sannaes (shyly). I thought I had better keep it to myself. (A pause.)

Tjaelde. That makes it still more painful for us--to think that you
could go about in our little home circle here, where you have shared
everything with us, carrying the secret of this intention hidden in your
heart.

Sannaes. Do not be hard on me! Believe me, if I could stay, I would; and
if I could tell you the reason, I would. (A pause.)

Signe (to her mother, in an undertone). Perhaps he wants to get married?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Would his being here with us make any difference to that?
Any one that Sannaes loved would be dear to us.

Tjaelde (going up to SANNAES and putting an arm round his shoulders).
Tell one of us, then, if you cannot tell us all. Is it nothing we can
help you in?

Sannaes. No.

Tjaelde. But can you judge of that alone? One does not always realise
how much some one else's advice, on the experience of an older man, may
help one.

Sannaes. Unfortunately it is as I say.

Tjaelde. It must be something very painful, then?

Sannaes. Please--!

Tjaelde. Well, Sannaes, you have quite cast a cloud over to-day's
happiness for us. I shall miss you as I have never missed any one.

Mrs. Tjaelde. I cannot imagine the house without Sannaes!

Tjaelde (to his wife). Come, dear, shall we go in again?

Mrs. Tjaelde. Yes--it is not nice out here any longer. (TJAELDE takes
her into the house. SIGNE turns to VALBORG to go in with her, but when
she comes close to her she gives a little cry. VALBORG takes her arm,
and their eyes meet.)

Signe. Where have my wits been? (She goes into the house, looking back
at VALBORG and SANNAES. The latter is giving way to his emotion, but as
soon as his eyes fall on VALBORG he recovers himself.)

Valborg (impetuously). Sannaes!

Sannaes. What are your orders, Miss Valborg?

Valborg (turning away from him, then turning back, but avoiding his
eyes). Do you really mean to leave us?

Sannaes. Yes, Miss Valborg. (A pause.)

Valborg. So we shall never stand back to back at our desks in the same
room again?

Sannaes. No, Miss Valborg.

Valborg. That is a pity; I had become so accustomed to it.

Sannaes. You will easily become accustomed to some one else's--back.

Valborg. Ah, some one else is some one else.

Sannaes. You must excuse me, Miss Valborg; I don't feel in the humour
for jesting to-day. (Turn to go.)

Valborg (looking up at him). Is this to be our parting, then? (A pause.)

Sannaes. I thought of taking leave of you all this afternoon.

Valborg (taking a step towards him). But ought not we two to settle our
accounts first?

Sannaes (coldly). No, Miss Valborg.

Valborg. Do you feel then that everything between us has been just as it
ought?

Sannaes. God knows I don't!

Valborg. But you think I am to blame?--Oh, well, it doesn't matter.

Sannaes. I am quite willing to take the blame. Put anyway, it is all
finished with now.

Valborg. But if we were to share the blame? You cannot be quite
indifferent as to which of us should take it?

Sannaes. I confess I am not. But, as I said, I do not wish for any
settling of accounts between us.

Valborg. But I wish it.

Sannaes. You will have plenty of time to settle it to your own
satisfaction.

Valborg. But, if I am in difficulties about it, I cannot do it alone.

Sannaes. I do not think you will find any difficulty.

Valborg. But if _I_ think so?--if I feel myself deeply wronged?

Sannaes. I have told you that I am willing to take all the blame upon
myself.

Valborg. No, Sannaes--I don't want charity; I want to be understood. I
have a question to ask you.

Sannaes. As you will.

Valborg. How was it that we got on so well for the first year after my
father's failure-and even longer? Have you ever thought of that?

Sannaes. Yes. I think it was because we never talked about anything but
our work--about business.

Valborg. You were my instructor.

Sannaes. And when you no longer needed an instructor--

Valborg.--we hardly spoke to one another.

Sannaes (softly). No.

Valborg. Well, what could I say or do, when every sign of friendship on
my part went unnoticed?

Sannaes. Unnoticed? Oh no, Miss Valborg, I noticed them.

Valborg. That was my punishment, then!

Sannas. God forbid I should do you an injustice. You had a motive which
did you credit; you felt compassion for me, and so you could not help
acting as you did. But, Miss Valborg, I refuse your compassion.

Valborg. And suppose it were gratitude?

Sannaes (softly). I dreaded that more than anything else! I had had a
warning.

Valborg. You must admit, Sannaes, that all this made you very difficult
to deal with!

Sannaes. I quite admit that. But, honestly, _you_ must admit that I
had good reason to mistrust an interest in me that sprang from mere
gratitude. Had circumstances been different, I should only have bored
you cruelly; I knew that quite well. And I had no fancy for being an
amusement for your idle hours.

Valborg. How you have mistaken me!--If you will think of it, surely you
must understand how different a girl, who has been accustomed to travel
and society, becomes when she has to stay at home and work because it
is her duty. She comes to judge men by an altogether different standard,
too. The men that she used to think delightful are very likely to appear
small in her eyes when it is a question of the demands life makes on
ability or courage or self-sacrifice; while the men she used to laugh
at are transformed in her eyes into models of what God meant men to
be, when she is brought into close contact with them in her father's
office.--Is there anything so surprising in that? (A pause.)

Sannaes. Thank you, at all events, for saying that to me. It has done me
good. But you should have said it sooner.

Valborg (emphatically). How could I, when you misjudged everything I did
or said? No; it was impossible until mistakes and misunderstandings had
driven us so far apart that we could not endure them any longer (Turns
away.)

Sannaes. Perhaps you are right. I cannot at once recall all that has
happened. If I have been mistaken, I shall by degrees find the knowledge
of it a profound comfort.--You must excuse me, Miss Valborg, I have a
number of things to see to. (Turns to go.)

Valborg (anxiously). Sannaes, as you admit that you have judged
me unjustly, don't you think you ought at least to give me--some
satisfaction?

Sannaes. You may be certain, Miss Valborg, that when I am balancing our
account you shall not suffer any injustice. But I cannot do it now. All
I have to do now is to get ready to go.

Valborg. But you are not ready to go, Sannaes! You have not finished
your work here yet! There is what I just spoke of--and something else
that dates farther back than that.

Sannaes. You must feel how painful it is for me to prolong this
interview. (Turns to go.)

Valborg. But surely you won't go without setting right something that I
am going to beg you to?

Sannas. What is that, Miss Valborg?

Valborg. Something that happened a long time ago.

Sannaes. If it is in my power, I will do what you ask.

Valborg. It is.--Ever since that day you have never offered to shake
hands with me.

Sannaes. Have you really noticed that? (A pause.)

Valborg (with a smile, turning away). Will you do so now?

Sannaes (stepping nearer to her). Is this more than a mere whim?

Valborg (concealing her emotion). How can you ask such a question now?

Sannaes. Because all this time you have never once asked me to shake
hands with you.

Valborg. I wanted you to offer me your hand. (A pause.)

Sannaes. Are you serious for once?

Valborg. I mean it, seriously.

Sannaes (in a happier voice). You really set a value on it?

Valborg. A great value.

Sannaes (going up to her). Here it is, then!

Valborg (turning and taking his hand). I accept the hand you offer me.

Sannaes (turning pale). What do you mean?

Valborg. I mean that for some time past I have known that I should be
proud to be the wife of a man who has loved me, and me alone, ever since
he was a boy, and has saved my father and us all.

Sannaes. Oh, Miss Valborg!

Valborg. And you wanted to go away, rather than offer me your hand; and
that, only because we had accepted help from you--and you did not think
we were free agents! That was too much; and, as you would not speak, I
had to!

Sannaes (kneeling to her). Miss Valborg!

Valborg. You have the most loyal nature, the most delicate mind, and the
warmest heart I have ever known.

Sannaes. This is a thousand times too much!

Valborg. Next to God, I have to thank you that I have become what I
am; and I feel that I can offer you a life's devotion such as you would
rarely find in this world.

Sannaes. I cannot answer because I scarcely realise what you are saying.
But you are saying it because you are sorry for me, now that I have to
go away, and feel that you owe me some gratitude. (Takes both her
hand in his.) Let me speak! I know the truth better than you, and have
thought over it far more than you. You are so immeasurably above me in
ability, in education, in manners--and a wife should not be able to look
down on her husband. At all events, I am too proud to be willing to be
exposed to that. No, what you are feeling now is only the result of your
beautiful nature, and the recollection of it will hallow all my life.
All the pain and all the happiness I have known have come from you. Your
life will be one of self-renunciation; but, God knows there are many
such! And my burden will be lightened now, because I shall know
that your good wishes will always be with me. (Gets up.) But part we
must--and now more than ever! For I could not bear to be near you unless
you were mine, and to make you mine would only mean misery for us both
after a little while!

Valborg. Sannaes--!

Sannaes (holding her hands and interrupting her). I entreat you not to
say anything more! You have too much power over me; do not use it to
make me sin! For it would be that--a great sin--to put two honest hearts
into a false position, where they would distress one another, even
perhaps get to hate one another.

Valborg. But let me--

Sannas (letting go her hands and stepping back). No, you must not tempt
me. Life with you would mean perpetual anxiety, for I should never
feel equal to what it would demand of me! But now I can part from you
comforted. There will be no bitterness in my heart now; and by degrees
all my thoughts of the past and of you will turn to sweetness. God bless
you! May every good fortune go with you! Good-bye! (Goes quickly towards
the house.)

Valborg. Sannaes! (Follows him.) Sannaes! Listen to me! (SANNAES takes
up his coat and gloves, and, as he rushes out without looking where
he is going, runs full tilt into BERENT who comes in at that moment
followed by JAKOBSEN.)

Sannaes. I beg your pardon! (Rushes out to the right.)

Berent. Are you two playing a game of blind man's buff?

Valborg. God knows we are!

Berent. You need not be so emphatic about it! I have had forcible
evidence of it. (Rubs his stomach and laughs.)

Valborg. You must excuse me! Father is in there. (Points to the left and
goes hurriedly out to the right.)

Berent. We don't seem to be getting a particularly polite reception!

Jakobsen. No, we seem to be rather in the way, Mr. Berent.

Berent (laughing). It looks like it. But what has been going on?

Jakobsen. I don't know. They looked as if they had been fighting, their
faces were so flushed.

Berent. They looked upset, you mean?

Jakobsen. Yes, that's it. Ah, here is Mr. Tjaelde! (To himself.) Good
Lord, how aged he looks! (Withdraws into the background as BERENT goes
forward to greet TJAELDE, who comes in.)

Tjaelde (to BERENT). I am delighted to see you! You are always welcome
in our little home--and this year more welcome than ever!

Berent. Because things are going better than ever this year! I
congratulate you on your discharge--and also on your determination to
pay everything in full!

Tjaelde. Yes, if God wills, I mean to--

Berent. Well, things are going splendidly, aren't they?

Tjaelde. So far, yes.

Berent. You are over the worst of it, now that you have laid the
foundations of a new business and laid them solidly.

Tjaelde. One of the things that have given me the greatest encouragement
has been the fact that I have won your confidence--and that has gained
me the confidence of others.

Berent. I could have done nothing unless you had first of all done
everything. But don't let us say any more about it!--Well, the place
looks even prettier than it did last year.

Tjaelde. We do a little more to it each year, you know.

Berent. And you are still all together here?

Tjaelde. So far, yes.

Berent. Ah, by the way, I can give you news of your deserter. (TJAELDE
looks surprised.) I mean your lieutenant!

Tjaelde. Oh--of him! Have you seen him?

Berent. I was on the same boat coming here. There was a very rich girl
on board.

Tjaelde (laughing). Oh, I see!

Berent. All the same, I don't think it came to any thing. It is rather
like coming upon a herd of deer when you are stalking; after your first
shot, you don't find it so easy to get another; they have grown wary!

Jakobsen (who during this conversation has been screwing up his courage
to address TJAELDE). I--I am a pig, I am! I know that!

Tjaelde (taking his hand). Oh, come, Jakobsen--!

Jakobsen. A great blundering pig!--But I know it now!

Tjaelde. That's all right! I can tell you I am delighted to be able to
set affairs straight between you and me.

Jakobsen. I don't know what to answer. It goes to my heart! (Shakes his
hand heartily.) You are a far better man than I,--and I said so to my
wife. "He's a splendid fellow," I said.

Tjaelde (releasing his hand). Let us forget everything except the happy
days we have had together, Jakobsen! How do things go at the Brewery?

Jakobsen. At the Brewery! As long as folk ladle beer into their stomachs
at the rate they do now--

Berent. Jakobsen was kind enough to drive me out here. We had a most
amusing drive. He is a character.

Jakobsen (in an anxious undertone, to TJAELDE). What does he mean by
that?

Tjaelde. That you are different from most people.

Jakobsen. Ah!--I didn't feel sure, you know, whether he wasn't sitting
there making game of me, all the way here.

Tjaelde. How can you think such a thing? (To BERENT.) Do come into the
house. Excuse my going first; but my wife is not always quite prepared
to receive visitors since she has been able to do so little for herself.
(Goes into the house.)

Berent. I don't think Mr. Tjaelde seems to me to be looking in quite as
good form as I expected?

Jakobsen. Don't you? I didn't notice anything.

Berent. Perhaps I am mistaken. I think he meant us to follow him in,
didn't he?

Jakobsen. So I understood.

Berent. Then, as you have brought me so far, you must take me in to Mrs.
Tjaelde.

Jakobsen. I am quite at your service, sir. I have the deepest respect
for Mrs. Tjaelde--(hurriedly)--and of course for Mr. Tjaelde too. Of
course.

Berent. Yes. Well, let us go in.

Jakobsen. Let us go in. (He tries anxiously to keep in step with
BERENT'S peculiar walk, but finds it difficult.)

Berent. I think you had better not try. My step suits very few.

Jakobsen. Oh, I shall manage--! (They go out to the left. SANNAES comes
hurriedly in from the right, and crosses the stage; looks around; then
comes across to the foreground and leans with his back against a tree.
VALBORG comes in a moment later, comes forward, sees him, and laughs.)

Sannaes. There, you see, Miss Valborg; you are laughing at me.

Valborg. I don't know whether I want to laugh or to cry.

Sannaes. Believe me, you are mistaken about this, Miss Valborg. You
don't see things as plainly as I do.

Valborg. Which of us was it that was mistaken to-day?--and had to beg
pardon for it?

Sannaes. It was I, I know. But this is impossible! A real union of
hearts needs to be founded on more than respect--

Valborg (laughing). On love?

Sannaes. You misunderstand me. Could you go into society with me without
feeling embarrassed? (VALBORG laughs.) You see, the mere idea of it
makes you laugh.

Valborg (laughing). I am laughing because you are magnifying the least
important part of it into the most important.

Sannaes. You know how awkward and shy--in fact downright frightened I am
amongst those who--. (VALBORG laughs again.) There, you see--you can't
help laughing at the idea!

Valborg. I should perhaps even laugh at you when we were in society
together! (Laughs.)

Sannaes (seriously). But I should suffer horribly if you did.

Valborg. Believe me, Sannaes, I love you well enough to be able to
afford to have a little laugh sometimes at your little imperfections.
Indeed, I often do! And suppose we were out in society, and I saw you
weighed down under the necessity for pretty manners that do not come
easy to you; if I did laugh at you, do you think there would be any
unkindness behind my laughter? If others laughed at you, do you suppose
I would not, the very next moment, take your arm and walk proudly down
the room with you? I know what you really are, and others know it too!
Thank God it is not only bad deeds that are known to others in this
world!

Sannaes. Your words intoxicate me and carry me off my feet!

Valborg (earnestly). If you think I am only flattering you, let us put
it to the test. Mr. Berent is here. He moves in the very best society,
but he is superior to its littlenesses. Shall we take his opinion?
Without betraying anything, I could make him give it in a moment.

Sannaes (carried away). I want no one's opinion but yours!

Valborg. That's right! If only you feel certain of my love--

Sannaes (impetuously).--then nothing else will seem to matter; and that
alone will be able to teach me all that I lack, in a very short time.

Valborg. Look into my eyes!

Sannaes (taking her hands). Yes!

Valborg. Do you believe that nothing would ever make me ashamed of you!

Sannaes. Yes, I believe that.

Valborg (with emotion). Do you believe that I love you?

Sannaes. Yes! (Falls on one knee.)

Valborg. Deeply enough for my love to last all our lives--

Sannaes. Yes, yes!

Valborg. Then stay with me; and we will look after the old folk--and
replace them when, in God's good time, they are taken from us. (SANNAES
bursts into tears. TJAELDE, who has come to the window to show BERENT
his ledgers, happens to look up and sees VALBORG and SANNAES.)

Tjaelde (leaning out of the window, and speaking gently:) Valborg, what
has happened?

Valborg (quietly). Only that Sannaes and I are engaged to be married.

Tjaelde. Is it possible! (To BERENT, who is immersed in the accounts.)
Excuse me! (Hurries away from the window.)

Sannaes (who, in his emotion has heard nothing). Forgive me! It has been
such a long, hard struggle--and I feel overwhelmed!

Valborg. Let us go in to my mother.

Sannws (shrinking back). I can't, Miss Valborg--you must wait a little--

Valborg. Here they come. (TJAELDE comes in wheeling MRS. TJAELDE in her
chair. VALBORG runs to her mother and throws herself into her arms.)

Mrs. Tjaelde (softly). God be praised and thanked!

Tjaelde (going up to SANNAES and embracing him). My son!

Mrs. Tjaelde. So that was why Sannaes wanted to go away! Oh, Sannaes!
(TJAELDE brings SANNAES up to her. SANNAES kneels and kisses her hand,
then gets up and goes into the background, to recover himself. SIGNE
comes in.)

Signe. Mother, everything is ready now!

Mrs. Tjaelde. So are things out here!

Signe (looking round). Not really?

Valborg (to SIGNE). Forgive me for never having told you!

Signe. You certainly kept your secret well!

Valborg. I kept long years of suffering secret--that was all! (SIGNE
kisses her and whispers to her; then turns to SANNAES.)

Signe. Sannaes! (Shakes his hand.) So we are to be brother and
sister-in-law?

Sannaes (embarrassed). Oh, Miss Signe--

Signe. But you mustn't call me Miss Signe now, you know!

Valborg. You must expect that! He calls me "Miss" Valborg still!

Singe. Well, he won't be able to do that when you are married, anyway!

Mrs. Tjaelde (to TJAELDE). But where are our friends?

Tjaelde. Mr. Berent is in the office. There he is, at the window.

Berent (at the window). Now I am coming straight out to congratulate
you, with my friend Jakobsen. (Comes out.)

Valborg (going to TJAELDE). Father!

Tjaelde. My child!

Valborg. If we had not known those bad days we should never have known
this happy one! (He gives her a grip of the hand.)

Tjaelde (to BERENT). Allow me to present to you my daughter Valborg's
fiancé--Mr. Sannaes.

Berent. I congratulate you on your choice, Miss Valborg--and I
congratulate the whole family on such a son-in-law.

Valborg (triumphantly). There, Sannaes!

Jakobsen. May I too, though I am only a stupid sort of chap, say that
this lad has been in love with you ever since he was in his teens--he
hardly could be sooner than that. But I can tell you, honestly, I should
never have credited you with having so much sense as to take him. (All
laugh.)

Mrs. Tjaelde. Signe is whispering to me that our dinner is getting cold.

Signe. May I take my mother's place and ask you to take me in to dinner,
Mr. Berent?

Berent (offering her his arm). I am honoured!--But our bridal pair must
go first!

Valborg. Sannaes--?

Sannaes (whispers, as he gives her his arm). To think that I have you
on my arm! (They go into the house, followed by BERENT and SIGNE, and by
JAKOBSEN.)

Tjaelde (bending over his wife, as he prepares to wheel her chair in).
My dear, God has blessed our house now!

Mrs. Tjaelde. My dear man!

Curtain.
